https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=L5ldqdAomRg

 Hi, this is Paul and I know some of you were a little disturbed by the fact that two of my videos yesterday were only three minutes and five minutes. Do not be disappointed, this will be longer. I'm going to talk about the Shapiro MacArthur conversation and I have to do this with some care and I have to do this with a lot of explanation. Part of this is because I know that as with my local church, those who watch my YouTube community are an incredibly diverse community and some of you are super engaged in some of these issues and some of you won't know what on earth we are talking about and that is because religion is super nerdy. There's a video done by Campus Humor a number of years ago called religious people are nerds and I go back to this video again and has 3.7 million views and it's very well done and it's very true because religious people are super nerdy and the Shapiro John MacArthur interview triggered a ton of nerdiness especially within the conservative reformed sub-communities and I know some of you who watch me are part of that community some of you who watch me would be in shock and abhorred and would flee from those conversations because they look crazy, they look unintelligible and they look unimportant and so what I want to do is understand this conversation in a much bigger frame and yes it's going to get super nerdy and so these are the four points I'm going to work through and you can see I'm going to be plenty nerdy in this. I want to talk about the strange relationships of post-Christian Christendom. I think that's a pretty good way of describing the cultural environment of the West. It is deeply Christian and it is post-Christian at the same time. It is also incredibly diverse and so it will be you'll see elements of it in lots of different places and ways and we're going to talk about how these relationships can in fact get very strange very quickly and we will be exposing and exploring idea hierarchies to resist facile dualisms. One of the gifts that Jordan Peterson has given me has been a year to think about hierarchies and Jonathan Pigeot has helped me on this topic as well. Part of the difficulty that we have is that okay John MacArthur am I for against? He's reformed, I'm reformed. Does that mean we're the same? How he has his conversation with Ben Shapiro and the the alignments and tensions within that conversation have everything to do with hierarchies and if we look at them in binaries as yes as right or wrong true and false good and bad we're not going to really have a very subtle and I think helpful analysis of why this conversation felt so important not only to the people that are in Ben Shapiro's offices but to many of the people who received them and have analyzed this conversation online. Part of the reason is because of the natural tensions that happen with dualities. Part of what is big in the Dutch Reformed history is the conversation of the antithesis. The antithesis are black and white binaries that is a reality but then there are also it's kind of binary and analog or digital and analog so you have binary dualities that do govern and are important and then you have analog relationships that that are much more nuanced and complex and where as I'm going to point out here how using hierarchies in terms of how we hold ideas can help us work through these tensions I think a little bit more productively. MacArthur is an example of Protestant modernist Christian cultural adaptations. John MacArthur is rather unusual in the Reformed community because he's got a lot of ideas that are quite antithetical to the Reformed tradition and we're going to talk about some of those too. And my last point is that the IDW, the intellectual dark web, wants to both preserve modernism. They want to nuance it. I think that's a commonality within the IDW but Jordan Peterson who I think is really a standout in that group really is pushing them and this is that part of some of his conversation with Sam Harris pushes beyond into a neo-sacramentalism and I think that's a helpful way of understanding why the Jordan Peterson phenomenon is shaped as it is. So let's jump in and I'm going to jump in with the first two points because I can't really separate them and how we treat them. The strange relationship of post-Christian Christendom and exposing and exploring idea hierarchies to resist facile dualisms. Now some of you watched this conversation through a political lens and that's appropriate even though as MacArthur says he's not one of the more political pastors his following is pretty political. Now many who watched that watch it through tribal filters and so some of what I'm going to say is disappointing and I doubt much of what I'm going to say will be predictable but what you had as a result of this was a disappointing and predictable tribal love fest or food fight depending on which aspect. So wretched radio which I assumed is a conservative reformed podcast that embraces our confessional identity as totally depraved was thrilled that John MacArthur witnessed to Ben Shapiro. They they put that up on their hierarchy to be right on their slide. Well what is that a function of? This is a function of Christian evangelism trying to convert a confessing Jew into the Christian fold and so many people many Christians of an evangelical variety were thrilled that John MacArthur gave a gospel statement or presented a gospel witness to Ben Shapiro. Now of course Shapiro knew this was coming and Shapiro didn't for a moment think oh no he might convert me. Ben Shapiro was playing a different game but it's important to understand this game over here and I'm not saying game pejoratively because I know many of you have a difficulty understanding quite where I lie. Is Vander Klee an evangelical? Is Vander Klee reformed? So the truth is I'm pretty multilingual. I can talk to someone with very solid evangelical credentials like Esther O'Riley who I've spoken with on this channel before and and with her I can I very much pass as an evangelical because I have a high view of Scripture and I believe in the historicity of the resurrection and all of those things. Am I also reformed? Well many conservative reformed individuals are easily within the evangelical camp but not all reformed individuals fit within these camps because these labels and these communities have developed through history and so this is pretty confusing. Now I am sometimes a little too open for a lot of evangelicals to feel at home with and there are a lot of moving pieces right now going through evangelicalism and a conversation like this cuts into all of those layers and all of those conflicts and and many of the tensions that are involved in these conversations today. So on one hand Wretched Radio is thrilled that John MacArthur witnessed to Ben Shapiro right there on YouTube and gave a gospel message to him. Now if you listen to again I mentioned Theology Gal's podcast they they excerpt that gospel witness and for many of you you might not even know what evangelicals mean by a gospel witness. A message of gospel witness will be Jesus Christ died for your sins and if you accept Christ you will be welcomed into heaven. This many of it is this is how many evangelicals frame a gospel witness. Now that is an articulation of the Bible and it is an attempt to take the great complexity of the Bible and put it into a very small sellable package. One of the people in one of my past videos asked well what is the sinner's prayer that's based on the the interview I gave to Christian Courier which is a small reformed newspaper slash magazine that's related to my denomination. Well what is the Well this gets into the history of evangelicalism and it is a particular packaging of Christianity that has a pretty significant tradition especially in the United States. Now this gets really really complex and this is why I want to talk about hierarchies because this attempt to take Christianity and put it into that package is a hierarchical move. It takes elements of this of all of the material that's in the Bible and reduces it down into a sentence and reduces it down into an interchange and attempts to achieve a goal. Now the difficulty that I have is that because this is so high up in a community's language, theological and mental hierarchy to even articulate it as such feels like a betrayal for some people and there will be some comments in my comment section. I've now been doing this long enough to get enough mail from people who are concerned for my faith, concerned for my witness and concerned for me because what happens in a tribal community is that you take a synthesis of a particular theological synthesis of the vast diversity of the Bible and put it into a nugget and unless you pledge allegiance to that nugget you are out of the community. It then becomes a boundary marker. Now I don't think that the evangelical formulations are a bad synthesis of the Bible but I also don't think that they are the only way to articulate what the Bible says and part of what I've done in my ministry for a long time is continually to try to look at language in order to connect with other kinds of people because this particular formulation of what we call the gospel also is connected to particular cultural elements that allow some people to look at and say that's exactly what I need and other people to look at it and say I can't go along with that because there are certain cultural elements built into it and this is where I get in too long and sometimes usually not heated on my part but usually heated on the part of the other people that well you're denying the gospel. Well if you say well that this little phrase Jesus died for your sins well you can sort of find that in a few places in the Bible but this let's say the sinner's prayer or the Roman Road or the four spiritual laws you can't actually lift them directly out of the Bible they're not found in the Bible and what they have been is the product of the church and theologians and culture and all of this to come and to say this is a shorthand for what the Bible is saying and I don't have a problem with that every culture has to do that in fact the New Testament is full of shorthands of what Paul and the other writers of the New Testament have distilled the gospel into a sentence for their particular cultural context and we have continued to tweak them because culture has continued to be tweaked and so we move them along. Now the difficulty that you get is that all of us live within a culture and cultures grip us in certain ways and we can't help but associate and articulate these things in these certain formulas. The difficulty that I have is by saying this certain numbers of people are going to look at me and say you're a relativist. I'm not saying I'm a relativist by any means other people look at me and say you're way too evangelical. What I'm saying is that we as human beings cannot express our representations without cultural aspects. We cannot speak without a language and Christian theology has known this for a very long time. John Calvin for example talks about this in terms of God's accommodation and condescension in communicating with us. It is in more philosophical language that I've used. It is in fact the representation through which we connect with this. See now I see I have to use I have to use certain words or no one's going to understand it with objective reality and if you listen to the theology gals podcast you'll hear them talk about objective reality. Once you use those words objective reality you've already opened the door to modernism because that is a particular framework of the world. It's not a bad framework of the world. I think it's a tremendously powerful framework of the world but like all of our frameworks it has its limitations and its context. When a Christian comes to your door and says let's use the D. James Kennedy's evangelism explosion methodology if a Christian knocks on your door and says if you were to die tonight what would you say to God as the reason he should let you into his heaven. This formulation assumes an entire theology and has embedded within it an entire history and you can't just pull that apart. The apostle Paul we don't have on record as saying that. That is not the speech that Peter gives in Acts 2 that cuts to the heart of his Jewish audience when he talks about the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus Christ. All of these shortcuts work as shortcuts because they are embedded within this huge rich world of representations of symbolism of meaning of history of culture of all of this stuff. When you listen to Ben Shapiro and John MacArthur talk there's a lot going on. Now we don't recognize necessarily that there's a lot going on because we're so good at it and it's just the water that we swim in. But if you start looking downstream of this conversation if you came into this conversation as an atheist person looking to talk about the IDW and well Shapiro he's already kind of a he's the he's the theist of the bunch well now he's going to talk to John MacArthur. Well the evangelical nerds are going to jump all over this because John MacArthur is going to try and flip Ben Shapiro over to the Christian camp. That's a tribal move. Now you get down to refuting Stephen Slanderson which is their own little fight of this Apologia Studios and Apologia Church someplace. I don't know anything about them. They just listening to them for a few minutes you know there's tells and you listen to these guys who look at how they dress. They're open to drinking beer. These are new neo-conservative reformed Christians often reformed Baptists in the strain of John Piper and certain sub elements of the the young restless and reformed movement that has been going through the United States and to a certain degree other parts of the world. And what they do is they listen to John MacArthur and they say well he's kind of reformed but he's also dispensational. And this is a word we're going to be talking about because this is an element of John MacArthur's theological pedigree and as I'm going to argue later this is in fact a part of the broader more philosophical modernist fundamentalist fight that broke out in the 19th century. So this this whole conversation is is strewn with land mines of computing this confusing tribal silos and the search for truth. What Christian subgroup subgroup do you claim allegiance towards? Will you violate their language games by daring to nuance words like gospel? Will I put will I will I be seen as a progressive evangelical if I want to start playing around with this shorthand terminology that certain in groups and tribes are using? How does this change your views? How do how do you differentiate yourself from others in the tribe? And that's what's going on in a lot of this language. Now again what I want to do to avoid some of these pitfalls is use hierarchy as a schema to understand complexity because one way of understanding what's going on is that certain subgroups certain tribes are tribes because they take certain elements of the Bible and they prioritize it over other elements. So in this theology gals podcast they were trying to figure out the relationship between anti-semitism between the idea that you must interpret the New test the Old Testament via the New Testament if you're a Christian and then also covenant theology and they were trying to work through those dynamics. Now I think hierarchies are a helpful way of understanding how we can work through multiple semi connected elements within one con within one conversation because it's not the case that well anti-semitism and covenant theology we tend to want to say well if you believe that Christians interpret the Old Testament through the New and if you listen to let's say Tim Keller talk about his idea of how Jesus used the time between his resurrection and his ascension based on certain texts in the New Testament Tim Keller for example from the road of the road to Emmaus will say well Jesus was instructing his disciples on how the Old Testament pointed to him. Okay John MacArthur in this video wants to say the Old Testament and New Testament stand on stand side by side in a sense but I think he I don't think he sufficient sufficiently thinks that through because he'll say that on one hand in order to avoid alienating a Jewish audience but later by the way he uses the Old Testament as let's say predicting and prophesying the coming of Jesus by seeing Jesus as the fulfillment of the Old Testament I would assert he implicitly begins to reinterpret that Old Testament and Ben Shapiro was amazingly well behaved during this interview he'd asked a question he'd sit there quietly and listen to it I thought wow Ben this is a this is different from your first tangle with Jordan Peterson on your first Sunday show but I think Ben Shapiro has an understanding that by claiming Jesus as Messiah you're already beginning to reinterpret what Messiahship means in the Old Testament and this then gets into this movement in theology called dispensationalism that has had a deep impact in American evangelical churches one that let's say the Reformed the Lutheran the Roman Catholics the Orthodox look at dispensationalism and say no that's really heretical that breaks the script on the church's historical way of interpreting the Bible and again this is a very very nerdy in-house long-running conversations that has going on that has been going on within the church and what's interesting about seeing MacArthur and Ben Shapiro talk is that if you understand and you're a part of these long-run conversations you listen to how John MacArthur tries to present the gospel to Ben Shapiro all of these elements come forward and how understanding hierarchies in religious communities and hierarchies even within theological structures and thoughts can help us say okay we don't want to MacArthur mentions authorial authorial intent in his video we want to respect authorial intent but when MacArthur says that God wrote the Bible that language too is fraught in many different ways with as I've brought up before organic inspiration versus mechanical inspiration the as Peterson notes the if you if you look at the Bible as Old and New Testament together the two books are changed because they're next to the other book this is an history this is a situation that the church fathers dealt with at a at a great level because very quickly once the New Testament as the New Testament continued in its trajectory it was increasingly understood and interpreted apart from the Old Testament that's where you get heresies like the ancient the ancient Marcion and they divorced the Old Testament and they basically tried to understand the writing of the apostles in light of current Greek philosophy or perhaps in light of gnostic tendencies in the context of the church fathers and so this led to a whole lot of conversation and now this is where hierarchies help us because otherwise we're left with binary choices to make yes no true false black white hierarchies can help us understand that well how do you figure out whether Jesus as son and we're going to come up to this a little bit later is an ontological category or an economic category in terms of trinitarian philosophy turn trinitarian theology i mean Jonathan Peugeot gets really nerdy with this stuff when he gets talking about church councils this actually comes to bear on some of the controversies that have surrounded John MacArthur and we'll get into that so we want to look at hierarchies as a schema to understand complexity we all have multiple influences commitments biases errors understanding where these fit into a hierarchy can help us understand ourselves and each other and maybe not too quickly close off the world with us them because even those who very quickly have us them well i'm big on John MacArthur or i'm against John MacArthur okay because i and then you have your long line of theological commitments but now he's talking to Ben Shapiro and Ben Shapiro is fundamentally a political pundit all right and so even John MacArthur talking to Ben Shapiro begins to cast John MacArthur in a political light and it begins to cast Ben Shapiro in a theological or religious context and it's the blurring of these things that get people who are very binary very excited either oh look Ben's gonna flip i don't know that Ben's gonna flip or oh look John MacArthur is getting political it's way more nuanced than that and and those who often think in binary terms what they tend to do is they just keep switching binary and and when for example you have the election of a president who is going to promote very conservative supreme court justices but he himself you know pays porn stars to sleep with him and then to shut up about it well this is what comes up in the MacArthur Shapiro interview and listen to how long John MacArthur has to try to justify this well that's part of the difficulties of a fairly binary perspective and where hierarchies come in and i would say that if you listen to that part of the conversation John MacArthur establishes a hierarchy of values by which he defends his i don't know if he's very publicly supported uh Donald Trump so but you know the the left does exactly the same thing it does it selectively so for example when when Bill Clinton has his affair in the White House with Monica Lewinsky the left rushes to his defense and says well that's a private sexual matter but now here you know 20 some odd years later you've got Donald Trump paying hush money to keep Stormy Daniels and someone else quiet about his relationships with them well well Bill Clinton was impeached not thrown out of office but impeached by the house for perjury Donald Trump may be impeached for campaign violations you know this is so this is where I think our binary conversation schema and again I'm not saying this is always invalid because part of the world is binary that's a very helpful and important way to see the world something that things are and are not but another way of understanding the world is hierarchically and so for example anyone who decides who to vote for well maybe they they're a single issue voter that would be binary if they're against abortion I'm for them if they're for abortion I'm against them well it's a very binary approach and there is something to that approach many others take a hierarchical approach well you know you've got abortion you have supreme court justices you have LGBT issues you have taxation issues you have immigration issues and they try to take all of these issues and they come to some point that these are the difference between a binary and a hierarchical approach to to it now what I did here was I put together a table that shows just a little bit of the complexity that's involved so here I am comparing myself Paul VanderKlay PVK to John MacArthur to Gretta Vosper who I've mentioned before and we're going to talk about her a bit more as we go on through this to Jordan Peterson to Ben Shapiro identifies as a Christian Paul VanderKlay yes John MacArthur yes Gretta Vosper I still think she does that's part of her argument Jordan B Peterson well he acts as if so do you count him as identifying as a Christian because of that well now it's complex Ben Shapiro no he identifies as a religious and observant jew okay says they believe in God Paul VanderKlay says yes John MacArthur says yes Gretta Vosper says no Jordan B Peterson well that depends and we talked about that plenty Ben Shapiro yes they see already things are getting complicated believes in the last judgment Paul VanderKlay yes John MacArthur yes Gretta Vosper no she's an atheist there's no there's probably no last judgment that she's imagining when you're dead you're dead so no right away you can see well she identifies as a Christian yes but she doesn't believe in the last judgment no so do we take away her Christian card well that's what the United Church of Canada has been trying to figure out and this is where confessionality comes in Jordan B Peterson does he believe in the last judgment well at least symbolically and I'd say again he's probably an open atheist an open agnostic on that score Ben Shapiro probably something like that a little bit a little bit different from from from let's say how Christians imagine it but there might be something to that that Ben Shapiro looks at all right identifies as a Christian minister Paul VanderKlay yes John MacArthur yes Gretta Vosper yes Jordan B Peterson for at least one wedding and he those of you who know Jordan Peterson know that little backstory on that Ben Shapiro no Reformed Christian Paul VanderKlay yes John MacArthur yes this is what we're going to talk about a little bit Gretta Vosper no I was doing a little poking around in that whole thing and noticed some of the connections between Presbyterianism and the United Church of Canada and thought there might be some Presbyterian influences going on there now Jordan Peterson no but he also has roots in the UCC so you know I had to rethink that when I was listening to the three craters and someone mentioned Peterson and Presbyterianism and I thought no he's part of the UCC but I hadn't appreciated the influence of liberal Presbyterianism on the United Church of Canada and some of you who are nerdy about the United Church of Canada can probably weigh in on the comment section and correct me about that Ben Shapiro no that's not a tribe so as you can see by this schema these things get complex dispensationalism which we're going to have to talk about Paul VanderKlay no I am not a dispensationalist Jonathan Peugeot not a dispensationalist the Roman Catholics not dispensationalist John generally speaking Reformed Christians not dispensationalist I was talking to a friend of mine who is much better versed in the contemporary young restless and Reformed movement and I mentioned MacArthur and he first thing out of his mouth was a quip about dispensational dispensationalism this is the thing that can that will come up in a number of in-house conversations between reform people about John MacArthur and if you know what to listen for and you listen to this conversation with Ben Shapiro you can hear what many of us in the conservative Reformed community would label as dispensational John Jonathan Peugeot would hear some of this as dispensational and the tells are when you start to hear how he talks about Israel and the Jewish community and how to read the Old Testament so is John MacArthur dispensational I'll give it a yes with a question mark is Greta Vosper dispensational not even close is Jordan Peterson Peterson dispensational not even close is Ben Shapiro dispensational well if you understand dispensationalism oh that gets a little even a little interesting with Shapiro and I'm going to score him rabbinic and so as you can see these facile binaries break down when you take a higher resolution look at what's involved in this conversation and again just for fun and a little bit later I threw in Greta Vosper and Jordan B Peterson I'm going to take a drink because again I said this is going to be long okay let's continue there are layers here now I'd say a pre-modern relationships this perspective is preserved in the religion and John MacArthur talked about being a slave a doulos that's the Greek slave of Jesus a slave of Christ and in the New Testament doulos depending on if you look at a variety of different translations will either be translated slave or servant because in the ancient world world those two categories weren't quite as as stark and distinct as they are in context but to be a Christian as described in the New Testament is to be Jesus slave to be Jesus servant so was Jesus a slave owner now we have no record at all that Jesus actually owned a slave but I am a slave of my master I am a slave of Christ now even the differentiation between Jesus and Christ that's a complicated conversation in and of itself too because the apostle Paul used this little phrase in Christ now I'm not going to go off into that but you can see this world of complexity very quickly floods in when you start talking theology but one of the things that is deeply embedded in Christianity is this relationship and this is an ancient layer is fundamentally personal and relational in the ancient world not much egalitarian everybody is below or above someone it's true of the Haitian world it's very much true of many traditional cultures today many Hispanic cultures Korean culture where it's things are hierarchical no one is no one is ever quite the same someone is always a little above or below someone else and and this gets poured then into relationships so to be a Christian one way of framing a Christian again if you want to say would you like to be a Christian would you like to be a slave of Jesus well ask a modern person no would you take Jesus as your master well that doesn't sound that doesn't sound right but ah listen to some evangelical language which is very Christian and very historical will you accept Jesus as your lord and savior well that doesn't sound so bad well let's pause on that lord word because once you say that word lord you're now initiating an entire history of language that basically says that you are a slave of Jesus well I don't want to be a slave of anyone I want to be an autonomous person ah but being a slave of Jesus is really freedom well now you Christians just talk crazy well what do you mean by that and again this is something that C.S. Lewis wrote about wrote about well so across confessional lines because there are layers here and this got in very very low very very deep into the the Christian layer cake okay widespread across confessional lines you'll find widespread embrace of this layer I embrace it John MacArthur will embrace it Jonathan Peugeot will brace it the pope will embrace it people who go to church not all people many people who go to church will embrace it and part of that is in the going to church business I sometimes will highlight to people that if you go into a church and you do a little bit of cultural anthropology what is happening in church is that the serfs are meeting their lord and they're meeting their lord to do what to show up to show their allegiance to their lord to bring their gifts to their lord to listen to what their lord has to say and to worship their lord now saying this in the 21st century to people who live in egalitarian societies you hear those words as religious there are still haunted a bit those words in terms of social class but if we were to go back 500 years or 700 years into different societies where there are lords and peasants well they would know exactly what those relationships are and they would have a very they would have a very deep understanding of the rights and obligations on both sides of that relationship all of that is built in and this is built into christian communities and christian services and the thing is we don't even know we're talking this language when we begin to say these words Jesus is my lord and savior which is why often I will look for different language that will have connections in our current culture now that's dangerous and often it's in its missiological efforts that promote heresy because to what degree do I disconnect contemporary language from these ancient ties and I think there are I think there are good reasons for articulating in new ways but I think there are also good reasons for maintaining the historical connections which is why for example I think the christian church should continue to preserve the language of father son and holy spirit even though father and son are both male and and I understand the complexities of that in our current cultural climate but there are things that are that are carried on to the past in there and the truth is there's stuff like this all over our world and our language games and and most of us are completely oblivious to it until someone stops and points it out to us now also built into this at a very deep layer is the idea that belief in god as a living person today this song that will be sung a lot in easter he lives he lives christ jesus lives today I walk with him and talk with him along life's narrow way it's a very modernist song it's rather nostalgic he lives he lives you ask me how I know he lives he lives within my heart what on earth do you mean by that he lives within my heart you see a lot of people outside the church will hear that and say what do you mean by that if they go to a funeral someone will say even a materialist well your mother isn't dead well why isn't my mother dead I just saw her in the tomb your mother is in your heart all right jesus lives within my heart does that mean that jesus lives in the same way my mother is alive because I still have met we still have collective memories about him preserved by the new testament well christians are actually saying something quite a bit more real than that but then some christians begin to take this language game and say well let's not go there with ideas of physical resurrection and ascension and some picture of jesus sitting at the right hand of god the father let's just have jesus live in my heart and listen to evangelical language well accept jesus into your heart well that's a very different thing than I would say accept the surgeon scalpel into my heart they're two totally different language games the thing is we're often not paying attention to those language games so then we get quite binary and that's why I you know begin to play with people and they say well you want a so you want a biblical cosmology yes and then I'll ask them do you want a biblical anatomy well what do you mean do you want to take human anatomy out of the bible well what do you mean are you going to let jesus into your heart well what do you mean yeah that's the important question what do you mean because letting a surgeon into your heart with a scalpel is very different from letting jesus into your heart but how exactly is it different it's important to think about and to try to figure out what are we doing with language now john mccarthur and i both share a pre-modern du Los of jesus this language both john mccarthur and i believe that we will one day stand before our master and be called to give an account for what we've done in our lives both john mccarthur and i we're not there's no difference and john mccarthur he could sit across the office from me and say and and john might say oh you know paul i saw that video he won't see it i saw that video and i heard what you said and i think you've sold out the gospel in these ways and i think you're reading the new testament wrong and i think you're leaving the door open to anti-semitism even though my father's line is all jewish i think you're leaving the door open because of how you read the old testament but are you really a christian i could say to him you know john one day i'm gonna stand before my master and i'm going to be called to give an account for everything that i've done and what i want to hear from him is well done good and faithful servant and john mccarthur will hear those words and part of him will say yeah you know vanderklaas got some theological problems but he's a christian there's there's a hierarchy you take that idea that that with so much embedded in it that someday i'll stand before jesus well what do i mean by stand or i have a body will it be raised on what will i be standing see all this is built into the representation and we don't ask those questions because it's a representation just like well where is middle earth what is middle earth when you watch the lord of the rings this holiday season again as as is my personal tradition watch it with my family where is middle earth what is middle earth how does middle earth relate to this earth well we don't worry about those questions but we're drawn into the drama now i'm not saying that me standing before my lord and savior jesus christ is any less real than me standing on the floor of this church i'd in fact say it's more real and so that in that way john mccarthur and i will look at each other and say yeah we're both christians because we've taken this idea and we've brought it up to the top of the hierarchy but there's a lot that's embedded in this idea i expect that both will agree that that this will not be a heaven and hell judgment as reformed christians because we've been saved by jesus blood so when john mccarthur and i both say we will stand before our lord and give an account for what we've done neither of us expect because of all we understand from our reformed faith that this will be a judgment into hell what this will offer is a status in the life of the age to come now i'm adding my language i don't know what language mccarthur would use because christians don't always get very detailed in that aspect but john mccarthur and i would agree with that see there's a lot of things we agree on and i want people to be able to hear that because in this video you're going to hear a lot of things we don't agree on but the better way to understand this is that we're going to be able to hear that we don't agree on but the better way to understand this is a hierarchy well this gets complex when we bring someone like jordan peterson or gretta vosper into the conversation and we will a little bit later so but like as i said before this is a pre-modern doulos relationship with jesus we both believe someday we will stand before our master be called to give an account we want his approval we expect a reward of sorts and and probably some some critique and and even censure of sorts the new testament talks about that the new testament talks in those terms these are cultural terms with which the new testament talks that are easily brought into our culture and these have been formulated and represented in our religion in a way that actually drives our behavior all right this is very deep stuff this actually then develops into a hierarchy pleasing the masters at the top of the hierarchy different expectations on what the master wants now john mccarthur and i might have different opinions for a variety of things we might vote the same or vote differently we might use our money in different ways we might read the new testament's relationship with the old testament in slightly different ways so and and we are both saying i read the new testament's relationship to the old testament in this way out of service to my master and one of us might look across the table and say you're right i'm wrong or vice versa that could happen but it's within a hierarchy because we're both trying to please the master now there's different theological political exegetical beliefs those might be even further down the hierarchy but again the hierarchy helps us both modulate agreement and disagreement within a multifaceted multi-layered relationship that's what thinking in terms of hierarchy does what's at the top of the hierarchy is pleasing the master and i think this also helps nuance the conversation that peterson had with shapiro and dave rubin when it came to faith versus works because ultimately faith and works are together and even reform documents like the heitberg catechism will say that we're not saved by work so what do we mean by that well when that is said in the context of the heitberg catechism it is said within a much longer conversation about we're going to get into this in a little while a sacramental system that the reformers began to believe that especially for a lot of people sitting in pews in the church what mattered most was that they get to the they get to the priest and they have the mass and that action of taking in the mass is what will save them and the reformers wanted to say not really because the idea was then it lets in the door that i can do whatever i want in the rest of my life but as long as i get to church and participate in the mass as long as i give money to the church as long as i do these things then i am to the top of the hierarchy pleasing the master or getting saved or something like this okay and the protestant reformers wanted to say no and i think in all fairness to many in the roman catholic church they would say no but but it's the question of of dealing with this tension that we all have of on one hand i want to please my master on the other hand i want to please myself and how do i nuance that well if the master says i need to show up and put money in the plate and and take communion and take the Eucharist and that will make him happy maybe i'll make him happy over here by doing that and then i'll still get to keep my mistress and defraud the peasants or whatever over here that's a something that's happening one of the big emphases and i did i know actually that's a convert that's a conversation that the person didn't want posted part of what i believe is at the heart of the reformed movement was all of life should be brought under the lordship of jesus christ now i'm not saying that the roman catholic church didn't teach that but what the protestant reformers wanted to do was up the pressure on this and so what happened was this got nuanced in lots of different ways i'm not going to go into the whole history of the protestant reformation but that will come up a little bit later in the video so there are layers the pre-modern relationship preserved in the religion the due loss of christ the slave of christ the servant of christ that's down there deep now above it you'll hear a lot in john mccarthur in this video especially the way he treats church history that is a pretty common approach to many protestants and and that approach goes something like this the first few hundred years you have the the early church the pristine church but then constantin mucked it up by the church getting involved in in church and state and so then in a sense the holy spirit goes on hiatus until the protestant reformation just don't talk about augustin because he comes after constantin and protestants are pretty augustinian the reformation goes back to the true true pure religion based on the texts themselves now there are real reasons for framing church history in this way individuals like jonathan bageaux hear this and say oh my goodness you've just cut out the church fathers you just cut out this long history of the church and some protestants will say yeah but there's a lot of corruption in that you had two or three popes at a time sometimes and you had you had selling of ecclesiastical offices and da da da da okay religious people are being nerdy again we're getting into our history we're having our our intramural intra-tribal or internal tri inter-tribal or intra-tribal fights that's what we're doing we're talking about all these things now what's happened for many in the contemporary world is they've no longer had this education in a classical education a classical humanities education you would have been brought up to speed in a lot of this history of western civilization where a lot of this is baked in right now a lot of people aren't getting this education at all they don't even know who martin luther was well didn't martin luther lead the american civil rights movement no that's martin luther king jr martin luther in a sense kicked off in an important way the protestant reformation that's martin luther so deep you have the the do-loss relationship of jesus above that now we have the reformational confessional movement and what happened was that belief or doctrinal subscription and this is the kind of belief that jordan peterson keeps coveting about displaces sacramental observance this is a long conversation too okay so is it more important to let's say this is where we get into fights about infant baptism that are very much hot within the reformed churches the christian reformed church baptizes infants john mccarthur will not baptize an infant many in the young restless and reform movement john piper does not baptize infants tim keller a pca presbyterian church of america baptizes infants well well why baptize or don't baptize infants well the argument about believer baptism is that baptism expresses our belief to the world people who practice infant baptism say no baptism is a sacrament baptism is baptism is god speaking to us and then i've just launched in the comment section a discussion on infant baptism which wasn't what i'm trying to do but all this stuff again is built in and you get to the protestant reformation and the protestant reformation part of what it tried to do was state that what people the the theological content that people subscribe to is important and one of the things that they were resisting is i can live any way i want as long as i go to the go to my local priest and get the communion and do my you know do my confession and then i'm set and i can live any way i want now i don't believe that many priests believe that but what these now the most protestant reformers were pastors and theologians which gives shape to churches like the reform church like myself i am a pastor theologian they looked at how this was impacting the church and they said you know what this is a bad thing so what they did was establish a hierarchy and said belief what do you mean by belief subscribing to proper doctrine of the church read the athanasian creed sometime that's pretty deep within the athanasian creed subscribing to proper doctrine in the church is fundamental to my relationship with christ more than physically popping the host in my mouth stuff is moving under the surface here the modern world is beginning to take shape a sacramental vision of the world which is an older world is beginning to recede and it's all in this dynamic and there are hierarchies in action here okay so belief doctrinal subscription displaces sacramental observance this is a multiple century process this takes hundreds of years to work through maybe even thousands roman catholic get confessionalist and the council of trent the the protestants start producing all of these documents john calvin for example calvin's institutes which kind of launches this reformed movement so you have the lutherans and the anabaptists are they are the first generation reformers and the reformed movement is kind of a second generation reform movement and a lot of this gets launched by this extremely popular book written by john calvin and then later the geneva bible which is then a i would argue a new testament interpretive document of the old testament the geneva bible was in some ways the first study bible at least in the in the confessional reformational era john calvin writes the institutes of the christian religion and it's all an attempt to re-synthesize the history of the christian church and to repackage christianity for their new context that's what john calvin is doing in the institutes of the christian religion and john calvin's institutes becomes a tremendously popular book and it continues to influence pastors as they continue to lead their congregation in the political and cultural patchwork that europe was the roman catholic church responds with the council of trent now the church had been writing confessional councils and statements ever since its inception but the council of trent attempts to address the protestant reformation was a rebellion so large it could not be snuffed out as it was with with jan hus or with with witcliffe and other pre-reformational figures and so the roman catholic church responds with the council of trent and responds by reforming the church and in that sense luther in a very ironic way becomes a fairly effective reformer of the church instead of a rebel which i won't go into that history that leads to a perceived uselessness especially in protestant churches of liturgical and religious groups especially in protestant churches of liturgical or sacramental observance and again this took hundreds of years to arrive at and i think we're seeing late stages of it in secularism why doesn't jordan peterson go to church he doesn't see the point why doesn't he see the point well there's a lot to that he sees some point in going to church being being reminded of you know moral things secularists can see some point in going to church and often they complain about you know when churches get political because that tends to be the layer that secularists are mostly looking at if christians want to go and pour water on babies or not pour water on babies or eat bread or wafers in the particular language that they use for putting that in their mouth what does that matter well now we're into the modern era for a christian whether or not you baptize a baby or believer or infant baptism well there's theological ties to that for christians whether or not what it what it means what that what from catholic cult the host eucharist loren supper communion what that bread and juice wine there's another fight mean what's all tied to this okay so there's the layers in modernity you have these theological confessional tribes and we're still going at it we're still talking it through now this is part of frey at freud's great phrase the narcissism of small differences they're small they're also large now this is in a sense why the idw interests me because listening to eric weinstein talk on on rebel wisdom about it he almost talks like having these conversations is a new thing and one of the things that i realized very quickly on with the idw is new thing we've been doing in this in the church forever not always well look at the protestant reformation c.s lewis thought that the protestant reformation should have been handled quietly and privately that that the c.s lewis had his own elitist streak in him to a degree even though very many ways he was a great populist in other ways theologically but he thought that the kinds of issues that were brought up in the protestant reformation should have been handled in a much more erratic or peaceful way and lewis has a point because protestants and catholics protestants are essentially protesting elements of the catholic church but the thing is that once you start getting a thread going that thread continues to go and expand all right so what you'll find is all of this conversation within tribes and hopefully we'll do this conversation well but sometimes you have the narcissism of small differences operating let's get a little bit more into john mccarthur as an example of protestant modernist i'm using that as a philosophical and cultural category christian cultural adaptation now renaissance humanists humanism gets morphed into philosophy all right renaissance humanism was a back to the sources movement i've talked about this in previous movements and maybe i'll talk to randard about this when i talk to him again because he's an erasmus scholar now erasmus erasmus okay erasmus was a dutch scholar who loved text he was a resident renaissance humanist and so what happens at this period is that they're getting all of these ancient texts and they're looking at them and they're learning greek and they're learning hebrew and what they begin to realize is that boy if you take they're getting better and better greek texts you put that next to the latin vulgate which was done around 600 by jerome there are some there's some there's some translation issues with the vulgate and there's always translation issues but some of these translation is issues are doctrinally substantive and erasmus kind of like cs lewis wants to have a conversation among scholars to do this let's leave the regular people in the church alone and let's have us scholars people who can deal with these texts and translations people who know greek and hebrew and church fathers in history of theology let's have this conversation over here but let's not bother the regular folks and let's have the church continue to stay together well luther didn't have the same idea luther was also a scholar and luther was seeing that the weaknesses of the vulgate and luther was an idealist he thought you know if we let's just bring these things out let's have this conversation and things will go well that didn't go well didn't go well at all very quickly the church pushes back on luther this is the conversation i had with ron dart is is jordan peterson more like erasmus or luther i think he's like luther you push on jordan peterson he's going to push back and pretty quickly you get polarization and alienization this is what happens with martin luther and martin luther is an idealist he wants to purify the church and so based on his reading of the new testament he he read galatians and wrote a commentary he read romans and wrote a commentary he then begins to reinterpret the old testament in some particular ways sorry john mccarthur i don't know where you stand with respect with respect to martin luther that's what luther did so all right well that then starts to take on momentum it starts to get connected up with political factors and on and on and on and the protestant reformation explodes and then you get wars of confession where well now the princes the state is determining the religion of people if the if the king of france is is is roman catholic well then all the people have to be roman catholic and hop over to england and you've got kings and queens switching religions well people can't switch religions that quickly and so eventually the idea gets developed well let's separate let's separate politics from religion because then you know prince charles can think whatever new age thing he wants he can he can sleep with his girlfriend even cheating on his young beautiful princess but even though he's the titular head of the church of england but that's where it all goes but earlier on let's have separation of of church and state and and that'll be that'll go better and in some ways it does but there are implications in dividing those worlds too and so what we begin to see in the early modernist period is the division of a lot of different worlds and this will happen with respect to science as well well whereas in renaissance humanism and of the protestant reformation we have the height of belief in texts that i can let me grab a bible off off the shelf this is a bible that i had in in in grade school presented presented to me by dad and mom in christmas 1971 how many of you would like a bible as a christmas present so in this bible i believe is in the new revised standard version and it has some it has some pretty pictures well here's no in the ark the prodigal son returns well in in the in renaissance humanism and in the protestant reformation texts were king everyone believed in texts in order to study physics you read aristotle well what happens is well now we're starting to have questions about text we have doubts about text well where can we find our certainty well how about empiricism and reason maybe we can find certainty in those places not necessarily the text but again this is a long slow process and we go back and forth and and there's lots of hierarchies that go on through here so so philosophy in some ways begins to displace religion and people instead of looking to aristotle to understand physics began looking to the real world drop an apple to figure out gravity study is all of this is connected i've spoken about this in some of my previous videos and so seeking new certainty in philosophy science and economics adam smith the invisible hand empiricism and rationality but then what is the bible and where do we stand with respect to this book well is it an ancient religious book yeah is it the word of god well you'd say well paul vanderkley do you believe the bible is the word of god yeah is that all we need to know well there's a pretty binary thing paul vanderkley says the bible is the word of god yes but now we start getting into details we start up in the resolution would john mccarthur and i be able to have a conversation about how to use the bible interpretation absolutely remember religious people are nerds what is the bible for well pre-modern rational teach us the rules to please god john calvin's third use of the law we we use the old testament law in order to please god this is built on that dulos relationship where well i'm not saved by works but i'm saved by grace this is what god does for me but then what am i to do with my life i am to please my master and so i use the bible in order to please my master that's how that thing works now in the medieval period you have this idea of two texts and this is relayed in the belgian confession for example in my own denomination that there are two texts and in fact mica in the three craters conversation mentioned that you have special revelation and you have general revelation general revelation can be empiricism reason matter science special revelation comes from the bible as word of god so we're working out those things but then how do these two things actually begin to relate in the 19th century you have the fundamentalist modernist controversy and what happens is that well what happens when we have general revelation stuff of the world special revelation the bible happens when their intention i don't know well what happens when we find find dinosaur bones and we used to kind of think they were dragons and put there by noah's flood but now we're having skepticism about noah's flood happening 5 000 some odd years ago and creation happening in six days 6 000 years ago again that wasn't that wasn't the assumption of augustin and many church fathers and or even john calvin but it comes from reading the bible a certain way and say well we can't really have two books one book and everything in our life has to be built on this one book and we're going to take reason and apply it to this book and generate for ourselves our entire schema that's where you get something like creation science from that's the move because the modernist fundamentalist that's the move because the modernist fundamentalist split was well we can't trust the bible for history oh well what does that do to jesus what does that do to the resurrection what does that do to the hope of the second coming what does that do to the apostle's creed well it's a problem so what happened what tended what what the fundamentalists tended to do was say the bible is our platform and we're going to build our science on the bible now if you listen to john mcArthur talk he talks this way all right now he's going to nuance it in a lot of different ways too because he's not dumb but this is basically the project in the program and and it's all the complexities between bible as let's say foundation for science when for example in that interview john mcArthur talks about the water cycle being found in isaiah i don't know i never looked in isaiah or or looks at for example and says that we know we knew that the world is a sphere floating in space because of a particular verse well authorial intent you see this is these are the games that theologians play because when i listen to john marker john john mcArthur make those kinds of statements i begin to say i don't know that all of your elements are really lining up and someone might say yeah but vander clay yours don't all line up either and i'd say yeah that's right because it's really hard to have them all line up in fact they almost never for any of us all line up and and the the goal is to try and get as much of it to line up as possible to understand the world as best we can and now here john mcArthur and i might agree that we ought to be seeking the truth but what is the truth and what do we even mean by this word truth and now this is where john mcArthur and i could have a conversation we're probably not going to have it again because of because of status because he's a mega church pastor and i'm a teeny weeny little church pastor then you get into the bible now i want to get into one of the hierarchies that i hear immediately when i listen to john mcArthur talk the bible is the pri is the bible primarily a story of heaven and earth or is the bible primarily a story of heaven and hell now this is something that's been happening in evangelical communities for a while if you read joshua ryan butler's book skeletons in god's closet john uh joshua ryan butler as a conservative evangelical or at least a moderate evangelical attempts to address a bunch of attempts attempts to address hell judgment old testament old testament wars and sexuality by changing the focus of the bible is the story between heaven and earth and the style bible is the story of heaven and hell if you listen to john mcArthur in this conversation you very much get the impression that the bible or christianity is all about heaven and hell well there was an enduring universal ancient assumption of heaven and earth and in the beginning god created the heavens and the earth and in fact i think a more biblical understanding of the text itself given especially authorial intent is that the bible is primarily a story of heaven and earth well why do we care about heaven and hell well we care about heaven and hell because we don't want to go to hell and well in the medieval church too well take the sacraments and you won't go to hell the church will keep you out of hell help you through purgatory and into heaven all right but but what happens in here is the displacement of earth and that is going to have some big consequences sacramentalism keeps the stuff of earth in the game all right this is where you get some of the conversations about well transubstantiation consubstantiation uh sign and seal in the reformed the real presence of christ in the in the bread and the wine according to john calvin eight now we're going to get into a fudgy word the spiritual presence of christ well what is that what do we mean by that we have real issues of that in with with that in the modern world these are exactly the issues that jonathan peugeot keeps pointing to but what happens as i mentioned before is that confessionality replaces stuff it's no longer so important which you which church you go to to get your communion wafer from it's more important what you believe in your head see now we're beginning to knock on the door of jordan peterson's ambiguity about i don't want to talk about belief because that's that's this facile game i want to talk about action are you bringing the american pragmatist into it jonathan peugeot listens to jonathan jordan peterson talk about this says yeah that's what he means by belief well why isn't he saying belief he's engaging in this conversation and in a sense he's in somewhat re-engaging in some of the elements of the protest and reformation but here's the thing this world is so complex and all this stuff is so built into us and our culture and our society we don't even know we're engaging in this stuff because we're just running around on the surface but all this stuff goes down deep through it now let's look at let's use hierarchies again i would very much say that the bible talks about heaven and hell jesus talks about gehenna hades eternal judgment lake of fire lake of fires in the book of revelation jesus talks about those things and jesus talks in in very binary terms often you know there's shut doors in jesus' parable there's people cast out of the wedding feast there's knocking on the door and depart from me i never knew you that's in the bible that's in my hierarchy but i think technically the story of the bible is more a story about heaven and earth and so i put heaven and hell a little bit lower in the hierarchy i'm not choosing between them i'm just placing them in different places on the hierarchy if you put heaven and hell at the top of the hierarchy in terms of the question what is the story of the bible about that will impact your theology and it will impact your practice it will impact how you act as if and that's part of what's going on in this conversation part of the reason john mccarthur and ben shapiro can talk is because they both share some ancient relationalist elements and some modernist elements and there's some real alignment between the two of them um babalon b i did a google search with mccarthur and shapiro and the babalon b picked it up and it was a great article uh john mccarthur ben shapiro delight audiences and debut on dancing with the stars so go ahead look at babalon b john mccarthur and ben shapiro it's hilarious and the picture was just hysterical but but in a sense you know shapiro begins the conversation says this is the person here around the office we've been most anticipating and i thought that was the most interesting thing said in the entire interview to me because that is telling me a lot about what's going on in these political and religious communities in southern california that's where john mccarthur's church is at that tells me a lot about who ben shapiro is connecting with tells me a lot about why certain people are so excited to have ben shapiro witness to because maybe ben shapiro will join our tribe now i'm not discounting the need for conversion i mean my great grandfather my great great grandfather my great great grandfather converted from judaism to dutch reformed christianity and i think that was a good move i'm happy he did but when we're when we're expressing these things and same thing with i hope jordan peterson becomes a confessional christian i do too that's my tribal aspect over here but there are other aspects of me too namely say you're a divided person you should be holy about your tribe yeah you can be but there are consequences to that what i need to be again in terms of a hierarchy is holy about my lord and one of the things i really want to make a video about is what is the relationship between a good person and a christian how can you really negotiate those two statements so people are all excited oh john mccarthur's on with ben shapiro why so excited well there's political and social alignment in southern california in those communities people we're always multiple we're always connecting with multiple tribes and communities at the same time john mccarthur's a celebrity pastor that's why he's on people say well well you know paul dave rubin should have you on i haven't done anything so significant in a in a certain way to rocket my status to the point that dave rubin wants to talk to me dave rubin and i could sit down and he could do a whole show with me and his metrics would be disappointing because not enough people know my name not enough people care about what i think that's okay but again i go back to what's at the top of my hierarchy well i serve a master osgenis's phrase we serve before an audience of one i serve jesus it's more important what jesus thinks of me than what the crowd thinks of me although i am also a calvinist which says these things are competing against each other and and i have to watch those dynamics inside myself but there's a hierarchy at play here there's political and social alignment between shapiro and mccarthur he's a celebrity pastor there's the dispensational layer which is intriguing in this case because dispensationalists are really big supporters of the state of israel because of their particular eschatology that was an important moment in 1948 with the the the founding of the modern state of israel our dispensationalists write that there's some special way that this is going to impact the the close of the story that god is writing could be i'm i'm a reformed christian so but i'm my new testament professor at calvin seminary david hoherda was a wonderful man a very soft quiet spoken man new testament scholar not particularly high status you won't find commentaries of his in the major commentary series but we used to say of him he says more with one lip than most people say with two he was just kind of a quiet man he kind of talked like this and he didn't really move both of his lips but he wrote this little book a really cool little book jesus and israel one covenant or two in the reformed community we've been talking about these issues too but we approach them differently than dispensationalists do and on the back we have bass van elderen donald hagener william bandham merrin and and bern um poitras well that's someone that um the westminster folks will know so so these are conversations that christians have been having for a long time and also big debates about what really is going on in romans 9 through 11 again religious people are super nerdy and the more religious you are in these cases the nerdier you're going to be and some of you out there know exactly what i'm talking about when i talk about romans 9 through 11 others of you think well he's talking about what's 9 through 11 what does anything have to do with anything again nerdiness then you've got the religious tribal motivations to flip ben shapiro so this was an exciting hookup for a lot of people me not so much exciting hookup for these ladies and again i found their podcast just by google's google searching ben shapiro john mcarthur podcast because someone had sent me a link to a podcast and i couldn't find it this morning when i wanted to listen to it so i started to listen to these the theology gals and these are conservative reformed complementarian women now i know a lot of women in the crc if they would listen to this podcast they would be horrified other women in the crc would listen to this podcast and they would be encouraged there's a lot interesting going on in this and they're trying to work through all of these issues and these are these are women that don't believe that women should be pastors or elders or hold office in church but they're doing a podcast and they're teaching out there well what does that mean so there's a lot going on with all of this stuff but they were very very very very very very excited about this and they early on in their podcast played john mcarthur witnessing to ben shapiro they're very excited about this well that again i'm not see i'm going to get comments about this and then people worry about me oh paul don't worry about me i'm fine John mcarthur witnessing to to ben shapiro is embedded in a ton of stuff and what i want to do is not disparage that but illuminate all of the ties around it all of the language games going on around it because some of you listening to that podcast those of you who grew up in church left christianity early on now a couple decades later listening to jordan peterson thinking huh listen to john listen to john mcarthur and think that is exactly the kind of guy i got away from that is exactly the kind of language i fled from some of you may be following you know esther o'reilly and reading her stuff and think that's exactly the kind of people i got away from now esther will want to come in and say no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no you're not understanding me well some people have run from my channel and said you're exactly the kind of person i want to get away from okay i'm not in control of that but i want to illuminate how all this stuff works okay and and what these various communities mean with this language those are my goals let's look a little bit more at john mcarthur i frankly i knew a little bit of him by reputation and i never paged any attention to him i've never read a single book he's written and i probably wouldn't have unless this whole thing brought john mcarthur into my path because by reputation hot very low resolution reputation i just kind of had jonathan john mcarthur located kind of exactly where i found him to be my low resolution wasn't inaccurate he is the pastor of a non-denominational evangelical mega church all those three words are hyperlinked in wikipedia and important founded in 1956 located in sun valley a neighborhood in san fernando valley of los angeles noted speaker and radio evangelist another key word john mcarthur is the senior pastor of grace community church as of 2008 the average weekly attendance was 8258 big church living stones at eight founded as grace community church blah blah blah that's a couple of previous previous pastors and then john mcarthur hit it big john mcarthur obviously connecting with with people on a big scale is that the holy spirit is that culture i'd say yes to both yes to both even though i have disagreements with john mcarthur okay and and that's why again prefer to have these the stuff in a hierarchy distinctives grace community church's elder rule well that's my tradition elder rule churches and within the evangelical protestant tradition okay but non-denominational so not a presbyterian church not to be confused with mainstream evangelicalism i'm not quite sure what whoever wrote that what meant by that it teaches calvinist theology see this is where the intramural stuff a lot of calvinists will say yeah not calvinist enough for my taste calvinist theology although it's not aligned with the denomination grace community church holds to the beliefs of spiritual gifts lordship salvation that might be fun to click on and the sufficiency of scripture noted for speaking out against movements such as prosperity gospel i speak out against the prosperity gospel maybe in more nuanced ways and the emerging church oh that's interesting the church also adheres to the view that christian giving should be derived voluntarily from the heart not a fixed or mandated percent sometimes people will call me say pastor does your church require 10% giving no this is an issue that also is talked about in so then go to wikipedia page on john mccarthur and that gets interesting so blah blah blah young earth theological views got us young earth creationism so he likes young earth creationism speaking about evolutionary theory he writes that christians ought to expose such lies and for what they are and and oppose them vigorously well where does ben shapiro they didn't talk much about creation and evolution in their show he argues that the battle for the beginning is ultimately a battle between two mutually exclusive faiths a lot of black and white binary antithesis language and mccarthur faith in scripture versus faith in an antithesis hypothesis okay that's where we get into this question of creation science the bible now is my singular source of truth and information and i'm going to build everything on it and so that this is this is exactly the kind of person that i would ask do you demand a biblical anatomy too and what they would probably say is the bible has anatomy correct and i might go to some passages and say well what about this and they'd say no we interpret it differently than you that's the way those conversations go i'm not saying it's a bad thing it's just the way those conversations go and i disagree with them on things mccarthur is a pre-millennialist now we're getting into eschatological controversies and pre-tribulation tribulationist in regard to the timing of the rapture and other end time events stating i'm committed to the fact that jesus will come and set up a literal earthly kingdom and that he will come seven years before the kingdom he will come prior to the tribulation my eschatology is ahmel again this is nerdy insider controversies on the second coming however he has tried to distance himself from others with this interpretation such as minister tim lahay and novelist jerry b jenkins of the left behind series mccarthur remarked in a sermon someone out there is going to say oh boy he's into the left behind series no i'm not a rapture fiction i'm not into wacky charge don't see this is where he's nuanced saying dispensationalism law and covenant mccarthur describes himself as a leaky dispensationalist not richard leaky apparently but just leaky he holds to a pre-millennialism and a pre-tribulational rapture of the church to get for a lot of you listen to this like what on earth is this stuff about and i'd say hey don't worry about it right now mccarthur states i'm not into all that traditionally known as dispensationalism seven dispensations two kingdoms two covenants two ways of salvation discontinuity between the old and the new uh but you know in chapiro he's getting into that old and new stuff soteriology key person in the lordship salvation controversy i'm not sure even sure what that is lordship salvation controversy is a theological dispute regarding key soteriological questions with evangelical christianity including involving some non-denominational evangelical churches the dispute the dispute spawned several books and pamphlets and conferences um um commitment salvation surrender salvation submission i'm not i'm not up on this controversy see this stuff is so leaky that are so nerdy that there's there's there are a lot of people out there that can nerd out on this stuff in ways that i just can't because i haven't read it but i am familiar with salvation by grace alone are the five solas many protestants have heard these phrases as distinctly protestant whereas lordship salvation controversy concerns what grace and faith must include and what they must exclude for a person to have salvation so again this gets very nerdy christology incarnational sonship basically this gets into the question oh it just goes to incarnation this basically gets into the question of is jesus as son an economic relationship which means that this is this gets into this gets into christological controversies that jonathan peugeot would happily talk about okay because this gets into all the nerdy stuff of the interrelationships within the members of the trinity and mccarthur apparently has gotten into that another big one secessionism secessionism as opposed to a continual continuationist secessionists say that miracles no longer happen and this again gets more into the modernist see so you have modernist you have modernist fundamentalists that will say we construct everything on the bible you have two bookish people like myself and micah from three creators and then you have materialists that say nope it's just material and in fact the bible is on top the bible is a derivative of that materialist universe so that could be ways that we differentiate these three things he's a secessionist no more miracles and that would put them as opposed to other groups that say the holy spirit continues to work the holy spirit can reveal things the holy spirit can heal people i'm not a secessionist i'm a apparently uh can continue i'm a continuationist there we go i'm a continuationist now someone in the comment section is gonna say oh that mandor clay he's a continuationist uh but if you're a modernist that's part of what's tied in with that philosophical package although mccarthur might very much disagree with that complementarian that means that the genders are complementary and that men only men can serve in office of the church egalitarian say that women can serve in the offices of the church mccarthur is into no ethics counseling which stresses the bible as a sufficient tool for counseling people with mental illness as depression and anxiety and there is and you will find that in some conservative churches not just reformed churches that say well the bible is our guide for our psychology you don't need freud and especially not young and and all of these other psychologists you need people that stick closely to the bible for their psychology and again that grows out of this idea that the bible is our basis of all knowledge not two books but one book other christian movements so he doesn't like joel osteen um disapproves of modern seeker friendly worship movements such as robert truller bill hybels rick warren see this is where you get picking fights with just about everybody else and again this is why hierarchies are helpful for helpful for differentiating this stuff um significant midst of significant media and public attention focused on the catholic sex abuse mccarthur gave highly critical the entire system of the roman catholic priesthood so he's carrying on so so it's interesting that and this again is where things get really complicated and really nerdy it's probably easier for john mccarthur to be on a show with ben shapiro than for john mccarthur to be on a show with bishop barron i don't know what john mccarthur and i would talk about but again then you have the status thing john mccarthur john mccarthur would get nothing out of having a conversation with me and posting that in fact it might even be a liability that's why it's probably not going to happen now those of you who say someday i'll have a million subscribers well if that happens then he'll probably want to talk to me but apart from that which i don't think that day is coming not that big of a deal okay now all of these things are what i think are modernist adaptations because if you if you say that it's all built on the bible in this way well then suddenly you do have to do a lot of adapting to modernity and so that's where you get the cessationism that's where you get the no ethic psychology see if you've got two books then you can learn something from the bible and you can learn from modern psychology you've got two books how you integrate and synthesize them well that's tougher but you've still got two books if you're like sam harrison you have one book and the bible is derivative upon this we're going to have materialist we're going to have materialist explanation sufficient to have all of scripture well then you're a materialist you've got one book again i'm belgian confession i got two books john mccarthur has one book so i didn't plan on this but you're just kind of a simple easy way of representing that but that's a very modernist approach and mod if you're if you're going to if you're going to buy here's i don't think i have a fork in my office hang on i'm gonna run into the kitchen and get one this will be a good illustration so i ran to the church kitchen and got a fork here's thinking about a fork so you've got the modernists and the fundamentalists the modernists and the fundamentalists both buy certain philosophical presuppositions about reality and and that those are in a sense implicit in even this dichotomy that i set up because what we're going to look at is well what's the relationship of reality well a modernist in a sense says well it's either based on spirit it's john mccarthur or matter that's sam harris okay and so we have to read the bible in a certain way but what's always interesting about a fork is you have the tines then you have the part that's together and what often modernists and fundamentalists don't understand is that they've got a lot down here that they share an assumption which add to a different fork if you forked off before this fork you might not share some of these and i think it's this fork that finally we're at the end of the 20th century beginning of the 21st century and what the jordan peterson conversation has everything to do with is looking at this fork and saying nah we went wrong before we got to this fork that we have to look at this in other ways or in a sense we're beyond this fork we might maybe the fork happened here we have the modernists and the fundamentalists and maybe we're coming to here maybe there'll be another fork history works that way now the idw wants to preserve modernism this is some of the fight that the weinstein brothers and ben shapiro are are fighting and jordan peterson too so he's together with them but i want to throw away science and and the new secret sacred self movement is that imagines that i can redefine myself apart from any material substrate or any biological substrate but peterson i think unique in the idw pushes it beyond and i think i think this is you know they wanted me to do a longer conversation about the idw moniker i think it obscures as much as it reveals because i think there are some significant ways in which jordan peterson is different from the rest of the tribe and and ben shapiro isn't ben shapiro is a theist but in some ways so he's got some similarity with how jordan peterson is different in that he's a theist but he's a confessional theist so he just he just flat out denies sam harris what he believes peterson is actually working on something what i think is a new synthesis now i don't want to get too hegelian here because there are plenty of issues with hegel and i know for some commenters i'm not sufficiently hegelian now perhaps for some others i'll be too hegelian but peterson pushes beyond into a more neo sacramentalism what do i mean by that well this is what i want to where i want to bring gretta vosper back into the conversation because what i essentially think is that jordan peterson when he talks to sam harris and he doesn't really hit brett weinstein with this but this has been some of my critique about the moral assumptions that brett weinstein thinks he can he can critique and re-edit his assassin robot biological programming with all all have in common with someone like gretta vosper now now what happened what happened oh i gotta right click on it what happened with with vosper was that back in back a couple of years ago when her thing hit well 2016 the united church of canada didn't really want to take this on and and that was because they didn't want to be mean you know to kick someone out that's that's mean and there's there's real cost to disciplining gretta vosper because she doesn't believe in god and and they they basically wanted to have it both ways and let's see they they said it pretty well the report of the interview committee is clear that the doctrine of the united church has being has never been a static thing well that's interesting the sub executive affirms that there has always been evolution and how the church describes what it believes okay the united church has experienced the delight of seeing god and our faith in a new light depending on the context in which we are living okay there have been there have been times we have said that things have caused joy in the church in the wider community we've also over the years come to realize that some of the ways we have said things and some of the ways we have acted have been cause for regret sorrow and repentance but whether we have stated things in good bad or evolving ways there have been the there has been the constant that the church believes in god follows the way of jesus christ and is led by the spirit so but what happens if you get rid of that well where does that go and so then she basically brought this up and so then they now have come to a decision and two very little short statements which really are really quite funny and they're not writing a lot because the more you write the deeper trouble you get into so let's just not talk about it so we understand that the toronto conference the the gretta vosper and the west hill united church have received averaged a settlement on the issue between them settlement what's the settlement the settlements even shorter than the explanation this doesn't alter in any way the belief of the united church of god church of canada in god a god most fully revealed to us as christians in and through jesus christ the church's statements of faith over the years have been all grounded on this understanding this doesn't alter in any way well well then you begin to ask well what game are you playing and and essentially you say we don't want to talk about this okay maybe you should because maybe be good for her and good for them no but she doesn't want to lose her pension and her building and her following and we want to be able to have an atheist church you know we want the anti the anti-gun elf we want the anti-gun caucus of the nra to be allowed to exist to exist you know and you can you can do this all kinds of different ways we want the we want the the red socks fan caucus of the of the yankee fandom to exist well you can't be a yankee fan and a red socks fan it's but it's not my church not my denomination let me say oh gosh i'm gonna get in so much trouble where was i and this is where i think we have post-christian christendom in operation because there's so much legacy code from christianity here that we really don't want to admit or deal with or engage but let's just keep going without it and well at some point it it just kind of gets silly after i mentioned gretta vosper someone sent me a link to advertising atheist on tv o in 2011 where it's fun jordan peterson and gretta vosper were on the same panel on ontario public tv but those two never really squared off there were other guys that peterson but but it was interesting because what you have here in this picture i guess like you have here's the host these three were the atheists and here's peterson and a fairly fundamentalist conservative christian on the other side and it's like huh well this is interesting because peterson has been talking about this stuff for quite a while and this is this is actually quite interesting now where we're going with this is that that what peterson is really dealing with i think is a neo sacramentalism all right and yesterday i talked a little bit about the institution of the idw and is it an institution and some people pushed back on the the the nuanced way that i use the word institution institution really has two meanings general motors is an institution and marriage is an institution and there are many ways in which general motors and marriage do not share things but that little bit in between if we were to do a venn diagram that's an institution and and when brett weinstein or when eric weinstein coins idw he tries to create an institution and and this is the element that i think jordan peterson is further out ahead of the other elements he's the highest status member and i think beyond the other members in terms of development of this arc which is exactly the kind of arc that david fuller and rebel wisdom and a whole bunch of other groups are kind of feeling now i get back to mr plinkett our brain consciously we might not know it but our brain does and this is where we're at right now with this stuff and and peterson i think people are sensing that peterson is going back in some ways to a sacramentalist position and it's not it's sacramentalism 2.0 but it's now seen through the light of some of the stuff that don hoffman has looked at some of the stuff that that philosophy has looked at and and so now in on rubin with rubin and shapiro jordan peterson talks about a spirit beneath the earth ha ha ha has as mike a sample says ah theism and and shapiro listens to that says yeah yeah yeah that's theism and yeah so what does that mean tribally well well peterson is very much a man in motion maybe see see here's the here's the thing because youngians can sound like this and i don't know how in motion they are and i'm gonna have some talk with some hardcore unions coming up and we'll see how that goes i don't know i don't know but this is all very complicated and it's made more complicated by the fact that we're not fully in control of ourselves and we don't even know everything that our brains know and and so we feel stuff and we feel it intuitively and so that's why you know david over at rebel wisdom and david and ollie are are monkeying around with this and jonathan peugeot gets so excited because he listens to jordan peterson talk this way but but jonathan peugeot also understands some tribal lines because he's part of a he's part of a historical church and he understands theology and so there's just a lot going on in this so so peterson and i'm not even sure if neo sacramentalism is quite the right word but you see mcgarthor has an adaptive modernist synthesis and and that has been losing traction now he's a pastor of a mega church and there's still plenty of people cultures don't move through a culture uniformly it's always complicated and there are many people for whom jon mcgarthor's particular synthesis will be engaging and helpful that this particular legacy theology code will still be really functional but there's a lot of people for whom that legacy theology code isn't functional now again even by using those terms some people are going to hear me are you saying that the gospel and that articulation and that presentation of it is obsolete no i'm saying it is a it is a representation that has ties to a culture just as much as peter's presentation in acts two is different from paul's presentation in athens and now in in christian theology we've known this that that by virtue of by virtue of cultural context we try to derive faithful representations of the gospel now i just read the united church of canada which you might say well banderclai you're playing the same game but i would say not all cultural representations are faithful how do you know which one well that's the game we're playing that's why we do theology that's why we have conversation that's why it's on one hand important that we not kick people out of the church too quickly but at the same point we do kick people out of the church at some point that's why john calvin has discipline of the church as a third mark of the church because if an organization doesn't have any discipline they cease to be a coherent organization if the nra allows the anti-gun caucus within it to exist they no longer become the nra and and and you're not saying i'm not saying you go out and shoot the anti-gun caucus of the nra i'm saying yeah but maybe you take away their membership card so that the nra can have a cohesive and i'm not a member of the nra i'm again you know my i'm not i don't have a problem with no i'm gonna get in trouble too i'm talking about guns you can't talk about these things well maybe that's why i'm the imagined pastor of the idw because i talk about things that are stupid to talk about like i mentioned gun control when i shouldn't when i have no problem with gun control i got kicked off of a jury panel for that once so on and on and on i won't tell you that story i didn't get kicked off of the panel i just didn't get impaneled okay i didn't break the law this is this video is way out of bounds all right but i'm going to post it anyway i'm almost two hours into it so yeah this will make up for my three and my five minute wins from yesterday mccarthur's adaptive modernist synthesis has been losing traction sacramentalism seeing god through the stuff has been on the rise now i don't think that i think we're going to have a neo sacramentalism that's going to be as with all neo movements has continuation and difference from the previous movement and i think jordan peterson is part of this trend and and when he reads the bible and and just the way he approaches the bible there's a there's a sacramentalist element to this and this is part of why joe why jonathan peugeot began to pick up on peterson because jonathan peugeot peugeot's ancient sacramentalism and jordan peterson's neo sacramentalism found enough that's alike but peugeot will talk very eloquently about what they disagree on and now they're able to manipulate hierarchies and say well jordan and i disagree on a bunch of things but we agree on other things and we have mutual interests so we're able to be friends and a lot of this is what the idw is supposed to be about so if i'm if i'm not a member of the nra my conservative fan base will you still love me see i get to this point and i ask myself what am i doing and another part of me says why not why not youtube is the place for people with not a lot to lose so here i am baby so sacramentalism seeing god through the stuff and and you see i think i think calvin's approach approach to the lord's supper has this that that that jesus is present is gonna use the word spiritually i have to is spiritually present in the lord's supper oh what does that mean oh gosh we don't know well it's a mystery well even the word mystery in the new testament is not quite what it means in our context so it is a mystery mystery we can't fully articulate it we are we stand before it seeing the reintegration of the layers and the readjustments of the elements within the hierarchy i think that's what we're doing in this project and and again when you get to my insistence on the historicity of the resurrection of jesus and the physicality of his body that they touched that's all in there because as as jonathan peugeot tweeted a little while ago yeah you know we can understand religion as a heuristic device but so is science that this this book that i hold let's talk about the book aspect of it that i touch is different than if you put it under an electron microscope and that in fact the page has ink and letters on it well there's meaning to that and well was it was it was it oh yeah mccarthur gave an illustration i think of a city and words on the wall was that mccarthur was someone else i don't remember i watched so many videos i can't always remember but my interaction with this is in a sense an interaction with a representation if you understand what that means and if you've been listening to my videos from the beginning maybe have a sense of what that means and i probably got myself in trouble from someone who hasn't been listening to it but this is a two-hour video so only the hardcore of you are going to get to this point and unless you know unless i get high enough status that someone starts clipping up my videos and taking out sound bites and trying to get me off patreon you just gotta have fun with this stuff folks let's not take ourselves too seriously in all the wrong ways so peterson's attempt at a new synthesis and again i don't i don't want to mean that in a hegelian way but hegel had a point in terms of and i think mike a sample made a point of that in the three creators too that hey hegel wasn't the first to figure out that there's thesis anti-thesis and synthesis that's that's this is kind of a very obvious observation about how ideas work the ancient relational was lost to him early on that's why he doesn't attend church he's he does not agree with he does not well he does a little bit see this is part of what's what's so hard about peterson and hard about all of us mccArthur and i can very easily sit here and say we will stand before our lord and call to be given account for this video for what i do in the church for what i do behind closed doors for the food i put in my body we are both very reformed in that that we are going to be called to account to answer to our lord for our theology for our action for our behavior for our thoughts for everything and we will be judged by our master and what we long to hear is well done good and faithful servant john mccArthur and i are down with that we can say that easily no problem at all jordan peterson i don't know if he would i think he would say something similar to that but and and he says some things that are like that in his book you know you'd better not lie because it's always found out and and on and on he has those kinds of warnings that's up that are rather last judgmenty but but it's not framed and distilled and and and honed in the way that a religion does that john mccArthur and i share and i don't know about ben chapiro probably something like that but in more of a jewish context all right so gretta vosper no and and so this is the way that that all of these things are are interacting and engaging he jordan peterson wants to subsume the modern not exercise it okay and if you understand what i mean by subsume is that you want to take what's in the modern you know purify it reform it not lose the increase the the important parts of it but also not lose the other parts of it and that's what he's doing all right and again i people who dismiss peterson as being dumb it just doesn't hold weight of of being a lightweight while he's he has credentials in his field he's he he bolts from the pack and in my opinion is making he's made a real contribution to my lifelong learning process and i think he's making a real contribution to a lot of different areas so if i didn't think that i wouldn't be spending all this time i gotta close this video soon we're almost done there's a sacramentalism in peterson and young is in this mix and i haven't quite figured all that stuff out because young isn't terribly seeker sensitive he's not terribly uh user friendly but but there's a sacramentalism in in peterson that i think is important and but it's also but also a protestant theoretical confessionalism and this is part of the reason that peterson doesn't go to church because in a sense protestantism theoretical confessionalism taken too far leads to why go to church and and in fact you see this in evangelicals who don't go to church i don't need to go to church i have my personal relationship with jesus that's a late-stage protestant thing and that's been that's been disconnected from from its sacramentalist roots john calvin would never go for that john calvin i've been rereading the institutes and you know it's it's i haven't read the institutes too often since i studied them in college but now at this stage in my life rereading the institutes it's been interesting understanding how much medieval stuff is in john calvin and how much he talks about the church fathers and how much he wanted to engage with his church and the roman catholic church and reform it and and the different elements he brought to the vision so there's a lot of protestantism in peterson as well and so he's this strange amalgam of all of these things which all of us are but peterson's just so darn public and vocal that he keeps pouring this stuff out to us and it's just so interesting to pick through and say yeah there's some sacramentalism in there yeah there's some protestantism in there yeah there's some modernism in there he wants to preserve that but boy he's he's interested in some of these other things and then you throw you know you throw that crazy young in as a wild card and it's just interesting so oh what did i think about chapiro and and mccarthur again i thought the most interesting thing about it was superiors initial comment he's been the most anticipated guest so far and i thought i'd rather talk to jordan peterson i'm not saying anything against mccarthur but it's not as interesting to me i i know many people like him and that's not a criticism that's just i know modernist evangelicals a lot of them and and elite and and a leaky dispensational that's a little bit interesting but it's also a little troublesome because i think well how are you reformed if you're flirting with the dispensationalists in that way and so you wanted to know what i thought of this conversation well there's two hours worth and as i said earlier i bet you a bunch of you are dissatisfied because if you come to this video and what you really want is some tribal analysis i'm with john mccarthur i'm with the idw you're not going to get that from me because i'm too old and and i've studied too much stuff and i have too many of my own ideas and so i i put these things in hierarchies and on one hand i'll say with john mccarthur you know our our ancient relational yes jesus i am jesus is my master and me and john mccarthur and and and there'll be a bunch of commonalities that john mccarthur and i will have and there'll be a bunch of differences now john mccarthur seems to much more be in the habit of denouncing people and so if i had status he might denounce me and some of you other low status people who are in the comments section might denounce me and if you do so you know me by now i won't be upset i don't mind being denounced that if i if i was afraid of being denounced that wouldn't be on youtube so that's not where i'm at but i find the entire map of the landscape interesting and again i think that people said well peterson should talk to shapiro not no not shapiro he's already talked to shapiro peterson should talk to john mccarthur i don't think that would go well peterson should talk to william lane craig i don't think that would go well because william lane craig unless he spent a lot of time investing in peterson even then i don't think it would be a great conversation because william lane craig is too much of a modernist have lane craig and shapiro talk there'd be much more connection there and i'd like to see i'd like to see when i it's really bad because when i pause there i think i'm thinking thoughts i shouldn't say for for for some reasons i want to see nt wright jordan peterson have a conversation but because there's enough probably between them that they could have a good one but i okay i told nt wright he should read maps of meaning and not just 12 rules because if you want to understand peterson you should read maps of meaning maps of meaning is a tortured book if you want to understand peterson you should watch his videos i think he most comes alive there but nt wright isn't a terribly busy man he doesn't have time to watch all those videos i do i'm low status so i've invested a lot of my life and i'm thinking about a conversation that i'll probably have with ron dart ron dart knows peterson well and he's also a competent scholar and he knows erasmus so as the next time i schedule with ron i'll probably talk more about these things because these are the things that interest me but this is why this is why peterson is going to have trouble talking with high status individuals because they're not going to have enough time or interest to really know peterson and so their interactions won't be that interesting whereas you know the interaction between peterson and sam harris was semi-interesting and then i thought of rachel or rachel i'm going senile it's got to be brown you know jordan peterson should talk to me and this is where i go back to my hierarchy and say you know finally and this is part of the joy of being a christian finally i serve a master one master and unlike jordan peterson who is limited to time and space and jordan peterson has all his own quirks his beef eating self my master isn't limited to time and space and i can talk to my master now through prayer and i can talk to my master now through prayer this is my father's world and i find it rich and full and fascinating and interesting including the theoretical and the material i i'm a i'm a two-book guy i don't have taylor's i don't have taylor's water bottle anymore right joey people in my meetup so i'm a two-book guy this is my father's world and it's rich and full and and i believe that once they put my body in the ground i will be with my lord and i will answer to him and he'll have some things to say to me that i don't want to hear because they're true and i am a sinner and i have failed him in many ways but i believe he will welcome me into his kingdom and in the life of the age to come the joy i experience of lobsters and of youtube and of getting to know many of you out there and of having my own channel and of talking about silly things like fork and of remembering christmas 1971 when my parents gave me this bible and how i used it in christian school where all the sad things come undone and this is where john mccarthur and i are the same in this sense we're both evangelists and i i don't know that i'll i'll forefront necessarily the ways that he presents it but i believe what i just gave you was a gospel presentation because part of what i'd like you to understand is the joy of my lord and the joy of belief and the joy of the church even though it can be a pain in the neck and is flawed and is a dangerous place sometimes and all of that stuff that life in christ there's apostle paul's formulation life in christ is the best kind of living and that's that's my gospel plea so there you go two hours and ten minutes almost ten minutes i could have a lot more thoughts i could i could dissect the i could dissect the shapiro mccarthur video but i didn't find it that interesting except for what ben shapiro said right off the bat for all the reasons i listed here so sorry to disappoint i am who i am