https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tLd8YjvLzl4

 Where does secularity fit into this mix? Because one of the things that I've been thinking a lot about lately is the way that secularity was stealing culture all around the world. And we're starting to see this now with, of course, Modi dedicating the new temple to Ram in India, the Hagia Sophia. There's a backlash. Yeah, there's a backlash to secularism. Backlashes are complex things because sometimes they can be corrections. Sometimes they can be just reactions. And we seldom know for until far past our lifetimes. Well, I want to respond because this is another tonus, another tension. And this is between two notions within sort of the philosophy of law between substantive justice and procedural justice. Substantial justice is that which constitutes justice in the sense of, you know, that's a just thing. And so there are things we pursue as a society that we think are substantially just, like, you know, we want to reduce suffering or something like that. Procedural justice is the processes by which you're trying to achieve your substantial gains to always be really self-correcting. And one of the things that secularity did well to my mind is pull those two apart and say we can commit to different pursuits of substantial justice in our society. But what will hold us together is we will all prioritize over our homed pursuits of substantial justice. We will pursue a commitment to procedural justice. We will all say that you can pursue your Christianity. I can pursue what I'm doing. But if we come into conflict, we will all go to this place that allows to tell you or me how we behave in the public sphere because we're commitment. This space is committed to procedural justice. And one of the things that a centrist is committed to is preserving the importance of procedural justice. And one of the things I'm again worried about is I see the left and the right undermining procedural justice because of the elevation of substantive justice. And so what was gained in secularity, and I think that was part of what was going on with the separation of church and state, in the church, you will pursue your substantive justice. In the state, we will have procedural justice enshrined and we won't confuse these two together and we'll try to demark and we'll try to prevent undue interference. But everybody, all the different church homes will share the same procedural justice. And that has that held things together in a certain way. And of course, the Civil War sprung up when the commitment to procedural justice was undermined both by the North and the South for their respective visions of substantive justice. I'm not saying the Civil War shouldn't have happened. Slavery was evil. But I'm saying what happens is when you lose that commitment, you open yourself up to Civil War. And I think that's what's happening right now. Both the left and the right are undermining the commitment to procedural justice. I don't think free speech should be curtailed because I believe in dialectic and the dialogos only under very extreme circumstances. Right. People calling to violence, shouting fire in a theater, all that sort of stuff, right? Like where there's clear, overwhelming, massive harm. And that's a commitment to procedural justice. And we are undermining that in a very significant way. For all my many disagreements with Jordan, and he's often voiced this in a way that I consider flawed, but I still admire the fact that he's trying to, he has been at times trying to say if we don't have this kind of procedural justice, things will breed in the dark. And I think that's what he's pointing to. So there's a long way of saying there is something very valuable because we've been talking about discernment. It comes to my mind that that's been a thread, a through line running through everything. There's a proper discernment between procedural and substantial justice that secularism gave us. I don't think we should ever let that go. That commitment to a wise discernment of the difference and the proper proportioning of them. And so that's the role I think secularism has for us. I don't think that separation of procedural and substantive justice maps on, as the Enlightenment perhaps proposed it is, the distinction between the sacred and the profane or the numinous and the mundane. I don't think it maps on that way. I think the procedural domain was filled with all kinds of, right, sacralization. Your honor, the podium, the gavel. It's filled with the sacred. Right. Go ahead. Go ahead. Walk to Washington, D.C. You're right. Those are temples to procedural justice. And that's because procedural justice deserves to have a sacred pole to it as much as substantive justice does. I wonder what you think about how this maps on to the struggles with science. Because in many ways, the scientific method was also a question of procedure. It is. I think that's an excellent mapping. And I'm glad you do that because that's the mapping I want. So thank you. It's like, well, science is about there's a procedural justice for our epistemic virtue that has to be given a kind of authority for all of us. Each of us has our own commitment, our own theories that we hone in on. We're using that in a double sense. We hone in on, right. But what we do is we all commit to, right, we make sacrosanct in a very important way this procedural justice. Now, that can be turned into an idolatry of the scientific method. There isn't such a thing. There are scientific methods and they're in this weird family relationship with each other. If you do any history and philosophy of science. So, right. But there was exactly that. And it was like, yes, we're after truth. Right. But it has to be properly justified by a process that we are trying to keep as self-correcting as it possibly can be. Now, of course, this has been undermined. And again, because the lines have blurred, there's a lot of loss of discernment. And I am particularly upset when people identify as research activists because that is a blurring between the pursuit, as they should, of particular substantial justice. Yes, it is important that we get rid of racism. That is substantial. That's a substantial justice that we should pursue. Don't let that undermine the procedural justice of how we do science in which we step aside from those commitments because we know they're biasing and we are exposing ourselves because we're holding it sacred that this to this self-corrective process. Yes. Yes.