https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=58wb7UX81iY

 Hi, this is Paul. This is the second part of the commentary on the Peterson-Vervecke conversation. I spent four hours today meeting with two of the estuary support host groups that John Vendonk has started, so I've had a fair amount of conversation, some of it about this today, quite a bit of really good conversation. I'm really pleased with the way the estuary, really sort of the estuary leadership training groups are going. Such a good time meeting with them all, which emphasizes for me that it's certainly forgivable for many of you who don't watch many of my videos to understand what I'm doing. My focus has always been on the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. Jordan Peterson is obviously an important part of the Jordan Peterson phenomenon, but it really isn't about him. This is about all of us. One of the craziest things about Jordan Peterson is the consistency with which he is in the middle of something. All the way from the start, this has been the thing with him. The consistency of the fracturing of things that usually happen around this guy. The Kathy Newman interview was probably one of the biggest examples. The Times of London. I mentioned before that one of the members of our local meetup early on said what he needs to do is just keep getting into fights. Now obviously if you look at Jordan and what that's cost him, he would tell you that his temperament, that's not exactly suitable to his temperament, but the outcome of the fights is usually not what anyone would expect from the outcome. It doesn't mean that he always wins his fights. He certainly came out on top with Kathy Newman, but the Zizek conversation, that was strange. The first of the two online and then the four follow-up video conversations with Sam Harris, winners and losers, well not necessarily, but there are almost always strange outcomes to what he's involved with. I've been reading the comments on the Vervecky Peterson conversation itself, and I've been reading the comments on the part one of my commentary on it, and And so it's hard to figure out what's going on, and that's sort of the way it always is with Peterson. In fact, in one of the question and answers, sometime middle of 2018 when he was asked, what is the question you would like the press to ask you? And of course he's had these ongoing sparrings with the press, and his answer was any real legitimate journalist should ask, what the hell is going on with you? And that remains the question with Peterson, and his story has gotten no less strange since wave one. You know, benzodiazepine rehab all the way to Russia, listening to Michaela's tale of that, over to, was it Serbia or Croatia, where he's rehabbing, he catches COVID. You know, how many strange things can happen to one guy? Well, I'll tell you, if you look at history, a lot. And Jordan Peterson is the epicenter of strangeness, but it's a productive strangeness. And that's why he's worth watching. And that's why, in fact, you might say, well, you watch a lot of Peterson. I do, but I'm really watching Peterson's audience. And so the estuary, the discord channel, the comment section, Twitter, these are all places for me to get a look at you. And I know you're watching me, but this is why I'm really curious about what you think. And this video was, this video was no exception. This video, who knows how it will turn out, but this one is sort of right up there with, with the Zizek conversation, because that ended weird. And I did a full commentary on that, but, or at least a, not a, not an interstitial commentary on that. The, the, the, the video production of that was a mess. Remember most of us were watching the bootleg copy, because even though I paid for a copy, it didn't get delivered. So, you know, this is Jordan Peterson. This is the Peterson phenomenon. The world is changing and it's swirling around him in some important ways. And a lot of the mainstream isn't, isn't paying attention to it. The IDW paid attention to him for a while, but sort of has gone on its own sort of carping way. But, no, if you're looking for a place for lightning to strike repeatedly, keep watching Jordan Peterson, because it keeps happening. Even when things are getting, you know, sort of a routine settling into these wave two dialogues, stuff keeps happening. And so, you know, it's, the internet is, it's sort of protocol for people to be all over the map, but how to judge. And so, well, I look at comments from some of you because I have a pretty good head for remembering names on comments. And so, I track some of you sort of mentally to see where you're at and you, you watching your little emoticons in the comment section or on the Discord server, whereas I might not always remember your names, little personality impressions sort of stick in my mind. And so, and especially, that's especially true of those people for whom I have actual relationships with. And so, I listen to, I'm very interested about your take on this conversation and it's just fascinating. So, a consensus hasn't emerged. He's always interrupting. Yeah, that's the observation. He's being mischievous. That's what Peugeot answered in A Question and Answer. He's sparring with an equal or an old friend or a colleague or a rival. Well, yeah. Concerned about his health. Yeah, good number of you. It was great. It was psychedelic, sort of shamanistic. And a lot of you have said, well, on second listening to it, when I watched the video instead of listening to the audio or, so there's been a lot of difference in terms of the way that people have listened to this conversation and what their takeaways has been from it. And then a lot of people are like, well, why are you watching so closely? Well, I'm watching the waves. That's where you should keep your eye on. Peterson, well, he's right there in the middle of it and lightning keeps striking him, but it's the waves around him that he's riding, which is what we should really be keeping our eyes on, because whatever happens to Jordan Peterson happens to Jordan Peterson. The waves affect me, too. The waves are in my world. And so I can learn about the waves by watching this particular surfer. And those of you who have been following my channel for a long time know I talk about the decay of modernity and the emergence of what's next, but we don't know what's next. You know, the blue church has sort of turned and gone after him. And in many ways, as I mentioned in the Barry Weiss video, he and Barry Weiss are sort of lamenting the loss in the end of the blue church. And if you don't know what I mean by blue church, I'm talking in Jordan Hall terms here. And those of you who follow, say, rebel wisdom would have a better understanding of that. It's not about the guy. It's about the waves and what's beneath the waves and what's causing the waves and how he's surfing the waves. People are expressions of spiritual movements. Now that sounded very wooish for a bunch of you, but you probably have to do some more research and find out what I mean by spiritual, because I think the definition of spiritual is very much what all of this is about. We have to practice relevance realization. And if you're not up on your verveky language, you might not have any idea what I'm talking about with respect to that. And we'll get to that. Verveky has been using relevance realization in a way that Peterson has been using chaos and order for quite a few years. So that is part of verveky's work that Jordan was familiar with. And you can hear that in their conversation, in the old 2015 conversation that's on YouTube, when Peterson is sort of sparring with verveky about, and Peterson, I remember, says, well, your relevance realization. And John verveky was developing that idea while Peterson was working on chaos and order and meaning and all of the stuff that you're used to by listening to Peterson. We don't see the unseen core beneath the waves, but we know things are moving by watching the elements around the core. And that's what we're looking for. And that's what Peugeot does, because Peugeot is looking for the signs of the times. And all of Peugeot's pattern recognition stuff is all about the signs of the times. And to understand, as Jesus said, when you see the clouds in the east, you know a storm is coming. Peugeot is seeing the clouds and looking at the patterns. And he's sort of a weather man for the end of modernity. There's another little name for Peugeot, the weather man for the end of modernity. But here's the thing about wave catching. Wave catching, I live in California. I'm not a surfer. One of my sons is currently living in Santa Cruz. He's learning to surf. I know enough about surfing to know it's all about speed and timing. And no one has caught a wave like Jordan Peterson. Peterson has about 3.8 million subs right now on YouTube. And verveky has about 30,000. And that'll give you an idea about what percentage of Jordan Peterson's audience knows anything about John Verveky. It's going to be sort of the hardcore people, like in this little corner of the internet, that really didn't just sort of watch Jordan, you know, as Poe said to me, you know, came for the culture war, stayed for the religion. Well, that's us here in this little corner of the internet. Although we didn't come for the culture war, I've always been here for the religion because the culture war stuff was data. It was part of the wave. The religion stuff is the foundation and the basis of the core. If you haven't watched awakening from the meaning crisis, well, you're both in for a treat if you can figure it out. Because if you compare it, let's say to Jordan Peterson's maps of meaning course or personalities course, I'll tell you Peterson's course is a lot more accessible to your average listener. Verveky's course is a very long extended argument. Peterson's course has how many episodes? 15, 18 episodes each. I didn't look it up. Verveky's has 50. Um, cognitive science is sort of an emergent, an emergent synthesizing discipline where it's science and philosophy. And so Verveky's very demanding and he has developed his own language, his own theories. And those of us who've been talking to him for, I've been watching his stuff now for a couple of years, and I still often feel like a neophyte when it comes to what he's talking about. So, you know, I'm going to try and do some translating as best I can in this video, but it's a big job because Verveky is also a very smart guy and extraordinarily well read. And his thought is highly developed. And whereas Peterson has been in some ways fighting for his life for the last five years and fighting out there in this culture war, Verveky has continued on in his academic discipline. And as I mentioned in the first one, Peterson doesn't know much about what Verveky has been developing for the last five years. And it's really hard to have an engaging conversation if you really don't know what the other person is doing. So Verveky, in terms of this little corner of the internet, is much more on sort of the rebel wisdom side of things. Non-theist, men's work, ecology of practices, these kinds of things. So it's skeptical, but welcoming of religion, of traditional religions, I'll say it that way. John doesn't really, he doesn't consider himself a Buddhist. He doesn't consider, he doesn't consider himself a Christian at all. And so some of the Christian sightings that Jordan found in John's language in this video were quite interesting and I think quite telling. And John basically said, well, I've been spending a lot of time with Christians. And well, yeah. Now, there's no quick way for Jordan Peterson to get up to speed with John Verveky's last five years because unlike many of the other people that Jordan has talked to on his channel, there's no book that Jordan can just sit down and read in a day or so and catch up with John's work. And so that's part of the reason for the frenetic nature of this conversation. Justin Briarley came to mind because this is also, and this is a question about what Jordan is doing in this second wave, because Justin Briarley and many journalists ask and interrogate and the purpose of the interview is to illuminate the work of the interviewee. Justin Briarley also does a lot of, and actually Justin Briarley or Brett Weinstein or a third party would have been helpful in a talk like this to sort of, at least for the sake of the audience. Many comments said, well, it's sort of they're forgetting that there's an audience and yeah, yeah, that's true. Many other commenters I've heard people have watched 20 minutes and simply given up on it. It made them anxious. It made them tired. It, it frustrated them too much and they simply gave up on the video. And well, that's part of the danger you have if you're going to produce a psychedelic video. So unlike the first part of this series, which in a lot of ways had a lot of prolegomena, I'm going to do more commenting on the video itself this time. I just remembered something that I have to do, so I might break for a minute here, but let's, let's get into this then. What we covered in part one, well, dia logos, that's a big part of John's work, distributed cognition. And again, if you're not familiar with John's work, you're probably going to have to step back and think about that. And that idea itself is fairly threatening to sort of a common modernistic way of thinking. It's much more friendly to the idea that there are in fact, one person calls them hyper things. Let's say something like communism. Well, what is communism? Did you dig up communism in the ground? Can you find it on a street corner? Is it located on a zip code? Communism is sort of a spirit that inhabits and propels and shapes and molds and colonizes and occupies humanity. Okay. And so distributed cognition is a way that communities think together. And part of what John Vervecki has been working on is studying as a cognitive scientist, the how distributed cognition works. And in that way, it's even though John doesn't use this term, it's very much a spiritual enterprise because spirit is the thing that moves the matter. It's the wind that moves the trees. It's the ideology that moves the armies and the activists and the rebels. It's the spirit that moves the religious people as a community. It's the thing that makes people all across the board start to notice the same thing at once that they never saw before. So in other words, part of what we're doing when we're talking together is we're looking for distributed cognition. And part of what John Vervecki is studying is how do we do this together? An example of this that I've used often in my videos is school spirit. How is it that school spirit molds and changes and morphs over time in a school and embeds itself in the walls and permanently colonizes and changes the course of individual human beings and groups of human beings? School spirit is sort of an example of distributed cognition. They start thinking together in a strange way. And again, this is part of humanity's superpower. Collaborative conversation creates a thing that internal dialogue cannot. Jordan Peterson jumped in and said, well, how is that like thinking? Yeah, it is like thinking, but it's between us. So what does it mean that the two of us share an idea? What does it mean that the two of us sort of create or participate? And I really do mean create a spiritual movement. That's what people do. People have been doing that on earth the whole time, and this is part of the reason why religion is the oldest thing around. And then he got into filosofia, which is the love of wisdom. And these are two styles of conversation. Philo-Nikeia, which is sort of conquest, win-lose-zero-sum, where there are many such conversations on the internet. And again, John Vervecki has been talking about this for quite a while, but Jordan hasn't been watching John's videos because Jordan, again, has been sort of fighting for his life over the last five years and hasn't spent the 50 hours required to watch John's videos. And as I made the point I made in the previous video, academia is mostly about books. Academics mostly read books. Not a lot of them watch or listen to a lot of videos because they can simply process and take in information faster in a book. And most of the time a book is edited, tailored, tested, reproved in a way that a video like this is not. Those are two different cultures and two different ways of approaching the world. Phileo is one of the Greek words for love, and it's in contrast with Eros, and John touches this in his series on the meaning crisis. Eros is sort of a love that consumes the other. It's sort of mouth-to-mouth love. Agape is love that sacrifices for the other. It's an I've got you love, and it's your well-being at my expense love. And Phileo is friendship, side-by-side. Think of Philadelphia, city of brotherly love. Phileo is brotherly love, sisterly love, side-by-side love. The love that two people share if they're sharing a common thing. The focus is not on each other so much. The focus is on the thing. With Eros, the focus is on I want to make you a part of me, and that's erotic love. Agopic love is I'm going to, I'm going, you, your well-being at my expense. I am going to sacrifice for the sake of you. It's other regarding in that sense, and Phileo is both of us love this similar thing, and we find a kind of love together. We find a kind of nourishment together by focusing on this third thing. That's Phileo. So the love of wisdom versus the love of conquest. All right, this is where we left off. Let's keep going. Well, that's very much, I mean, it sort of started with my projects, my major project right now, and this is why I'm doing these other things in this manner, is I put together an anthology for publication, and I'm doing a lot of work on it as I'm trying to understand what is DIA Logos? How do we bring it about? And I'm looking, the two areas of research are, and I'm looking, the two areas of research are, I'm of course looking back into the philosophical heritage, the whole Socratic tradition, but I'm also doing a lot of participant observation, participant experimentation, and all these emerging communities. You know, the circling community, the authentic relating community, philosophical insight, philosophical fellowship. I'm trying to learn how to do this, share with this with other people. It seems to me, tell me what you think of this. It seems to me that this, okay, so you're a participant observer. I feel like we're tracking something, and this must be associated with our hunting instinct, that the Phileas Sophia is a, because I feel like I'm tracking, so I believe this is from The Lord of the Rings with Bilbo, but I could be completely wrong about this. There's a scene near the end of the book where he wakes, makes his way across a swamp full of souls, and he feels for the rocks underneath that make- Sounds like Frodo making his way through the the marsh of the dead in The Lord of the Rings. ...the path, but he can't see them because the water is murky, and so he feels the mount, and it seems to me that Phileas Sophia is associated with that, is that you feel your way to a solid, to something solid, and then you take the next step, and that manifests itself in speech, but it's, it's mute, is it, is it mutual tracking? Is it a reprogramming of the tracking circuit that we used for so long when we were dialogical hunters, like signaling to each other? I think so. We're on the track of wisdom as a beast. Yeah, I think so. I mean, I think, you know, Robert diversity is right, and well, well, tracking wisdom as a beast, yes, and then slouching towards Bethlehem. Oh, you're gonna bring that poem into it. I mean, it's a mean turning, turning in the wandering gyre, the Falcon cannot hear the Falconer. Things fall apart, the center cannot hold. Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world. The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere the ceremony of innocence is drowned. The best lack all conviction, while the worst are full of passionate intensity. Surely some revelation is at hand. Surely the second coming is at hand. The second coming. Hardly are those words out when the vast image of spiritus mundi troubles my sight. Somewhere in the sands of the desert, a shape with lion body and the head of a man, a gaze blank and pitiless as the sun is moving its slow thighs, while all about it real shadows of the indignant desert birds. The darkness drops away. But now I know that 20 centuries of stony steep were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle. And what rough beast, it's our come round at last slouches towards Bethlehem. To be born. That's what pops to mind? Fascinating. Now it's interesting that we're looking at personifications of spirits and a lot of what this is going to talk about is a theme that I've been working on in my videos. In fact, one person left a comment and said, not so much Jordan Peterson, can you get back to the spirits? Part of why these two are important is because we are leaving modernity. And in some ways, part of why we got into modernity was because of changes in science, but it really wasn't about science because of course, science is always nested in deeper philosophical and religious assumptions. One of the philosophical and religious assumptions of science is that you can have an expectation of finding order if you look for it. Part of what happens in, I know this because I actually just did commentary on the next 15 minutes of this and I didn't hit record. So that was about 45 minutes of content that I don't have. And it was good content. Lost forever. And I have to end this in a half hour because I'm doing a live stream about atheism, which I wasn't sure that that's the subject that I was agreeing to do, but it'll be fine. Because the atheism, atheism is going away. It just is, at least the kind of atheism that people imagine themselves to be. It's going away. Now it might take a couple of hundred years, but it's going away and it's going to get pushed out of the door by the kind of science that John Vervecky is talking about. In fact, John Vervecky doesn't identify as an atheist. He identifies as a non-theist. Well, why? Well, that gets into some deeper questions about definition of theism. And even that term might get very strange as we begin now post-modernity to start to come to terms with the kinds of, see, and this is where our language does not afford much help. See, I want to say the kinds of things because that's the language that we use. Now John Vervecky, after some conversations between myself and him and JP Marceau, talked about hyper things and John Vervecky talked about that with Paul and Leitner as well. Whereas hyper things are, we talk about these kinds of, let's say capitalism. We didn't discover capitalism like we discovered uranium or radioactivity or that lightning is electricity. Capitalism is something that inhabits us, shapes us. It's in many ways a spirit. If you look at Max Weber's very famous book at the beginning of the 20th century, which someone just wrote a very interesting article on, the spirit of capitalism, and that's exactly the right word because that spirit inhabits us, moves us, molds us, shapes us. I talked earlier in the introduction to this about school spirit. School spirit, if you went to a school, has shaped you. But that spirit you participate in and you have also changed and there are people changing spirits, creating spirits all the time. This is the kind of stuff that we're talking about with respect to collaborative cognition, let's say. Peterson is very open about talking about these spirits. I think part of what Peterson is aware of is that these are things that we participate in. These are things that we have some say in shaping in the future like school spirit, but we are also small and short-lived and weak compared to them. This is again someone mentioned in the comment section. I wish you'd talk more about the principalities and powers. This is what we're talking about. In many ways with Verbeckian is distributed cognition. He's noticing and looking for a language to talk about what ancients talked about in terms of the spiritual world. I mentioned earlier that John is not religious in the formal sense that I am, but I do wonder how much longer atheism will be tenable because increasingly we're simply aware, for example, of the non-player character meme. The non-player character meme is one in which we recognize that other human beings are formed and fulfilling a role in the conversation between Richard Roussen and David Fuller that I did some commentary on. Roussen comes to a point where he basically gives sort of an anthropology that says, well, human beings are simply the sum total of, and David Fully stops them and basically says, is that all we are? Because if that is all we are, then we're sort of locked into a Sam Harris determinism. There are elements of agreement and mapping between that and oh, these people are non-player characters. There are deep connections between that way of thinking and this whole woke revolution. Well, it's the whiteness that has been built into you that you are acting out of, and that's how you can be a racist without knowing it. So now you need to wake up to your racism and what? So it's a battle of spirits, is it? It's the battle of the woke spirit against my old spirit of whiteness, and that's why a lot of the regular atheists like James Lindsay and Peter Boghossian and why a lot of religious people, especially Calvinists like myself, saw these dynamics and said, oh, that's religion. They recognize it from the outside, I recognize it from the inside. Because what we're saying is that we can be occupied by spirits and spirits move our mouths and spirits direct our lives. And that's a very ancient way of talking. That's exactly how they spoke before. But here we are dealing with spirits. Well, I mean, it's a main claim of most of 4-E cognitive science that our higher cognitive processes are exempted from more direct sensory motor interaction. Now, what does he mean by exempted? It means that, well, when we close our eyes, we can see inside of our heads. And so this machinery, and again, we're continuing to use these sort of modernistic mechanistic images for what's going on inside our minds. So the machinery of eyesight is exacted into our visual imagination. And the machinery of hearing is exacted into hearing voices in our head. And the machinery of all of these other processes are used for what we call higher functions. And what we mean by that is there's sort of a self-transcendent where, and Peterson talked about this before, where I can sort of come out of myself and I can let my ideas die instead of me die because I use all of that machinery in order to do this. Whereas dogs might do some of this via instinct, we sort of step back and then we have the added ability of representation where we can represent things and we can do this together. We can tell a story. And if I'm saying, yeah, driving, driving a hundred miles an hour with your eyes closed is a really bad idea. Oh yeah, it is. Why? Well, just imagine that I'm driving along and my eyes are closed and the road turns and I don't know it and I drive off the road and I die. Oh, okay. So there's some distributed cognition that we're doing and the exaptation that we're doing. And you're right, Socrates talks about a willingness to follow the logos wherever it goes. The interesting thing when you do now, it's helpful here because partly because of Peterson and because Peterson's audience will hear logos and think of it specifically in Christian terms. It was around a lot longer before Christianity. And so when the author of the gospel of John comes in and uses it there, it's just sort of a mind blowing experience that the logos has become flesh. What are you saying of this man, Jesus? And do you think that's any different than prayer? Because you could hardly say that in a more Christian way. Now here we bump into in the first part of this commentary, you know, some comments were like, when are you going to talk about the video? Well, how much do you know about Vervecky? How are you going to evaluate this video unless you know something about these two? And again, part of it has been Peterson's been fighting for his life for the last five years. John Vervecky has continued to be a busy academic who has in fact, I believe he was introduced as an assistant professor. And now John is a full tenured professor. He received tenure this past year, I believe. I don't know how that affects his title. University ways are as murky to me as ecclesiastical ways are as murky to academics, I would expect. But Jordan Drubbs, you know, connects this up with prayer. Okay, well, well, why? Well, we've been talking about exaptation, which is, well, what do we do when we pray? Well, we sort of close our eyes and we use all of this machinery to talk to whom? And again, traditionally, if you have a much more ancient understanding about what a human being is, that kind of talk is participating in a spiritual world. And again, in modernity, that just sounds crazy, because a human being is a physical organism that's sort of captured by skin. But we're not merely captured by skin because we are doing distributed cognition. We are thinking together. We are accepting all of this machinery for things. And so how does this relate to prayer? Now, this answer is going to sort of take John off guard, as well as when did all this Christianity get into your talk? Because remember, John Vervecky was teaching courses on Buddhism and cognitive science, and Jordan Peterson has been the one who's been flirting with Christianity. And now, suddenly, John Vervecky is including all of this Christian language in his stuff. Do you think that's any different than prayer? Because you could hardly say that in a more Christian way. Well, let me say something. So now John Vervecky does not identify as a Buddhist. He does not identify as a Christian. I'd say if you want to categorize him, perhaps an accurate categorization, well, he identifies as a non-theist. And I would say he's in many ways post-Buddhist. He talks about beyond Buddhism in his awakening from the meeting crisis series. And he's post-Christian, especially in terms of his biography. You can find some biographical information in my first video conversation with him, and also in an excellent conversation that he did with Sam from the Bridges of Meaning channel. If you need that link, I'll try to remember to include it below. And if I don't, ask for it in the comments and I can drop it in, or Sam will probably be tracking and he'll drop it in as well. Something about that, because when I've done the participant observation, what happens is at first people are taken aback by a kind of intimacy that is not sexual or... And this is a product of our modern society where we have, in many ways, we have the only intimacy we now recognize as romantic intimacy, whereas that's simply ridiculous. We talked about the three loves, phileo, eros, agapic. Every love of a good parent for their child is agapic. Every good love between siblings is like phileo. And so all of these have degrees of intimacy in them. And now with the circling practice, see now, because I lost that video, I don't remember what I said and didn't say. Circling comes from Guy Senckstock, who developed what he calls sort of a relational yoga that he practices in the Bay Area. And I've spoken with Guy a number of times and he just emailed me, so Guy, I'll get back to your email. You can find him quite a few times on John Vervecki's channel, Voices with Vervecki. He's often doing dialogos with Guy and Guy came up with this practice and this is what John is talking about. Now I expect that Jordan has little to no understanding of any of this circling stuff that John is talking about. It's a kind of immediacy that the culture doesn't currently prepare them for. So they've taken it back. We write this kind of... There's going to be so many interjections in the next 15 minutes. And again, I have a live stream in three minutes, so I don't know exactly what's going to happen to this video if I'm going to just have to hang on to it for a little while longer and post it at the beginning of the week or what. But that expression, God, well, is it just an exclamation, God, or is it you're talking about God? Intimacy and connection. John, that's exactly what I experience when people come up on the street and tell me that they've been watching my videos and that their life has been changed. So this strange intimacy and of course for Jordan, it's sort of a function of, and they're going to talk about this, and this is something I'm aware of too. I'm aware of it from both ends. When I did my conversation with Jordan, when you talk to someone with whom you have devoured a tremendous amount of content, it's strange. And it's strange on the other end too. But it begs the question, what are we? Peterson made a comment earlier of his avatars were still, you know, doing their thing on YouTube while he was near death struggling for life, recovering from benzo withdrawal. So am I this physical being sitting in this room talking into this mic? Well, yes, certainly. But to what degree am I now sort of being trained to be transported up through this camera, through this microphone, into this computer, and then I'm going to upload myself into the cloud? What me is that that's up there? Because it's certainly part of me, but a modernist frame doesn't have much faculty for that. And then the intimacy that many of you, my listeners experience, and which I experience with other people that I encounter in podcasts and on videos, what exactly is that intimacy? It's not nothing. It's real enough to support people on Patreon, or to buy their books or to leverage my reputation to lend them to others. It's a very real thing. There's this instant immediacy that takes me aback. And it just floors me. And it really does. I get the same thing. I get people when I talk to them and they've watched the series or something like that, and they've spent like 50 hours with me in their head and they think they know me. Well maybe they do, John. And the question is which me do they know? Because all social media does this. We tailor a piece of us and we're, it's, there is a me that they know, but now we're going to get into this language of the true me. Before I started making any of these videos a number of years before, I seriously contemplated, was contemplating writing a book on this because I actually think the only way any of this works is if we presuppose a God who knows us. Because without that God who can know us in all of our faculties, both, and in some ways, knows us via our parents. And then as the psalmist says, while I was being knit together in the inmost parts, and again, I know me as myself and there's a me I know, but the me that my parents knew was quite different. It was very much a changing me. And then the me that my wife knows is a little different from the me I know. And then the me that my children know, the PVK that my children know as father is different from as my wife knows me and as I know myself. And now you, my listeners, my wife and children, and my sons, a couple of my sons will listen to some of these videos, but my wife and children for the most part don't watch these videos. And so there's a me that you all know that they don't know. And there's truth and reality to those me's. And how on earth do all of those me's come together? I have to pause it now. I don't know if this is enough for this part. I'll have to decide. I'll have to decide later. So we'll see. Yeah, yeah, maybe they do. You don't know them. Or maybe you do. You know they're Phylaea Sophia, and it knows yours. And right there he embodies it. He doesn't embody it. He represents it. He personifies it. And again, if you go back, this is a video that I've talked to, that I've mentioned quite a bit, a conversation I had with John Ravecki, where I walked through this argument that I basically get from Pascal of a spirit of finesse versus a spirit of geometry. And my argument has been that it's actually very rational to approach the unknown that way. And most of what we deal with is the unknown, because we don't have it encapsulated in geometry. It is too big. It is too out there. It is too transjective to use a verbatim word. But again, Peterson keeps pulling this into a religious frame. So it's instant intimacy, but it's very disconcerting. It is. And it's very hard for me initially, because I'm by nature very sort of socially phobic. Well, it doesn't get easier. But when I'm doing the practices, what happens is initially people are caught up in this intimacy. And then what happens is, and people have various names for it, the we space, the geist, logo, spirit. There's a sense of- Wherever I am between you, I'm with you. Yeah, where two or three are gathered in my name, there I am also. Which is of course a saying of Jesus. Right. And so there's the sense- That's a name for it, all right. When do you put the Christian spin on this? Now, again, Peterson's catching up with John, and John was teaching courses on Buddhism and cognitive science. And so he'll answer. Well, I mean, there's- We're coming for you, John. We Christians. There's sections in the episodes in the series where I talk a lot about Christianity. I mean, one of the odd things that's happened to me is I did an episode on agape. And I've had many Christians, including Christian pastors, like Paul Vanderclay said that was one of the best explanations of agape they ever heard. And it was sort of startling from them. So Vanderclay is following you obviously as well. They said it was odd for a non-Christian to be doing this. It's embarrassing for a non-Christian to preach better than the preacher. That's what it is. It's embarrassing. It's true sometimes for both of them. But- Well, somebody had to. What does he mean by that? I have no idea. Well, that's fair enough. Oh, God. What a nasty bastard I am. I don't know what to make of this. And as my friend who texted me, I was up in Trinidad, California, enjoying a lovely brunch with my wonderful wife. And I get a text from a friend. You know, the Verveke Peterson video just dropped. Oh, really? Yeah. And, you know, he says, I've never seen Peterson this way. And I said, well, now you're killing me. And he says, after you watch it, tell me if I'm wrong. Yeah. No, no, no, no. This is fun. But the thing I wanted to say is, like, when you're in, like, because I've done circling, I've been in these events. And when this happens, you know, you get people from all kinds of backgrounds, religious, non-religious, you know, sort of, you know, officially atheist or something like, and they start using spiritual language to describe- Yes, I've been in that situation in my therapy sessions many times. As soon as you talk about anything that's really serious, you use religious language. And that means religious language is the language of extraordinary seriousness. I mean, when you talk about good and evil, and you do that in therapy, when you're talking to someone who's been touched with malevolence repeatedly, there's no alternative. Then you're in this religious ground. I think that's right. So what does that mean? And this spirit- So what does that- and so I just did a little podcast, little live stream. Three people watched it on a different channel. And, you know, the conversation was about atheism. I didn't know this guy approached me and really wanted to talk and yada yada yada. And that happens all the time. And so I said yes. And the hour was, I usually don't do this outside of sort of work hours, because it's family time. And then I didn't know that we were going to be talking about, you know, something like confronting atheism. And I thought, that's not usually my schtick. But then he asked me, and I said, I don't think atheism has long for this world. Sorry, I just don't. Because I think what we're seeing- now, again, these movements take hundreds of years. But what we're seeing with Peterson and Vervecky is, I think atheism in many ways was sort of a social bullying. Because to- and this, you know, this goes all the way back to Voltaire, let's say. Because Christianity became a bully. And various forms of Christianity, including various forms of Protestantism, just wouldn't let people be honest about their doubts and their fears. And so we started to become, I think much more in Canada or the UK, we started to become societies in which we couldn't be honest about what we were experiencing. And now with circling and with other things, people are experiencing something and they're trying to put names on it. And religious language is going to be what follows. This spirit that we're tracking, that's the spirit that's laid the golden thread throughout history. And we're in dialogue with that spirit and that's the ancestral- And that's an astounding claim. And that's very God number two-ish for Jordan. But he does- yeah. Spirit. And so that ancestral spirit reaches- that's the spirit that manifests itself, I think, is God the Father. That's the ancestral spirit that lays down the golden thread. That's what's different than logos. Maybe- and I don't know how to parse out the triune conception exactly. Now, various- the other versions of this that I didn't record, I talked about my skepticism about trying to map things onto the trinity from below. I think Christian trinitarian theology emerged also sort of from below because, of course, by the time you get to the first century, the Jewish community was just not going to play with the sort of polytheism it flirted with during the monarchy. The exile sort of beaded out of them. But then what to do with Jesus? And increasingly, Jesus was- the word became flesh and the logos became- and, of course, there's some elements of Christianity- sorry, Sam- some minority elements that are holding out against the trinity. But trinitarian theology emerged. Now, a lot of people try to map my God number one and God number two onto trinitarian theology. It doesn't map that way. God number one is the arenic God. And all members of the trinity have arenic qualities. God number two is the agentic God. And all three members of the trinity are agentic. They are all persons. They are all agents. So all of these attempts to try to map my God number one and God number two onto the trinity, I don't buy them at all because then people are like, well, God number three. No, you don't understand. Agent arena relationship. And so it's limited. Transcendent, imminent, it's these dualities that in Christianity come together and in Judaism came together in a rather special way as opposed to ancient polytheism. So they're going to try and do some mapping onto the trinity here. And then John Vervecki is going to push away from the- I just watched this a few minutes ago because I didn't record it a couple hours ago. You know, because you talk about this logo manifesting itself in the dialogue on Sophia. Yeah. And logos is in there, right? Dialogue. Dialogues, yes. So is the sun the love of wisdom? I mean, that makes sense. Or is that the spirit? Well, I don't know. And there's a long tradition of in the book of Proverbs, there's lady wisdom. And there have been various attempts to try to map that onto the trinity in one way or another. Now, John Vervecki being rather post-Christian isn't going to go there, really. No, I- And neither do I. A Trinitarian interpretation. I do know that what happens and maybe- What do you think of the God the Father interpretation that I just laid on you, man? Well, I mean- And it's- like my friend said to me, I've never seen Peterson like this. I mean, I've just been reading a lot about Christian Platonism and I watched your talk with Jonathan and I found it- I mean, you guys were talking Christianity and fair enough and I appreciate the earnestness and the authenticity. But there was, you know, a lot of the- to my ear, there was a lot of Platonism in there. Yeah. Have you read the immortality key? No, I haven't read the immortality key. Oh, you need to read it. I just interviewed the author. He's been tracking the use of psychedelics in the- So I guess this is coming down the way. I don't know anything about this book. I guess we're going to have a conversation with Peterson. I always kind of wonder about the order of these things and obviously they're not necessarily in chronological order in terms of when Peterson records and when things get released. But again, this illustrates my point that a lot of Peterson's conversations are book-related conversations and it's, you know, when authors write a book, they have to go on their book tour to try to get the book out there. And I think that's a good point. And you can usually get authors like this. And for Peterson, that makes these wave two conversations go a lot easier because you can read the book and you can talk about the book. Where all the Greeks went to be enlightened, you know, the- Delphi? Yeah, yeah. And in the Delphic mysteries. Exactly. And I was going to say that, I mean, I read a book that I would recommend too. And he integrates that with Christianity, you know, is stressing the Greek. And so I asked him, and Dr. Ruck, who's from Harvard, he wrote the Road to Eleusis. So it's the Eleusinian mysteries that I'm reaching for. He's been tracking the use of psychedelics for 2000 years in Greece in the Eleusinian. And he's been tracking the use of psychedelics for 2000 years in Greece in the Eleusinian. And he's been tracking the use of psychedelics for 2000 years in Greece in the Eleusinian mysteries, making the claim that psychedelic experience in Eleusis was core to Greek culture, the bedrock of Greek philosophy. That's part of the revelatory element that we're talking about. And that all of Greek philosophy emerged as a consequence of that revelatory Eleusinian experience. It could be. I mean, Cordford made a lot of good arguments about, you know, the divine men that were the precursors to the philosophers being influenced by Thracian shamanism. And you get figures that are right on the border. Who is that? Cormford. Cormford. Cormford. Influenced by what brand of shamanism? Thracian shamanism. Shaman's from Thrace, which is north of Greece. And so Cormford talked about, like, you get very weird things about Pythagoras. He did a thunderstone ceremony where he went into a cave and died and came back. And of course, he... How do you spell Hornford or Cormford? Cormford. C-O-R-N-F-O-R-D. The idea there is that the sort of soul flight practices within shamanism are taken up into Pythagoras' notion of soul flight. Well, I imagine the soul flight practices are the same thing as the Eleusinian mysteries, essentially. They're a continuation of the shamanic tradition into the present. Well, that's the thesis of this book, anyways. What's interesting to me is that Pseido represents Socrates as being able to bring about that state in people through dialogue alone. Yeah, I know what that means. Yeah. And so do you. Yeah. And again, I don't know. I don't know what you two are meaning by this. I mean, part of my argument about... I think part of the reason that Christians, generally speaking, are resistant to advocating psychedelics is that Christians actually enter into their own, let's call them religious states of mind through liturgy, through meditation, through song, through all kinds of things. And that's part and parcel of religious practice. Very much. And when I see people in these practices, what happens is they first orient on each other, then they orient on the logos. They find an intimacy with the logos. What do you mean by that? What they do is they come to find that they're not only in relationship to each other, they're in relationship to this geist or logos that's happening in the distributed cognition. Yeah, okay. So that's a very... Now, part of what I think, probably conservative Christians like myself, who are quite accustomed to reading the New Testament, where we are admonished in the first epistle of John to discern the spirits, and that, as I said before, I often use school spirit as an illustration of... A big part of what we're going to go into as we go beyond modernity is to once again have a higher resolution, more public conversation about the spirits. And sort of a bridgehead into there is talking about school spirit, because almost everyone has an experience of school spirit. We understand how we participate in school spirit, how school spirit colonizes us, but how we also influence the creation, ongoing maintenance and transformations of school spirit as they go. And school principals, school teachers, school cheer leaders, school student councils are all involved in school spirit. And it's in that way that we, human beings, are deeply spiritual. Now, when you say that in a modernistic frame, people are like, oh no, we're not spiritual spirit. But then modernists don't stop using the word at all. If I'm talking to someone in a context where they're highlighting or forefronting their modernism and they use this word, sometimes I'll pause them and say, well, what do you mean by that word? And then they're suddenly at a loss. And I play the same trick on Christians, because I'll ask them what spirit means and they're suddenly at a loss. And it's like, well, maybe you want to think a little bit more about that word, about what it means and how we relate to it. Very interesting way of phrasing it. So that's what I see as the spirit that's guiding the golden thread. And that's what... And again, Peterson's a little monospiritist on this in terms of, okay, but there are many spirits at work, just like there are many school spirits. You're praying to when you ask for a revelatory thought when you're confused. So imagine that you have, if we're, imagine we're holographic in relationship to this distributed cognitive net, right? So the part contains some of the whole. And the whole would be this distributed spirit that you're just describing, at least as it's enacted. And so, in so far as you're a holographic, minuscule, but complete in some sense, canotic, canotic representation of this spirit, you can ask it. See, and we're not just a representation of the spirit. And this little word picture by Peterson is actually too small, because there are lots of spirits impacting us. And we ourselves have agency and ontology within this spiritual realm. Now, we are perhaps being guided by the spirits of the age, let's say, and we are non-player characters in those spirit, in those spirits, but we are, we are modal, modal. And I would argue that what happens with the spirit of God, as the spirit of God inhabits us, is that our own spirit, in other words, the spirit of God, affords more agency to our spirits. I think some of you are going to probably think, yeah, you, you, you, you absorb the psychedelic of this conversation, Mr. VanderKlay. VanderKlay For it to bestow its wisdom on you, and its operation in your unconscious produces the revelatory thought. Okay, well, that is deeply converging with a lot of the cog-sci that I'm bringing to it. Oh, good. These responses, I just don't know what to think of them. VanderKlay The idea here is that, that distributed cognition has a property, collective intelligence, that is something, that is not just the sum of individual intelligences, and there's increasing evidence for this. So, so he would say that's an emergent property. And again, his conversations with Pazot are often emanation versus emergence. And Peterson has sort of brought some of this into it, because he's, he's, he's seeing insight and those kinds of experiences as more emanation than emergence. And, and this is why, to a degree, I think the further John goes with this, the more it undercuts the possibility that this thing can be foundationalized. And I think the transaction will stay, but I think he's going to have to increasingly afford the possibility of emanation, and that all of this distributed cognition, all of this all of this spirit that we find, that we generate, comes into contact with spirits far older and far longer. And some of them perhaps not necessarily attestable to other human beings, which is of course something that religious traditions have asserted forever, including Christianity, but to, to sort of maintain that it can only come from below. And John wouldn't, you know, John's very open, and so he, the scientific project against, again, closing one eye sort of says, this is our goal in order to achieve this. But again, as a Christian, I'm skeptical because I think it's just not the case. Yeah, well, you can imagine, sorry, I'm prone to do this, but you can imagine, meaning interrupting. It's like reading a book. I mean, I have this distributed spirit in my head, plus I have my own experience. And so I'm the combination. You have multiple distributed spirits in your head, plus all of the, all of the experiences, plus all of the members of your consciousness, Congress, of that distributed spirit and my own. Well, yeah, that's the extended mind. Okay. So that's probably what the sun is, John, in the Trinitarian spirit is that combination, because that's an incarnation of the spirit in a particular time and place. And that's what I bring to the dialogue. So you're saying you're Jesus. Well, that's well, I was a little flippant there. So maybe, maybe I'm the one who's, who should be, who should be diagnosed from afar. In all seriousness, what he's saying is that that being that he just described, that I just amplified a little bit, because I thought it was a little simplistic, that is what he's bringing to the dialogue. And now how you're going to map that onto Jesus, I'd pull back from that a bit. Good. Let's play with that. I like serious play. I think that's how we go through. Okay. Well, so, so, okay, so we've got the farther as that distributed entity that stretches back in time. Well, no, you see, let's play with that, because let me first try something. And then let's see if it maps in, because we, you know, people get into, they start to realize that the presence of the collective intelligence above and beyond the presence of Tom and Sue and Ann, right. And then they start to enter into relationship with that. But then there's a with them, because there's a collect, there's not just one collective intelligence, they're, in fact, all competing with each other. Further thing that happens. And this, I think, might point to what you're, what you're. Okay. So maybe that's the spirit, that thing that's inhabiting everybody at that time, right? So it's akin to the son and it's akin to the father, but it's, it's, it constitutes that distributed space. And so what I think might, I think of it as the Neil Platonic one. And that, right. And so that's your peculiarity. And again, you know, each time I watch this now, I have different, okay, it's a little psychedelic. All right. All right. It's shamanic in that it's disrupting my, my sense making patterns. We'll come back to why I think that language is helpful. I'm not claiming it's exclusive. I'm not doing, Hey, I'm not claiming it's not helpful either. So what they do is they get to a place where, and not everybody does this because you can imagine it depends, you know, it's, you know, what did you just say? Not everybody does this. That's a little manic. Okay. Okay. That's a little manic. Now again, nothing wrong with a little manic, but the t-shirt thing comes up a lot. What I mean is that, yeah, I noticed that John, most people that are doing the circling, they don't, you know, many of them are happy just with what you might call the psychological intimacy. Then God, yes, no wonder. Yep. And some people move to what you might call logos intimacy. And then some people move through that and by means of it to an intimacy of what is the fount of that? What is the ground of that? What is it about the reality that makes this kind of thing possible? They start to think of it. So they're reflecting on it. They're reflecting on it. Like we're doing. Like we're doing. Is that. And I can't help but get the sense, gosh, I'm almost out of time again. I'm so crunched for time. I can't help but get the sense that as modernity emerges from this, we're neophytes. Because if you read the ancients, nothing that was beset here would surprise them. You sort of translate it into that those terminologies, but I think they would say that the landscape is the landscape described here is more sparse than the landscape of what is that there are in fact many spirits. And again, that was all sort of suppressed in modernity. And I think this is part of the reason why what's going to follow is going to be a little wild. And I think part of what we're going to see are people looking for refuge in. Okay. It's an orthodox podcast, the Lord of the Spirits, but they didn't come up with it. Okay. But I am out of time for right now. And well, maybe I can just get to the little end of this section that they have here. Yeah, very much. You can think about this kind of move. And for me, this is where the prototypical Socratic Platonic move comes, where you get the idea that the very process of intelligibility gives you is the most profound access we have to the way reality is realizing itself. And that's how people. That's a really profound thing that he just said. Where you get the idea that the very process of intelligibility gives you is the most profound access we have to the way reality is realizing itself. And that's how people start to talk. That's where he gets his transjective. This is where people begin. This is why the language changes and why we go back to this older way of viewing the world. Now I'm going to have to, well, let's see if it just sort of ends here at this little. Talk about reality, but beyond the, the we space. So there's us, the we space, and then the reality. And maybe that corresponds better with the Trinity that you're looking for. So I'm optimistic. I'm optimistic. How many hours am I going to take to get through this? I am more excited about getting through this than I was at the end of that first video. I'm more motivated to keep working this through because I knew at first listening that this was just chock full of stuff. And I can see now the benefit to taking it apart, which is what I usually do with these commentaries. So I'm going to land the plane now. I have a church council meeting, and then I'm going to go home and tomorrow. So I'm going to post this tomorrow morning. It's going to be a little over an hour long. I post this at 6 a.m. Pacific. At 10 a.m. Pacific, we have question and answer the Bridges of Meeting Discord. I want to talk about this tomorrow. Now I sort of get hemmed in by the questions. I'm not going to have question and answer the week after, and I haven't lined up. I'm having a hard time finding preachers. I have to talk to John Vervecki to see if he's willing to do a Q&A on the Bridges of Meeting. Peugeot did a Q&A on the Awakening from the Meeting Crisis. So all of the peeps at Bridges of Meeting says, why can't Peugeot do a Q&A on our podcast, Paul? You're not being a good night looking out for your mooks. So anyway, I got to land the plane. I'm late for my meeting. Leave a comment, like and subscribe, hit the notification bell.