https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2XIxGIHF8VI

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm having a conversation today with John Van Sloot. John Van Sloot is an author. He's a friend of mine. He's also a Christian Reformed minister. This is his latest book, Every Job a Parable, and we'll probably talk about some of his earlier books too. Thank you so much, John, for having this conversation with me. Paul, thanks for asking. Why don't you, people know me, it's my channel, but they don't know you. So why don't you share a little bit about yourself, and don't be too brief. You might include some of the stuff in your first book, maybe how you, you know, your Christian life, how you became a pastor, what you're dealing with now. Just give folks a good introduction. To where I'm at, all right. I'll chew up the whole hour telling my story again. Then we'll do another one, no problem. No, I'll be reasonable. I'm a pastor of a Christian Reformed church here in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. So what Denver is to the Rockies, Calgary is to the Rockies, a little bit north. And I've been doing that for 22 years. Before that I was a real estate developer back in Toronto. So I built shopping centers and office buildings and the like, and loved that job, and then had a bit of a personal turnaround point, a conversion experience. Although it was very much akin to the theology of the church I was a part of, there wasn't a lot of free will. I kind of had this spontaneous confession to a pastor. I was attending a church and a pastor asked me how I was doing, and I started to confess all of this duplicity in my life. And I was a real SOB businessman and in all kinds of other moral ways. In a place of great brokenness. And so for some reason he asked and for some reason I answered and I thought, I'm going to be done. They're going to kick me out of this church because as far as I knew everybody in this church had their stuff together. And I thought for sure I'd get kicked out of my marriage when I got home. So it started for me, a transition from developer to pastor with that confession. And then three months later the birth of my third child, our third child, Edward with Down syndrome, which was a total surprise to us. And changed everything. Everything that I was as a developer was superficial, was about the next house, the next car, the next whatever. And my definition was based on what other people thought and how well I was performing and succeeding in life. And then when I came here to that man, that father, comes a boy who is the antithesis of that. And it was a disaster for me. I was, I'll be honest, I was not able to handle it at first. And then through a series of events and the ensuing months, it just had all kinds of parable-like stories happening in my life that affirmed or gave hope. And one in particular, I went on a road trip into Rochester, New York on a community service trip with some kids from our church and I met four people with Down syndrome at different ages that all told the opposite story of four scenarios I ran about how shitty it's going to be to be a parent in Canada. Are you allowed to use that word? I don't know if your viewers... You can use it on YouTube too. Okay, all right. I will not go beyond that. But I just thought this would be a horrible life experience. I ran scenarios, then I was born, literal scenarios, four of them, of how bad it was going to be. And each of those, almost to the year, to the age of the person with Down syndrome I met was retold and renewed. And I met an 18-year-old who had a life and an eight-year-old who was physically strong and a 40-year-old who was able to live on his own. So anyway, reconciling or that moment where God, in my understanding, God kind of set me up to show me what Edward's birth is really all about and more importantly who God is and how much God is holding everything. That was the conversion moment into ministry. It took me a year or so to kind of get into a seminary and go into the formal studies of ministry. So big conversion and then for the last 22 years, up until last year, a year ago yesterday, I worked as a pastor of a church and we started off trying to be a relevant church. And then one day relevance turned into revelation and this idea that God is moving in the world quite outside of the church and doing just fine, speaking his truth and bringing life and flourishing and providentially moving things along and holding people and loving people, that took hold in me. And again, it was a bit of a drive-by conversion. I was not looking for it. I did not start the church with the idea that we'd start looking for God in the world and naming God's presence in everything. But when I saw it for what it was and realized, I still remember the blog post. It must have been like, it was like Paul VanderKlay-length blog post. It was huge. I said, if this is true, if God is moving in the world, as a Christian, God moves and speaks through the Bible, but if God is speaking through creation too, and these two books are meant to talk to each other, it changes everything. And so I have been pursuing that idea by preaching on pop culture and science and work. And then once I've done enough sermons, I guess, hey, this would be a good book. Or once I was in enough trouble with the seminary, I better write this down so that everybody can understand what I'm doing, trying to do. And have discovered that the tradition that you and I share theologically is actually the probably the only one within which you can find a theological imprimatur for a worldview that's as big as this. And so I've been doing a lot of theological growth and preaching these sermons. And then, yeah, last year stopped at the church in order to write. I'm writing a book on faith and science right now and release the book that you just held up. It got released in North America and then it got picked up in the UK too. So it's kind of a growing thing author wise. And I've got a few more I think I need to write, but I'm still trying to figure out what I'm going to do when I grow up. Yesterday I was speaking in the next province over in British Columbia to a group of a hundred union labor representatives. And the room was filled with they all got a free copy of my book and they'd all read it. They'd all read it. Unlike if you give it out in a church. They were dogged here. And these guys were smart and you know guys and gals they were all great gifted labor negotiators right. So it was a bit of an intimidating crowd. I had this deeply compelling conversation unpacking the nature of their work and naming how when they negotiate the way they do and they problem solve the way they do and they etc. etc. They're like God. You image God in these very particular union ways. And so I thought I could work for these guys and do that for the rest of my life. But anyway so I'm trying to figure out but the idea is God speaking everywhere and I am all about trying to see that and name that come alongside people and say hey. Well you your first book was was about Metallica. Why don't you say a little bit about that and and say a little bit about your first book because I remember I first met John we were both on a board the board of home missions and the Christian from church and I had heard a little bit about John before. And but I and then I met John and then I I don't know if you gave it to me or if I bought it. I got your first book and I read that book and I was just I was just weeping. The story of your conversion of you know that some of the version of the story that you just told and it just just powerful. And at that point I you know people some of the people on my channel listen my sermons now. I mean I had done I had done the movie type thing for a while in the church and I got into some trouble for that with a few people. But Living Stones is a very gracious place. But you know but I but the Metallica the Metallica thing was fascinating and that that seemed with Metallica and baseball that seemed to launch this kind of this parallel this parallel career for you for a while. And then once you talk a little bit. Yeah well I mean yeah like you I was engaging culture as a relevant way of bridging to the to the broader world. And the Metallica thing I mean those were early days in terms of this idea of God speaking through two books. But I think at that time already a healthy sense of respect for you know that God could have something to do with heavy metal was there. And a kid in my church a young a young preteen boy came up after a sermon on YouTube which is pretty Christian band to preach and said hey Pastor John would you ever preach on my favorite band. And before I found out what his band was I said yes. And then he said Metallica and I said oh we both kind of looked at the floor and I gave him the pastoral slough off which was let me pray about it. And the next day some newbies a new guy in our church Jason phoned me up and gave me said hey Pastor John I got two tickets to the Metallica concert next month in Calgary would you and your wife like to go. So I took that as a divine sign and went and I did a bit of homework on the band and read all their lyrics and started to hear echoes of the Old Testament prophets very literal echoes in terms of some of the things that they referenced in their lyrics but also echoes in terms of a wrathful passion toward injustice and all of the all that's wrong in the world and all of the manipulation that happens in a capital C capitalist society etc. etc. And so they were getting mad at the same things prophets were getting mad at and then my heart got converted at the concert when two thirds of the way through the set they sing Nothing Else Matters and it was like 17,000 Calgarians all crying out before God this communal lament at how broken things are and what really matters in life and this big existential cry and my heart broke I remember turning around from the stage we were right on the stage on the floor and I just turned around and looked at all these people and felt as though I was feeling God's heart for a crowd full of metalheads and so I ended up preaching the sermon and Metallica heard about it and Lars Ulrich was being interviewed the drummer by a DJ from CJ a local rock station and they told him about this church and Lars couldn't believe it he said I think this is something amazing and Lars phoned up Warner Music Canada and said can you go to this church and film it because they they were in town that week but they had to go on tour so and so I get a call from Warner Music Canada on Saturday night saying are you the pastor who's preaching on Metallica and at the time they're taking down Napster right so I think they're gonna take me down they're going after us churches now no no no no Lars just wants us to film it for him and so they did and you know we did our you know of course you do your three Metallica songs that's your call to worship and I preached a sermon on how Metallica get angry about the same thing as Old Testament prophets do and the story got picked up and it hit the wire it went around the world I was interviewed in Irish National Radio and rock stations around North America and and that story does not easily get forgotten at this union talk that I was at yesterday somebody had heard about this Metallica sermon and to them it was brand new rights so they were heading out to get the book so so what have you learned about because I remember when I when I met you in Grand Rapids for our board meeting you made a comment to me something about your it was it was I remember you know we always remember what's important to us are you know these these watchers inside our head that are keeping track of things that our conscious mind isn't I remember you making a comment about yeah I'm kind of a you know I'm kind of a you didn't say it this way but it's kind of I'm kind of a glory hound I get in the papers and I'm looking to this and you did a lot of that for a while and you know on our last conversation that wasn't on YouTube you know I noted some reflection in you about that and what have you learned about about that on one hand obviously picking up getting picked up you know in a sense this is every church planters dream right because you're thinking well everybody's gonna hear about me and everybody's gonna know this and my name's gonna be everywhere and well you know now okay that happened you know I think I think sometimes about Robin Williams who had this great story how he you know he won an Academy Award and and he said you know that lasted about a week and and then I was walking out of a place that I had just at a comedy set and someone turned to me and said hey Mork and you know bang right right back into so so you've been through this in ways that I know a lot of church planters obviously a lot of church planters would dream of and now you know now you're in this different thing what any reflection yeah well the transition story is probably the most incisive inflection point in terms of my thoughts on that I a year ago a year and a month ago was was that a Toronto Blue Jays game at the invitation of the Major League Baseball team's owners they'd asked if they could use a sermon I'd preached in the previous year for their marketing for their fall playoff run so I signed off on sermon material so they could market it on national television here in Canada they they they came and interviewed they gave us free tickets they put us up in a hotel you could watch the game in the owners box they had cameras everywhere you signed your whole life away that they could take whatever you said and put it anywhere and then one of the guys comes up to me between in the first inning of the Cleveland game taps me on the shoulder and says hey watch what's gonna happen between the first and the second inning and sure enough there's my big fat head being interviewed between the the first and second inning at a Blue Jays game and I'm in the owners box and and what was troublesome to me was that I could not stop myself from reaching into my pocket and getting a phone and taking a picture of myself I mean if this is not CS Lewis's the self filled with self filled with self filled with self and then post to this well I remember knowing it was the wrong thing to do right grabbing for the attention that way right and and and it hasn't been like that the whole way it hasn't I mean I mean this just happened this has happened 20 50 maybe a hundred times with everything from a newspaper story to a radio interview to these bigger things with Metallica the Jays you're right it none of it really matters after a while you're you're you're on to the next thing I mean I don't I don't think I called it a glory hound I think my friend said it was a media prostitute so I've always wondered like God you take this guy to whom you you give this beautiful Down syndrome kid to humble him and show him that identity is not about performance it's not about being seen it's not about being known then you call him into the ministry and he's happy to do that work and I think would have been just fine you know in some little corner of the church just serving and and am and then this starts to happen and then these calls happen and then you get to write and there's a there's a different kind of attention that comes from that then as opposed to a TV interview or or radio interview and and and I remember feeling thinking back really you sure you sure you can trust like it's still a little too fresh that was 15 years ago that I was that person right and felt that I could steward it and but but not all the time not not not at that Blue Jays game that was that was that was just offside that was that was King David in the Old Testament counting his armies I just read that story this morning and and you know looking for sales or looking online for media hits or likes or you know whatever so I am that guy who couldn't hold his phone and keep his phone in his pocket and at that Blue Jays game in that place who's been called by God to go around and where God is moving in the world in all kinds of amazing places that are and you know in the naming is getting people's attention and they're there they're wanting to hear more and and so it is a you know this past year has been deeply humbling in terms of the leaving of a church and a little bit of conflict not not too bad but and then and then out into this nether world this this wilderness and I figured things would pick up by now and somebody would want to hire me or the book would take off and and it's like crickets it's like crickets for my life right now and and it's it's been so good in terms of getting me back to my first love and you know the the grace of being a total freaking loser and being called by God into the ministry right like you know you talk about Jordan Peterson and all the stuff you're doing there right and I've caught a few things but I love the the definition of his audience and you know the young men who are kind of lost and looking and want to know who they are and how they fit in and and I mean I was that guy I was a Rush fan when I was a Toronto kid growing up I'm the same age as Peterson and and I figured they should play Rush at his existential questions trying to figure out who they are and and so yeah yeah but I think that's you know the juxtaposition of that kind of character with a little bit of attention and having to deal with a strain of that it's that it says God thing all over it to me I'm gonna I'm gonna you know the hardness of this past year I said to my wife a couple weeks ago I think this is what it feels like to have your pride die this is your inordinate pride CS Lewis type of pride right you filled with you always about you I feel like it's dying again and hopefully that leaves me in a more humble place to keep going forward yeah the other stuff is all pretty transient right it's it they're cool stories and make for great book titles but but now I feel all I want is to know him more and to to to tell people when I need to whether it's the person across the street meeting them on you know on the sidewalk or we're doing an interview in London I'll do whatever I need to do but I want those two to feel kind of the same and I want to be the same person in both so oh my goodness this is a confession I'm gonna go lie on my couch right now and we can continue therapist thank you pastor Paul you know but you know and that's you know again thinking about your book and and thinking about you know I often so so when I talk to when I talk to people who are on the religious page skeptical or atheist you know they will they will the most the most common thing that will offer one of the most common things that will come up is you know God well you know where is God I mean why didn't he stick his head out of the clouds or you know something like this and and I often think about the hiddenness of God in terms of his humility and and what I love about your work is is that God shows up all over but he doesn't show up all over saying look at me look at me look at me and that God you know I so I often when I sometimes I get asked to teach you know like an hour about the Bible or an hour about Christianity and I'll almost always go to glory and talk about the fact that you know we're made we're made to to make glory we take you know these these tiny little bitter things that grew it in Eurasia that we now call apples and we turn them into this you know this amazing fruit that you can find in your supermarket which is big and red and juicy and sweet and and and this is glory and so we take eggs and flour and you know this huge long line of human civilization and and we make a cake out of it and let's imagine the best baker in the world makes a wonderful cake and and what glory means is that they put that cake in front of people and people look at its beauty and then at the sacrifice of the beauty of the cake they cut it and they eat a piece and they and and you know that the good baker watches their face and just sees sees how glory multiplies and the way that that Baker would destroy glory would be to insert him or herself and say I made that cake yeah and and so then glory would be diminished and and when you think about that and when I look at when I look at your stories and and what you tell here I see I see the humble God all over the place who is just enjoying the glory he has put and packed into the world that people can't even see and and even people who don't know him or deny him or doubt him have moments where they see that glory and I think God just looks at them and just enjoys that moment and just thinks you know isn't it great you know you doubt me you don't like me you you use my name for cursing but you just uncorked that bottle of wine and it wasn't it filled with glory and and I think your books for me drip with that and and so you know even just you know again I started this John and I'll okay so I got it set you know John gave me this book for free but because he gave it to me for free that's not going to you know impact my review of the book what you know I so I opened it and and I read the first sentence again this morning and God is more present at your work than you know hmm and I thought yeah and I think he wants you to know that yeah God wants you to see that he is there and that his spirit is moving in you through you and around you as you do your job you know I one of the things one of my gripes one of my gripes and and I know there's there's been some people in our I'm a heretic for some people in our denomination and lately with my Jordan Peterson connections probably increasingly so but you know we're both old enough now that we don't get too upset with our medications are there are what they are by this point but I know some people get a little nervous around you because it's like well will we lose the centrality of the word but you know our tradition says that God speaks through two books and in church I think it's right that we especially in a world that has lost its connection with the Bible we we major in the Bible yet you know when I read yet this this heresy that we continue to have in the Christian Reformed Church where where where I will I will stand up people say well you're the pastor you should tell me what to think okay well here's what I'm gonna tell you what to think my calling is no it is not of any why my calling might be a little distinct from each of your callings it is in a sense not elevated and that you're calling to be a rice farmer or to be a hydrologist or to be a mother or to be a grandmother or you know that calling you are called by God to bring his kingdom into this world that you know when when we stand before the Lord on Judgment Day he isn't gonna say oh wow Vanderclay you yeah you were a minister you know enter into your piece oh you were just a mom well you know what did your kid do was he a jerk it's not gonna go that way and this is our this is our doctrine in our tradition and people don't believe it you tell them that as a pastor and they say yeah yeah pastor I know you're supposed to say that but you know you know you really have a more important job and and so then I look at your work and say well you should read John Monsloat because he's finding glory in places that I as a minister of the word am jealous of and that and good yeah no great Paul I think people in the church I mean even with these union members a lot of them were most of them were people of faith right who had a very similar theological worldview as you and I and yet even for them there was a naming of glory in places that they hadn't considered God's glory being present before Christians tend to I mean they do what you just said you know elevate religious roles over and above ordinary work but even with ordinary work they tend to look at the utility of that work working for the common good is the thing that comes up all the time in in faith work conversations and you know I say in the book that if you believe that working for the common good is the purpose of work then that's a different kind of idolatry that keeps you from the bigger purpose of work which is to know who God is through your vocational image bearing through this parable of you at work imaging a God who works so nudging people past the utility part or a moral or an ethical or an integrity based assessment of the value of their work has been and continues to be a crucial part of what well it's what the book is about and and every conversation I have with people yesterday talking with these union people trying to nudge them past just being a servant or loving the person like you love yourself and and and creating this kind of moral ethical definition of of your work having value yeah and that goes for everybody's work everybody from the cleaner they got a person who's mopping the floors to the scientist working in the university lab they're all doing the same thing they're they're kind of looking at the utility of their job in terms of working for the common good instead of looking at the very nature of their job as revealing something of the the the working nature of God and so yeah as you get to name that and I don't know why I get to name that I can just see it all the time no it's true though you know I see a cleaner while I'm in the food court and I think made in the image of a God who takes out the trash to make room for the new and a clean table is new to me and enables me to flourish and have a meal in a food court which I should be having but I'm having a meal in the food court and theologizing so yeah glory glory everywhere and you know in the book I write about heaven on earth right and we have this this vision in the church of a new heaven and our new earth right and everything the way it should be so I mean we're gonna know God and I believe we're gonna be working there still we're gonna know God in and through our work all the time so all of these little bits of glory that we see now are just four tastes they're pointers they're hopeful vocational moments within which we can grasp that that one day perfection of what it's gonna mean to be a human being who works with wood or loves a child or or writes for a living or or creates or does science or creates new molecules etc. With Jordan Peterson a really big aspect of his of what caught my attention early on was his identification of the logos and so he's I'm not gonna get into all kinds of Petersonian things but the you know the logos he takes that obviously from John one he gets it from John one is obviously getting it from Genesis one. One of the things that I think about now with the with the ongoing secularization of the culture whereas I think both you and I grew up in a tradition where it was not uncommon to meet people because of their Christian formation who had a internet connection is on frozen me Paul okay you froze on me too I'm still I'm gonna pause recording until okay so you were doing the logos thing and Genesis and John well and well and I think I think when we lived when we live when I think both of us knew people growing up that the the idea of how these two books work together was sufficiently embedded within our tradition that at least some individuals who were doing what we would call secular work had had a deep sense of God's call and the meaningful nature of this and and could actually tie that to to eschatology and and part of what I fear about secularization today is what I hear so often not only in the church but especially outside the church where someone says yeah I just go to this job to get a paycheck and and and when I hear that I think that you've got this loss of meaning that that has to be crushing for people so as you're going out and you're talking to people and you're doing a lot of interviewing of all kinds of people how do you find those who have a sense of meaning and those who are lacking it and what have you noticed about those two groups I didn't think about a book that would help people who needed to find meaning in their work as as that was not a motivating factor in terms of writing this and yet it comes up as it has with you every time every time somebody reads the book and they go you know look a Walmart greeter a woman who an elderly woman who delivered flyers in in in his neighborhood an electrician you know I mean these these are all no job is better than any of the other jobs but in people's minds they're more or less meaningful I I just wanted to name the glory so when a hot when a Walmart greeter helps you find your way to the right aisle so that you could buy the right product your life flourishes and they are imaging the hospitality of God when a woman an elderly woman in my neighborhood delivers flyers to my home even though I hate the waste and and they usually go straight into the recycling for some people she's helping them know where products are available at a price that they can afford and she's helping their lives to flourish where coupon kiting is an important part of their ability to exist and and naming that I mean that this is a poor woman I actually said most of that in more layman's terms on the street when I met the flyer delivery woman on her last day of delivering flyers and we had an impromptu on the street retirement party and I just I felt like I was I was saying to her how God was seeing her work for all those years pulling this huge wooden wagon up and down our streets in all seasons and and and with the tone and the eye contact in my heart letting her know God's tone that he sees and his heart was for her and and yeah it wasn't a theological idea that I sought to unpack it was a relational moment with a human being who when I was able to love her I was able to see and enabled when I'm was able to see her I was able to see the dignity in her as a human being an image bearer of God and then knowing that look at her vocational image bearing and and how her work imaged her maker and it all just kind of yeah cascaded from there so a noticing that led to a love that our conversation that led to a love that led to an exegesis of the job that led to the naming of that to her on her retirement day that led to the opening chapter of the book my editor you know this can't be in chapter five we got this right at the front because this is where people are at but I've had that experience about meaning at work not just you know people have done that math with jobs that are traditionally not seen as meaningful or less meaningful but I've I've had new meaning come to judges and to scientists and researchers I sat in the office of a judge a Christian judge a provincial no not a federal judge here in Calgary and we're talking about the nature of his work and he talked about how when he gives his judgments his MO is that he he writes it all out of course because he's a very complex complex judgments but then when he gives the judgment he actually puts what he's written and he says and this is a very risky thing I put my written notes down and I give an oral judgment and sometimes because I give an oral judgment because I want to look into the eyes of those upon whom this judgment is coming and sometimes as I'm giving an oral judgment I will change my judgment slightly or it'll move this way or that based on the eye contact that he has so so he is made in the image of a God who came to us and chose to give an oral judgment based on eye contact that came through relationship with him he took on human flesh so that we could see him and he could see us and then through that kind of a high-risk open court God God stepped into open court to give his judgment I saw all these echoes of his maker and so I named that back to him and okay a judge you know a top a thousand people in Canada with the kind of judgeship he had and and a person of faith and a very thoughtful person and I've never saw that before in my work I want to be a morally just judge I want to be fair I want to have integrity but this deeper thing of you know you actually are like God in that moment and and then the question for him I asked was what would it mean to know God in that moment you're you're giving the judgment even as the judge is looking at you and looking at them and and and and moving through his image-bearing that he put into your mind and your rationality and your empirical sensibilities and your sense of justice and what do we know what would he like to know God who is present in you federal judge as you're giving that judgment that's where it gets abstract and they sometimes go whoa and hopefully think about it you think about it a little bit. You are a journalist for glory my friend. You are that that is you're a journalist for creational glory because you're God is proclaimed well this is this is what we do as pastors right I mean God has proclaimed what's in his word and we take it and we you know through the work of the Holy Spirit and filtered through our lives and our story and this moment in the world God proclaims his glory once more and you just give words to it. Yeah yeah well you know and so I think of the psalmist right my tongue is the pen of a skillful writer and my imagination is made in the image of an imaginative God right and you know despite the earlier worries of pride and the self getting in the way God in his grace just continues to plant something in the imagination that says look look that's just like that's just like I'm not right about that in the book to write i over the last year in my kind of re jigging of my heart i've been reading my bible like crazy like just hold big swaths and chapters of books and just going through the whole Bible just to know the story again so that i have more with which to look through to see God in the world. So the smaller I get and the humbler I get and the more attentive I am to God's signature move in the scriptures the more I am able to recognize God's signature moves in the world and I forget why I was saying all that but yeah it was beautiful. No but it's a good move right it yeah then this naming of glory thing I don't get I don't get how it happens half the time you know I was just arguing with these union reps yesterday that you know one of the reasons we can claim that our jobs are parables and believe that it's true is a view of the Holy Spirit moving in the world right and the Spirit is the author of all truth and holds everything in the cosmos together and Calvin said were the Spirit to take its hand off the cosmos everything would collapse and that same Spirit is moving in you and me and in human lives whether we know it or not people inside or outside of the faith and that Spirit nudges and graciously continues to work through you and names and lets you see and name and I mean that's the best part of my job and life right now is coming alongside people and just naming God's glory already moving in their lives I mean that's what happened with the blue jays I was naming the glory of baseball and Metallica the glory of metal and the DNA repair mechanism scientists you know the glory of that particular protein that causes healing to happen in our cells we just got to get a pile more pastors doing this because it's such a huge text Paul yeah well and you know not just pastors but you know I think what's exciting about you is that the pastors it's not it's it's always the pastor's job to equip the saints and so you are not only looking to teach pastors to pay attention to the glory in the book of general revelation but you're also equipping the saints to labor because think of the tragedy of laboring in the Lord's vineyard without seeing his glory and this is what we're seeing throughout the world throughout the world and and the heavens and now it paused right after you said the word glory and so we're we're we're having internet troubles he in calgary and me in sacramento california but what oh I was just talking about the tragedy the tragedy of billions of people laboring in this world not having a sense of meaning or glory that they are surrounded by and yeah it's the job of preachers to hopefully help you know be used by the Holy Spirit to open their eyes to the glory of what this world demeans as menial labor such as cleaning up a food court but you know what the pastors are called to equip the saints so that those who are greeted at Walmart or cleaning up the food court I remember you know so Daniel if you know my Facebook friends knew Daniel he used to sleep right in front of my door and you know bipolar horrible alcoholic you know lots of drama and mess with him but one of the things that always stuck in my mind was he'd always say to me I'm an asset not a liability you know I and so when he was I and so when he was at one of his manic phases he would you know try to fix the cement he would try to clean up the churchyard he would you know and he was depressed phase he would he would lay he would lay against my door and just I could I could hear him in my office just fuck fuck fuck I hate life I hate I want to die I want to die I want to die that's all he would do for days on end I've been doing that for the last year actually yeah so you know but but I think you know I'm an asset not a liability he even even Daniel knew glory and so when he would do something that he considered a gift to me he with you know his Mormon he was a Mormon his LDS you know he touched glory and I just think that the crushing loss of the billions of people in the world who are disconnected from their glory in this job because because they can't see it hmm oh that's that's that's crushing and yeah you come in and you say stop look at what you're doing yeah all the glory yeah and not uh I mean the work is hard and a lot of people have very difficult work and and highly repetitive and and may not be self-actualizing as much as as they could um regardless of where they're placed but yeah we do have a white collar versus at least where I live white collar versus blue collar bias right high income versus low income bias um leadership versus following bias etc etc etc um I don't know if I wrote about it in the book but I I have often often have the thought that uh you know the difference from between the the Nobel Prize winning scientist or business person and the most lowly job on the planet um is is infinitesimal when we're all compared to the uh nature of a working god and what god has done you know um Abraham Kuyper a Dutch theologian said there isn't a thing that exists in the cosmos that wasn't a thought in the mind of god before it ever came to be so god's a physicist Nobel Prize winning physicist um who you know in any good Nobel Prize winning physicist would know they know nothing when they're on the edge of knowing what they know um and so that you know you get a god's eye view on the dignity uh but even that then is kind of operating out of a worldview as that that would say um you know that there are other jobs that do have dignity when in fact that dignity is a little bit of a misnomer relatively speaking in comparison to a working god so yeah dignity for all jobs even the lowly Nobel laureate um his job has dignity before god and and god gracefully looks upon and delights in their work as he does uh the person framing a new house down the street in the new subdivision and and and every other job that people do um it's it you know again this whole idea of judging people's work by the utility of the work is maybe problematic when you start when you pull it back to our imago dei image bearing just in in doing the things you know like working with our hands um what does it mean to know the jesus who's seated at the right hand of god now with hands through your hands as you work in a greenhouse what is it like to know god through all of your senses in your body um as a laborer lifting things um we don't we don't even talk it sounds like crazy talk right that that but who knows that could be more valuable to god you know in my book i write about my son edward my publisher he says okay there's a great book you're writing about scientists and all these people with fancy jobs what about a young man with down syndrome how would how would this book say anything to them and he didn't know that i have a son with down syndrome um wow that's a bit of an oversight and so i write a story about edward and folding towels at the ymca which is one of his part-time jobs and huge dignity in that work and i don't doubt for a second that god is as proud of edward in his towel folding moment as he is of me and my work and you and yours and a noble laureate in their work um god is god is no respecter of person vocational persons in in those places right and well and one of the things you know i'd love that you brought up edward in this because one of the things that i think about jordan peterson makes a point in one of his classes that the u.s army now will not take anyone with an iq of of less than something like 87 which is basically 10 of the population and a number of the people that that i know and work with are on disability um often you know one kind of disability or another and you know freddie who i do the freddie and paul show freddie is on disability and you know part of what i what part of what i fear is that as work gets increasingly complex more and more population well maybe a generous government will will give them just enough money to survive and they'll maybe give them some crappy this is in the u.s you probably get better medical care in canada but some crappy medical care and that doesn't include dental so they've always got problem with their teeth and but and i think okay you know yeah so let's say you gave them gloriously better benefits but the crushing thing that that's so many who say live on disability and maybe in a group home is they have they just have nothing to do they they feel like they have nothing to contribute and so you know every waking moment is a kind of hell because they're divorced from you know they're divorced from the ability to have this glory and i i think about um i think about billy allman who so i grew up in patterson right next to prospect park prospect park was dutch hill you know for a while when the dutch immigrants were there and billy allman was in the old language i don't know what his diagnosis would be what it was called we retarded and he rode around on this crappy little bike through prospect park but he was the town crier he was he would always spread the gossip around and everybody knew billy allman and there was a there was a place for him in that neighborhood and and i look at many of the people today who um you know they're they're disabled because of mental illness or some other thing and and i think in a village they might have worked in a field and from the time they were young they would have gotten used to working in a field they would have had a role or they could have worked in a bakery i knew frank foster at northside chapel was disabled and you know he was able to work in a bakery and increasingly i see in our world it's getting technologically more and more sophisticated more and more of the population the the government could say okay here's here's eight hundred dollars a month so you don't starve and you have a room over your head but we're gonna warehouse you and there's not gonna be any place for you in this world to know god's glory and again it's just it's just horrible and and and no the neither left nor the right you know nobody's paying attention to these people and and oh we gotta give them better benefits oh they should work for a living and it's like i once had a woman so there's a a yard next to it next to us here that the supermarket owns and it's full of garbage and a woman knocks on my door and she sees the homeless people around she says i i've got 50 dollars could you know could you take this and pay some of these homeless people to clean out that vacant lot and it's like lady it ain't gonna work because they've these people it you know it's just not gonna work because we have lost something and then and again the loss is just the loss is just the loss is just grim so you know and i think so i love your story about edward and folding towels because i think yeah everybody needs to participate in this glory yeah yeah yeah and you know 200 years ago maybe edward would have you know been born on a farm and been able to find a good labor job that was commensurate with his giftings but um edward now and this is perhaps uniquely canadian right he's got so many supports around him and and workers who come alongside him that enable him to do that work at the ymca or or calling bingo at the asian seniors home um he can't even talk he has no communication skills and he apparently had called bingo there um you know it developed society um where there may be losses in terms of some of those opportunities has found a way at least in our context to continue to provide opportunities but this is uh you know this is a unique context i realize that uh i i share your worry right because how do you fit in um when i mean i feel that i'm i'm 56 and in an increasingly technological world uh can i keep up i mean how does uh someone with a disability find their place yeah yeah well um any anything you want to plug i mean i i just i appreciate you taking the time and you know we might talk again sometime if either of us says hey i've got an idea let's talk again because to me um you know what you're doing is really valuable and i i really do want more people reading your books and i'll put links to them in the in the notes um but i you know i i really respect the work that you do and i think it's important and and i do want more people to know about it because it's unlike you know we pastors you know we talk about you know jesus and the bible and all of these things and i'm not in any way you know i love talking about that i'll talk about that all the time but for most of the people that i'm talking to this disconnect between god's glory which they are simply immersed in and their appreciation of it is is is just a is is just a crushing loss and i think you fit that gap yeah i think that's a good word paul and i mean i i don't think that talking about god's revelation through uh general revelation is not talking about jesus i mean we believe in a jesus who's seated at the right hand of god who's holding the cosmos together that everything was made through him there isn't a thing that exists that wasn't made through him there isn't a thing that exists that his holy spirit isn't holding in place and moving along it doesn't have intention for making new or is in the process of making new that jesus is moving and living and resurrected and ascended and and and bringing and holding life in all things in him we live and move and have our being everything uh as being held together in and through christ so i'm talking about jesus all the time um at first when we went down this road i mean a lot of people and even i thought you're mostly just talking about god right how can you get to christ through general revelation but if you look at even as christ was embedded in the old testament and all kinds of veiled and hidden ways this is that uh it's true looking out for christ in general revelation this and the bible is that and he's moving in that place i i had a calvin theological seminary professor sydney grey donna's come up to me after a talk and uh he said i think i see what you're doing you know i've spent my whole life trying to connect the jesus of the old testament to the jesus of the new and you're connecting the jesus of the bible to jesus out in the world moving in creation and that's exactly and they're two connected things jesus new and old jesus in the bible and out there that's exactly what i'm doing and uh yeah excited to be called to it and spend the rest of my life figuring it out so how can people find your work uh john van sloaton dot com a new author website i had to create for every job of a parable and if you go there there's just a few blog posts i'm just getting started there but i posted a ton of sermon videos so all the vocational sermons are there so there's about 35 sermons on everything from a firefighter to an electrician to all of the ones we've talked about um there's sermons on music so the metallic i just uploaded the old metallica sermon that warner music shot uh this morning so music sermons um all of that is there and uh yeah some some of the media stuff and so if people want to find out what it's about or in information on the books they can find it there okay okay super well thank you so much john hang on don't hang up i'm just going to stop the recording and uh and and so then we can finish up we can finish up