https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A9KJsk2RDKw

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to continue my treatment of Jordan Peterson's conversation with Heinz Style, his second one where they sum up 2018. In class one of Urveki's Buddhism and Cognitive Science, he runs the nine dot problem. And I remember seeing this years and years ago and think outside the lines and all of that. One of the, when he, when he brought this up, I, part of, part of, part of me had an emotional reaction like, oh not this again, I'm so tired of think outside the lines or think outside the box or all the different ways this is said. One of the things that Urveki says though here is that you can tell people to think outside the box and they still can't solve it. In other words, the point of the nine dot problem is that we, we have a, we see through filters, we see through glasses, and, and these filters are constructed, that they're often socially constructed. And so he gets into this in class one and of course I've talked about class one at Fair Mountain and some other videos. Now the nine dot problem as living life under the sun and I get under the sun from the book of Ecclesiastes. In the secular box that holds us are all our materialist goods. Now I don't mean that in terms of money and, and simply materialistic goods, but all of the goods that materialism has given us. And so we look at all of our accomplishments and we're impressed by all of our accomplishments. And you can listen to Steven Pinker note how much better the world is and how much more money poor people have and, and all of that is wonderful. The difficulty we have is what it seems affluence for those of us who have been living now for maybe two, three generations in highly affluent societies what this is doing to us. Now the book of Ecclesiastes in the Old Testament is a thought experiment with secularism. That's often how I look at it. And vanity, vanities, all is vanity. Now if you read the entire book you get to the end of chapter 12 and vanity ends with duty. And finally fear God and keep his commandments. That's the best you can do under the sun. That's the best that you can do in life as we know it. Now obviously the book of Ecclesiastes is a very ancient book and it was written at a time where there was considerably less food security, considerably less political security, considerably less economic security. But again the the book is written from the perspective of an alpha male from someone at the top of the heap and and this person denies himself nothing and whether it's pleasure or whether it's wisdom or whether it's philosophy or or in whatever realm he desires he he denies himself nothing. Well all the time keeping his perspective, keeping wisdom, continuing to do the thought experiment and and he comes to the conclusion that life is a chasing after the wind. It's like smoke. You can't put your hand around it. And again you can look at the Bible Project's YouTube treatment of the book of Ecclesiastes for some good overview of the book. But what's apparent that okay so now according to a good number of people and I certainly celebrate this there's nothing to there's nothing to celebrate in terms of poverty but the more and more people leave poverty the meaning crisis is going to stalk us. The meaning problem stalks affluent humanity. Now I've mentioned before that I never heard of a suicide in a Haitian bataille. A bataille is kind of a workers a workers community usually outside the sugar cane fields where the Haitians were cutting Dominican sugar and picking Dominican coffee most of these Haitians without without legal status and they had very hard lives they had very brutal lives. We tend to simplistically imagine that life is about reaching your goals and finding security and and really founding because we're all seeking security and most of us don't have that F.U. money that Eric Weinstein talks about and so we're we're scrambling to pay the mortgage and you know not get into too much credit card debt and on and on and on and on and we're doing this and this in fact gives us meaning although this chasing after the wind haunts us and stalks us. Well what we're seeing happening in affluent society is that suicide rates go up. One of the one of the I've done suicides in a number of sermons one at one of the places with the highest suicide rates is wait for it Silicon Valley and you'd think Silicon Valley they're at the top of the top right now but San Jose High School had an alarming suicide rate of the children of the of the emperors of the information age. What does that say? What does that say about us? What does it say about humanity that you can gain all this stuff and lose yourself? Well of course someone said that. It was Jesus. Politics become then your religion and this is what we see happening in our society. Again and again you'll hear David Brooks make the point on News Hour. He says you know politics should be a small part of life. This is a this is actually a fairly conservative position. The life should not be politics. Politics should run. The government should you know keep civil order, should keep the peace, should have a give a lay level playing field so that people can pursue. Well what is the pursuit? Well pursuit of happiness according to the declaration of independence. Pursuit of whatever it is you want to pursue. This is the foundation of American life and so at what level should government be there but even when I listen to people who are thinking that socialism is a wonderful idea well most of them wouldn't want the government telling them what job they would need to do. Having their job assigned to them by the government. Most of them Americans are expressive individualists and and we want to express ourselves and we find meaning in in chasing our pursuits. The difficulty is that when politics becomes your religion we try to create heaven on earth and usually we pull up hell from the bottom because there's something intrinsic between well if this group of people is going to get life exactly the way they want it other groups of people who perhaps don't define goodness and well-being along with them well they're going to experience hell. That's why when you every time you try to create a utopia you will often find pretty hellish things coming up with it. Now the meaning crisis I think crisis is a consequence of affluence. Jordan Peterson's thesis is that psychological experience of meaning is a result of taking voluntary responsibility for the sufferings of life. You turn to it voluntarily and he looks at Jesus crucifixion and resurrection as as mythology which points to this truth. The affluent wealth reduces suffering on a large scale on an unbelievable scale compared to much of human history and you can look at just google Peter Creaf's The Dark Side. Peter Creaf opens that argument with this noting that we've gotten rid of so many of the physical pains in the west only to open up ourselves to existential pain and so the existential pain is nihilism. It's nothingness. It's well I if there's meaning is meaning is at the top of the hierarchy for why the meaning of life. It's more important than happiness. People will trade happiness for meaning any day. I always have trouble with those phrasing those because of my dyslexia. I always get them backwards but they'll say yes I will sacrifice happiness to have meaning. People do it all the time. Jordan Peterson says so go out there and voluntarily confront your suffering. Clean your room. Sort out your life. Get at it and if you get at it you will feel meaning again and even though it's easy to live in your mother's basement covered with Cheetos dust doing video games and porn there's not a lot of meaning in it. You need to get up and get out and do something in the world. Now this again the motivation for this is a feeling of happiness and you know usually around the time of Easter the Sacramento Freedom From Religion Organization puts up billboards that to me says it all because if you have to put a billboard up defending yourself sounds to me like a little bit of expressed insecurity but God free happy and inspired by wonder will scarf sharp Sacramento technology analyst atheist so as long as he has a feeling of wonder a feeling of meaning that's good enough because actually in his worldview that's all that can be had and so actually if we would someday invent a drug not just for happiness which is cocaine as Jordan Peterson keeps reminding us but let's say a drug that gives us the feeling of meaning well then we can all sit in blissful couches well actually probably the drug that gives us a sense of meaning are video games because video games are all about I mean and I I play one video game pretty much and that's civilization and I play civilization and I sit there and I work my little map and I try and build my civilization and it feels like meaning but then at the end of playing it for six hours sometimes I think now why did I just play this game for six hours couldn't there have been something more meaningful to do than construct a little empire of of of electronic zeros and ones if you haven't seen Jonathan Heights interview on the Rogan experience do so because it's a it's a masterpiece I've really appreciated Jonathan height for a long time I discovered him back when he was talking about the the the built-in morality of our two political tribes the right and the left and I read so I read his second book first and then I read the happiness hypothesis which which I really enjoyed and then now the coddling of the American mind another terrific book he notes that once we get our food security once we have our housing security once we have our economic security and a bunch of these really basic instinctive securities nailed down what we really compete for is is status and loss of status motivates us and this is fueling the culture war and fueling the the social justice movements you gain moral status by pointing out the immorality of the oppressor but the irony that will come upon you with self-righteousness because this ironically makes you into an oppressor and this is why the social justice camps so often eat themselves eventually because no one can be pure enough and and in fact in in that worldview there is no redemption there is no forgiveness all there is is the defeat of your enemy and and so instead of having this competition on a very basic material level where we're competing for money or food or survival in terms of nation states now we're competing for moral status and well as in the lord of the rings there can only be one at the top and if it's gotta be you well you're going to be the enemy of all now all of this is going on but but it leaves us in many ways with what i call the dilemma of self-aware moral a motivated belief sam harris talks about this in the conversations with jordan peterson where in some ways jordan peterson is scoring points and saying you know it's it really it really benefits people to believe in god it really benefits people to participate in religion it really benefits people and this this isn't a this isn't something that's been lost um a while ago i did i mentioned melanie bruster's skepticon seven address why is psychology silent when it comes to atheism and that's a basically in it she said well atheists can feel meaning and community and can enjoy the things of religion too except they don't do it and so she leaves with this sermon with this a breathless a breathless admonition for atheists to form their own what would only be the the kind of the an atheist church now this has been tried and sustained there are sunday communions in various cities where people get together and sing the songs of beetles and and bart campolo has been pursuing this and and a number of atheists have been pursuing this but you'll it never seems to scale like religion religion beats it hands down again and again and again and again and especially if times turn bad people get religious people are very religious naturally which jonathan height points out again and again and so as much as melanie bruster would and and sam harris would like to admonish atheist people to act like religious people so they can receive the goods of religious people self-aware motivated belief simply doesn't work if you decide you want to believe in god because believing in god will make you happy if you don't really believe in god it won't work you have to really believe in god well how do you really believe in god if you've been gripped by the ideology of the subtraction story it's insufficient to simply know that a belief in god is good for you you can't fool yourself about what you really believe and this in a sense is where one side of jordan peterson's act as if is kind of the a fake it till you make it you need to act as if you believe if you want to begin to believe you need to lean into beliefs you need to it's kind of a behaviorist approach you need to go through the motions this is this is why the the lack of church attendance for jordan peterson or lack of association with specific religious communities i find deeply ironic because it's it's actually all of that liturgy and worship and prayer and singing and devoting yourself to teaching and to study that this is this is actually how the elephant is trained this is actually how people come to believe and we know this because we look at people who have been raised in it and they so easily believe so often compared to many others who who were not raised in it so so this in fact can be formed in you so if you want to believe in god you're going to need to act as if god is real and acting as if god is real is going to mean to one degree or another participating in all of the actions that for centuries generations have who have believed that god is real act out their belief in a real god talking to this god praying to this god worshiping this god singing this god sing talking about this god especially living in the midst of communities where people believe in this stuff because we as human beings really do believe in communities i don't mean we just believe in communities our beliefs are formed by communities and maintained by communities if you go and live with a group of people for long enough and you are happy with those group of people and the relationships are good you will bit by bit take on the beliefs of those other people that is exactly how we are now i want to again i want to go back to if i can say jane style which when if you remember some of my early talks with roland we he i asked him i who are these people that are really interested in peterson and and he said now it's a it's a really ironic choice because jane style if my memory serves me means something like no style or anti-style and with the uh with the power of the chrome browser you can go to their website and google will translate it for you if you don't know dutch i don't know dutch my friend john vandonck knows dot dutch very well i know a lot of people who know dutch well but but it it basically means no style or anti-style and and it's a rather cynical blog and they enjoy mocking and you know i think it was my british friends used to say something like taking the piss out of that they they enjoy doing this and they're known for this which for roland was was very interesting that these people you know have have this deep interest in peterson and it's almost like in cynicism that you come full circle uh david david foster wallace i think is is you know was very much someone who made this journey all the way around and i remember when the latest lay mizraab movie came about there was a there was a lot of there was a lot of press coverage about the new sincerity and if you listen to um akira akira the don and the interview he did i don't remember if it was with rebel wisdom i think it was on rebel wisdom but with someone else how how akira the don said you know the new radicality is monogamy and and being a responsible parent one of the interesting things and in listening to to jonathan height and joe rogan so here's rogan he's all tatted up and his head is shaved and he's this comedian and these colors commentator for mixed martial arts fighting and and you know he's he's a guy who is open about his use of psychedelics he smokes a joint with with elon moss he drinks you would think that that joe rogan would be a hippie father but as you listen to him talk to jonathan height well he was a latchkey kid and like many people that i've known who who grew up with with a little more chaos than than he now especially probably whoever his wife is i don't know any of these people so um because the wives are usually the ones who who domesticate the man but when when jonathan height is talking about you know you got to let your kid walk home and you got to let your kid get out there and you got to let your kid do stuff now now jonathan height has his daughter on a tether with the the little the little phone watch and all of this kind of thing but but joe rogan there is now the the conservative and i i don't let my kids go for sleepovers and i you know i'm really i'm really careful about that and i don't want my kid being hurt well well there's as akira the don said there's the new radicality conservatism is the new radicality in the in the age of the children of hippies and and and i've seen this all the time again part of what drew me to the the current culture war was just watching the the history in my tiny little subculture in the christian reform church i would i would often remember it was the the biggest rebels from our sometimes smothering orthodoxy of of christian reformed controlism which was which was very deep and very pervasive it was the kids who would cut class and go smoke behind the behind the gas station across the street from the christian high school it was the kids who were who were known for for doing pot i mean these were christian kids in the christian reformed church very conservative church it was these kids that were rebels often that i noticed when they grew up became the most hard-lined conservatives and myself who was quite a compliant kid in high school i didn't drink i didn't smoke i didn't i didn't do much bad stuff um i'm you know i'm the one with high openness and and i'm the liberal so so where does that come from so here you see jonathan height and he's wearing his nice shirt and he's a university professor and he's written books and he's an intellectual and he's a liberal and he's measured and so on and so forth and and joe rogan looks like the you know he doesn't let his kids go for sleepovers he's he's not going to let his kid walk down the street and and and you just watch these things flip and flip and so here you see hain style if i'm saying it right here you see hain style with no style no no style anti-style they're going to mock people and they're going to dox people and they're going to out people and they're going to be brutal with anyone who has any pretense and then here one of the editors gladiator is the movie of our times gladiator gladiator is as conservative and as traditional as you could possibly imagine and and and so here they are loving on jordan peterson it's the new sincerity it's it's the new hotness of monogamy and playing it straight now now it's it's interesting i played a little bit of the i played quite a bit of the video actually last time but but the the editor here from hain style and i don't remember his name he he basically says you know he basically lays out gladiator and says there's greater suffering than kind of the material suffering we have in this world now that suffering would most commonly be described as spiritual suffering and and peterson kind of begins as the as the as the college professor and he's he's editing his paper but he basically towards as he continues to talk and process this peterson agrees seemingly 100 with this young man about gladiator now let's let's pick up a little bit of this here you i think the central implicit thesis throughout the whole movie is as follows that no matter how powerful someone is the pain of a man whose soul has been irreversibly corrupted far out exceeds the pain of a righteous man whose wife and son have been murdered and who's been reduced to abject slavery which is really something to think about so again this is no style these are the mockers these are the cynics these are the people that that look at society and the world and they are ready to out anyone's self-righteousness which is which is probably why as it comes around full circle one of the things that you find in 20 years ago 30 years ago it was the christians and the conservatives that were self-righteous well now the left is more self-righteous than anyone could imagine people used to say i don't want to go to a sermon to hear someone preach well now all of the preaching you get from politics you can't escape it and this is why peter bagosian and and james lindsey and pluck rose i think her name is why the three of them in exposing this exposing this grievance this grievance culture this is why it's so apt because there now you used to be able to avoid going to church by just not going to church now you can't avoid moralism that way anymore it's it's it's full blown in the culture you're the politicians are moralists and again david brooks says politics should be a little part of society david brooks is a moralist but but he's he's tends towards the classical conservative moralist but now everyone's a moralist and and you know the state of california we tell farmers how to raise their chickens and we tell not not because necessarily of now i'm not an expert in this and someone will correct me in the comment section not necessarily because of the health of the quality of meat that we're eating but because of the happiness of the chicken i only want to eat chickens that have had happy and fulfilling lives well that's interesting happy cows come from california that's because the state of california has in some ways taken it upon itself to to be the steward of the happiness of cows now again i'm not against animal cruelty and if you want to look for a real advocate against animal cruelty look for c.s lewis these are christians for a long time have have talked about these issues so the issue isn't animal cruelty the issue is this new morality and this new self-righteousness that wow i used to be able to avoid a sermon by not going to church now just go to a political party and and it used to be the conservative it used to be the republicans now it's the democrats they're the preachiest of all and so here hainstile is and they're basically saying we won't take anybody's self-righteousness so then what are we looking for we're looking for the genuine article we're looking for the real deal we're looking for a a a morality and a virtue that goes all the way down yeah right yeah well they yeah well they okay so the themes that you've been developing there well okay so the first thing we might also note though that that you um lost over maybe that's the right way of thinking see he's got all this he's got all this ritual built into him about being a college professor and dealing with student papers and as he's looking for words those those those pathways are kicking in and and he's he's figuring it out but he'll get there pretty quick about it is that maximus is a paragon of soldierly virtue right he's a physical combatant a warrior yeah he's dutiful he serves his commander but also serves the principles more importantly yeah the principles that govern his commander and he serves the principles more than the commander himself and you can tell that because he chooses not to serve the new emperor comodus yeah because he doesn't believe that he abides by the proper principles and comodus of course also killed his his own father which means that he killed the principles by which the state um he's like he's like the elder gods in the mesopotamia now now he serves well let's back it up and hear him say it again so because he chooses more than the commander himself he serves the principles more than the commander himself and and that's vital to this and and that has everything to do with the the nine dot experiment and and thinking outside the box you have to in a sense think above the box you might look if you're maximus you might look at marcus aurelius as your adopted father which was common in the roman empire you would adopt i mean julius caesar adopted the man who became augustus caesar and maximus always served something or someone higher than the old and new emperor and that's why when the old emperor is killed or dead maximus can continue forward along that path he has to serve something outside of the box that we see when we see the nine dot experiment in fact we are always orienting ourselves outside of this box now victor frankl noted this in terms of man's search for meaning if you've never read victor frankl's book man's search for meaning you should definitely read it it's a it's an amazing book but but frankl notes that who survives the camp it's it's those who in fact have values that the camp cannot touch they have goods that are outside of the material frame and they prioritize this in their hierarchies above the stuff and the dog eat dog nature of the camp those are the ones who survive the camp now you can look at this again this is well this is adaptive this is the adaptive argument for religion that religions evolve and religions succeed and the reason we find pretty much natural humanity is 100 religious the the the outliers are those that think they no longer need religion but humanity naturally is 100 religious so from an evolutionary argument you say there must be an adaptive advantage a competitive advantage to religion now brent weinstein goes here and they says yeah but we have to then critique the religion and and you just have to begin to ask what what stage outside of you will you stand on to critique the religion and that's exactly the point you need something outside the square that you see when you see the nine dots you need something above outside this world that you are perceiving in order to properly orient yourself in the world that is what you should take away from the fact that religion according to evolutionists is an adaptive property that yields a competitive advantage that religious people out compete those who are not religious well why and and certainly why if you say that religion is somehow some some archaic mythology that is that doesn't serve us now you get back to jordan peterson's argument that the best story wins so now we get into a sense of of not only are we as cultures evolve the stories of the cultures evolve well what are the stories of the culture the stories of the culture are the mythologies when when hindstile looks at gladiator and and this young man says this is the movie of for young men of our time period there's no other what he's saying is gladiator is my religion gladiator speaks truth to me but not just truth beauty why on the hierarchy beauty people just like people will say i'll sacrifice happiness for meaning people will sacrifice truth for beauty oh why do i say that why have you ever seen a friend fall in love with a beautiful girl who isn't necessarily quite as beautiful on the inside as she is on the outside have you ever seen a young woman fall in love with a bad boy who everyone around her knows that this is going to be trouble but yet she does beauty is powerful and and so in a sense what heinstile is saying here is that the beauty of gladiator so captivates him that i don't know if he's an atheist or not i don't know of his personal beliefs but but i think this is what's happening in terms of jordan peterson harrowing the materialist hell of sam harris this is jordan peterson raiding the house of sam harris i don't mean just sam harris but this is jordan peterson eating the lunch of the materialist because jordan peterson offers beauty and and people will exchange truth for beauty often now truth beauty good the good the true the beautiful there as as verveke and others peter kreef note these are kind of the classic greek triad but this is what's happening he's saying you know i i don't buy the self-righteousness of the new left i don't buy the pretense of the old orders i don't buy any of this what do i buy i buy the beauty i see shining through in the movie gladiator and there are certain deaths certain pains that are greater than the pain of hunger the pain of deprivation that i this is it this is the exchange of of beauty for truth or the exchange of truth for beauty this is the exchange of happiness for meaning to have virtue to experience meaning you must serve something or someone outside the secular box especially not simply your own self-interest and again now we have the the problem that sam harris and melanie bruster talk about what how can you believe it how can you believe something outside the box we have an existential crisis and i know a number of you are having that crisis now because you feel drawn to believe in something outside the box but you you're not there yet and and you can't do it and so you're wrestling you're in the middle i talk to people all the time in that middle so to have virtue to experience meaning you must serve something or someone outside the secular box especially not simply your own self-interest you need to lay down your life for another and and that then is beautiful that then is meaning is meaning jesus says that's true that's good no one has greater love than this than to lay down their life for their friend it might be that laying down your life for your child is is biologically adaptive but laying down your life for your enemy well when we see that now it's got our attention no matter if you're hein style if you're cynical or if you're hardened or if you've if you're a millennial and you've been exposed to the crass consumerism and marketing of this age that that everyone is out there to sell you something you long for someone who will give themselves to you that that will say your well-being at my expense you long for that love now how does this work c.s lewis talks about this and he walks through this in the beginning of mere christianity and those of you might not know that mere christianity is a book that he derived from some radio lectures that he was giving on the bbc during some very dark days in 1941 of the second world war where hitler had cleaned out western europe the french had surrendered that the british had a shameful yet miraculous retreat at dunkirk and hitler was trying to bomb into submission and actually george marsden who i've mentioned before has a a wonderful book there's a series of book biographies often we send biographies about a person but these are biographies about books and george marsden writes a wonderful biography on mere christianity and most of the tapes i think there's only like one or two recordings left of c.s lewis actually having given this but these recordings in the darkest days of the london blitz became this book mere christianity which has become probably c.s lewis's most popular certainly his most popular apologetic book probably his most popular book beyond the chronicles of narnia and now the google doodles guy i don't know who he is but you can go to the google doodle the c.s lewis doodle channel and he's got a lot of basically audio books of of c.s lewis of other readers reading c.s lewis and he does these little diagrams so that's let's listen to how c.s lewis begins the conversation where in a sense c.s lewis is saying well here's the nine dot experiment you need to see beyond the box you need to see that in fact moral law comes from outside of our box so i'm just going to play the first one but there's a whole bunch of them and if if this wets your interest by all means go to the c.s lewis doodle site and and watch more of them so well and, uh, scoddy fleet the end. Tonight, the BBC presents the first in a series of talks called Right and Wrong, a clue to the meaning of the universe by C.S. Lewis. This talk is titled Common Decency. And now, Mr. Lewis. Good evening. Everyone has heard people quarrelling. Sometimes it sounds funny and sometimes it sounds merely unpleasant. But however it sounds, I believe we can learn something very important from listening to the kinds of things they say. They say things like this. How do you like it if anyone did the same to you? That's my seat. I was there first. Leave him alone. He isn't doing you any harm. Why should you shove in first? Give me a bit of your orange. I gave you a bit of mine. Come on. You promised. People say things like that every day. Educated people as well as uneducated. And children as well as grownups. Now what interests me about all these remarks is that the man who makes them is not merely saying that the other man's behaviour doesn't happen to please him. He's appealing to some kind of standard of behaviour which he expects the other man to know about. And the other man very seldom replies to hell with your standard. Nearly always he tries to make out that what he's been doing doesn't really go against the standard. Or that if it does, there is some special excuse. Listen to the Democrats and Republican fight about the government shutdown. This is the same thing. He pretends there is some special reason in this particular case why the person who took the seat first shouldn't keep it. Or that things were quite different when he was given the bit of orange. Or that something has turned up which lets him off keeping his promise. It looks in fact very much as if both parties had in mind some kind of law or rule of fair play or decent behaviour or morality or whatever you like to call it about which they really agreed. And they have. If they hadn't, they might of course fight like animals. But they couldn't quarrel in the human sense of the word. Quarrel means trying to show that the other man is in the wrong. And there would be no sense in trying to do that unless you and he had some sort of agreement as to what right and wrong are. Just as there'd be no sense in saying that a footballer had committed a foul unless there is some agreement about the rules of football. Now this law or rule about right and wrong used to be called the law of nature. Nowadays when we talk of the laws of nature we usually mean things like gravitation or heredity or the laws of chemistry. But when the older thinkers called the law of right and wrong the law of nature they really meant the law of human nature. The idea was that just as falling stones are governed by the law of gravitation and chemicals by chemical laws so the creature called man also had his law. With this great difference that the stone couldn't choose whether it obeyed the law of gravitation or not but a man could choose either to obey the law of human nature or to obey the law of nature. Either to obey the law of human nature or to disobey it. They called it law of nature because they thought that everyone knew it by nature and didn't need to be taught it. They didn't mean of course that you mightn't find an odd individual here and there who didn't know it just as you find a few people who are colour blind or have no ear for a tune. But taking the race as a whole they thought that the human idea of decent behaviour was obvious to everyone. And I believe they were right. If they were not and all the things we say about the war are nonsense what is the sense in saying the enemy is in the wrong? Unless right is a real thing which the Germans at bottom know as well as we do and ought to practice. If they have no notion of what we mean by right and though we might still have to fight them we could no more blame them for that than for the colour of their hair. I know that some people say the idea of a law of nature or decent behaviour known to all men is unsound because different civilisations and different ages have had quite different moralities. But this is not true. They have only had slightly different moralities. Just think what a quite different morality would mean. Think of a country where people were admired for running away in battle or where a man felt proud of double crossing all the people who had been kindest to him. Now you can actually find anthropologists who will find tiny little tribes out there who believe some of these things. But part of what you should ask is why are these tribes so tiny? Why haven't they taken over the world? You can begin with the question that was asked to Jared Diamond at the beginning of guns, germs and steel. Why do you people have so much kit? You might just as well try to imagine a country where two and two made five. Men have differed as regards what people you ought to be unselfish to. Whether it was only your own family or your fellow countrymen or everyone. But they have always agreed that you ought not to put yourself first. Selfishness has never been admired. Men have differed as to whether you should have one wife or four. But they have always agreed that you must not simply have any woman you liked. But the most remarkable thing is this. Whenever you find a man who says he does not believe in a real right and wrong, you will find the same man going back on this a moment later. He may break his promise to you, but if you try breaking one to him, he will be complaining it's not fair before you can say Jack Robinson. A nation may say treaties don't matter, but then next minute they spoil their case by saying that the particular treaty they want to break was an unfair one. But if treaties don't matter, and if there is no such thing as right and wrong, in other words, if there is no law of nature, what is the difference between a fair treaty and an unfair one? Have they not let the cat out of the bag and shown that whatever they say, they really know the law of nature, just like anyone else? It seems then we are forced to believe in a real right and wrong. People may be sometimes mistaken about them, just as people sometimes get their sums wrong, but they are not a matter of mere taste and opinion, any more than the multiplication table. Now, if we're agreed about that, I go on to my next point, which is this. None of us are really keeping the law of nature. If there are any exceptions among you, I apologize to them. They'd much better switch to some other station, for nothing I am going to say concerns them. And now, turning to the ordinary human beings who are left, I hope you won't misunderstand what I'm going to say. I'm not preaching, and heaven knows I don't pretend to be better than anyone else. I'm only trying to call attention to a fact, the fact that this year or this month, or more likely this very day, we have failed to practice ourselves the kind of behavior we expect from other people. There may be all sorts of excuses for us. At time you were so unfair to the children, was when you were very tired. That slightly shady business about the money, the one you've almost forgotten, came when you were very hard up. And what you promised to do for old so-and-so and have never done, well, you never would have promised if you had known how frightfully busy you were going to be. And as for your behavior to your wife, or husband, or sister, or brother, if I knew how irritating they could be, I wouldn't wonder at it. And who the dickens am I anyway? I'm just the same. That is to say, I don't succeed in keeping the law of nature very well. And the moment anyone tells me I'm not keeping it, there starts up in my mind a string of excuses as long as your arm. The question at the moment isn't whether they are good excuses. The point is that they are one more proof of how deeply, whether we like it or not, we believe in the law of nature. If we don't believe in decent behavior, why should we be so anxious to make excuses for not having behaved decently? The truth is, we believe in decency so much we feel the rule or law pressing on us so that we cannot bear to face the fact that we're breaking it, and consequently we try to shift the responsibility. For you notice that it is only for our bad behavior that we find all these explanations. It is only our bad temper that we put down to being tired or worried or hungry. We put our good temper down to ourselves. These then are the first two points I wanted to make tonight. First, that human beings all over the earth have this curious idea that they ought to behave in a certain way and cannot really get rid of it. Secondly, that they don't in fact behave in that way. They know the law of nature. They break it. These two facts are the foundation of all clear thinking about ourselves and the universe we live in. Thank you. Let's take a look at some of the next one at least. Mere Christianity by C.S. Lewis. The reality of the moral law. I now go back to what I said at the end of the first talk, that there were two odd things about the human race. First, that they were haunted by the idea of a sort of behavior they ought to practice, what you might call fair play or decency or morality or the law of nature. Second, that they did not in fact do so. Now some of you may wonder why I call this odd. It may seem to you the most natural thing in the world. In particular, you may have thought I was rather hard on the human race. After all, you may say, what I call breaking the law of right and wrong or of nature only means that people are not perfect. And why on earth should I expect them to be? That would be a good answer if what I was trying to do was to fix the exact amount of blame which is due to us for not behaving as we expect others to behave. But that is not my job at all. I am not concerned at present with blame. I am trying to find out truth. And from that point of view, the very idea of something being imperfect, of its not being what it ought to be, has certain consequences. If you take a thing like a stone or a tree, it is what it is. And there seems no sense in saying it ought to have been otherwise. Of course, you may say a stone is the wrong shape if you want to use it for a rockery or that a tree is a bad tree because it does not give you as much shade as you expected. But all you mean is that the stone or tree does not happen to be convenient for some purpose of your own. You are not, except as a joke, blaming them for that. You really know that given the weather and the soil, the tree could not have been any different. What we, from our point of view, call a bad tree is obeying the laws of its nature just as much as a good one. Now have you noticed what follows? It follows that what we usually call the laws of nature, the way weather works on a tree, for example, may not really be laws in the strict sense, but only in a manner of speaking. When you say that falling stones always obey the law of gravitation, isn't this much the same as saying that the law only means what stones always do? You do not really think that when a stone is let go, it suddenly remembers that it is under orders to fall to the ground. You only mean that, in fact, it does fall. In other words, you cannot be sure that there is anything over and above the facts themselves. Now this gets into what I've talked about in past videos about how what we call the laws of nature are the patterns that we have seen that we have seen so frequent and predictable that we say, this is how govern works. But remember, this is what governs nature. But again, when we say governs nature, we're implying that this is above nature, that these laws have somehow colonized and are controlling the matter of the world when that's not really what we have access to. What we've seen are patterns, and we've noted that these patterns are so predictable, we count on them. But that's an inferential leap that goes on in our minds. That is, in some senses, an act of faith because we don't actually see the process by which these things are happening. We've just seen the pattern, and we've seen the pattern of being so reliable, we count on it. It's not much different from the child of the faithful parent who knows that mom picks her up after school every day who is standing on the corner waiting for mom. Maybe even in the rain. The child could have stayed in the classroom where it's dry and warm but has gone out into the rain to stood on the corner. Why? Because mom has been so faithful and predictable in picking her up that she will go out there into the rain and get wet in order to be picked up. Those, that is our condition of seeing these laws of physics or laws of nature. That's how we're doing it. Okay? This is a faith we are exercising. Now, Peter Boghossian, I came across his name before all of this other stuff when he had his manual to make atheists. And he was basically using the argument that faith is something you don't have evidence for. Well, that's hardly the case for this young girl who goes out and stands in the rain to wait for her mother. Faith is the case that she has tremendous evidence for because of the reliability and seen predictability of her mother even though the little girl cannot in any way sketch out all of the psychological or physical dynamics that go into her mother picking her up. And this is exactly the same thing for each of us when we walk on an airplane or go over a bridge or sit in a chair or go to a doctor's office and all of these things. All of these things exercise faith. Faith is grown. It's formed as a result of what we've seen as predictable and what we've seen as trustworthy in other people. And so therefore, we look at the world around us and we say rocks always fall because we've seen them fall every time. So we will trust that this rock falls. So if someone above us drops a rock, we move. But we look at jet planes which are far heavier than almost every rock we ever see put into motion by any human being. And we don't duck when we see a jet plane go over us. Why? Well, we figured that out, haven't we? So these laws of nature, these are just patterns. But he's about, C.S. Lewis is about to make the point. But here's the ironic things about the laws of human nature. We see them broken all the time, yet we believe in them. In fact, we believe in them so strongly that even when we ourselves break it, we appeal to them against the other for our own status. Remember, Jonathan Haidt, for our own status. This is the game we play. This is a very strange game. And again, my argument, don't lose sight of the larger argument I'm making through this video, that we have to see outside the box in order to do this. That the box says human beings are fallible and prone to betrayal and error. That should be the law of nature about human beings. Yet, we exclude ourselves from that. We look outside the box and we in fact say, we must exclude ourselves from that. We must in fact believe in a law of human nature that we have never seen a single human being comply with. We've seen tastes of it. We've had elements of it. We've seen glimpses of it in good people, in our parents, and our loyal friends, in faithful people around us. We've gotten a whiff of it. We've heard suggestions of it. We've heard whispers of it. But yet we have never seen it. Yet we believe it to such a degree that even when we fail it, we appeal to it. Above and beyond, outside the nine dot box that we see and say the world fits within. Electrons and molecules behave in a certain way and certain results follow. And that may be the whole story. As a footnote, I do not think it is the whole story as you will see later. I mean that as far as the argument has gone up to date, it may be. But men behave in a certain way and that is not the whole story. For all the time you know that they ought to behave differently. Now this is really so peculiar that one is tempted to try to explain it away. For instance, we might try to make out that when you say a man ought not to act as he does, you only mean the same as when you say that a stone is the wrong shape. Namely that what he is doing happens to be inconvenient to you. But that is simply untrue. And it's cynicism. In a sense, that's Hain's style. A man occupying the corner seat in the train because he got there first and a man who slipped into it while my back was turned and removed my bag are both equally inconvenient. But I blame the second man and do not blame the first. I am not angry, except perhaps for a moment before I come to my senses, with a man who trips me up by accident. I am angry with a man who tries to trick me into a fight. I am angry with a man who tries to trip me up even if he does not succeed. Yet the first has hurt me and the second has not. Sometimes the behavior which I call bad is not inconvenient to me at all, but the very opposite. In war, each side may find a traitor on the other side very useful. But though they use him and pay him, they regard him as human vermin. I cannot say that what we call decent behavior in others is simply the behavior that happens to be useful to us. And as for decent behavior in ourselves, I suppose it is pretty obvious that it does not mean the behavior that pays. It means things like being content with 30 shillings when you might have got three pounds, doing schoolwork honestly when it would be easy to cheat, leaving a girl alone when you would like to make love to her, staying in dangerous places when you could go somewhere safer, keeping promises you would rather not keep, and telling the truth even when it makes you look a fool. Some people say that though decent conduct does not mean what pays each particular person at a particular moment, still it means what pays the human race as a whole, and that consequently there is no mystery about it. Human beings, after all, have some sense. They see that you cannot have any real safety or happiness except in a society where everyone plays fair, and it is because they see this that they try to behave decently. Now, of course, it is perfectly true that safety and happiness can only come from individuals, classes, and nations being honest and fair and kind to each other. It is one of the most important truths in the world. But as an explanation of why we feel as we do about right and wrong, it just misses the point. If we ask, why ought I to be unselfish? And you reply, because it is good for society. We may then ask, why should I care what's good for society except when it happens to pay me personally? And then you will have to say, because you ought to be unselfish, which simply brings us back to where we started. You are saying what is true, but you are not getting any further. If a man asked what was the point of playing football, it would not be much good saying, in order to score goals, for trying to score goals is the game itself, not the reason for the game. And you would really only be saying that football was football, which is true, but not worth saying. In the same way, if a man asks what is the point of behaving decently, it is no good replying, in order to benefit society. For trying to benefit society, in other words, being unselfish, for society after all only means other people, is one of the things decent behavior consists in. All you are really saying is that decent behavior is decent behavior. You would have said just as much if you had stopped at the statement, men ought to be unselfish. And that is where I do stop. Men ought to be unselfish, ought to be fair. Not that men are unselfish, nor that they like being unselfish, but that they ought to be. The moral law, or law of human nature, is not simply a fact about human behavior, is not simply a fact about human behavior, in the same way as the law of gravitation is, or may be simply a fact about how heavy objects behave. On the other hand, it is not a mere fancy, for we cannot get rid of the idea, and most of the things we say and think about men would be reduced to nonsense if we did. And it is not simply a statement about how we should like men to behave, for our own convenience. For the behavior we call bad or unfair is not exactly the same as the behavior we find inconvenient, and may even be the opposite. Consequently, this rule of right and wrong, or law of human nature, or whatever you call it, must, somehow or other, be a real thing. A thing that is really there, not made up by ourselves. And yet, it is not a fact in the ordinary sense, in the same way as our actual behavior is a fact. It begins to look as if we shall have to admit that there is more than one kind of reality, that in this particular case, there is something above and beyond the ordinary facts of men's behavior, and yet quite definitely real. A real law, which none of us made, but which we find pressing on us. Alright, just one more. Mere Christianity by C.S. Lewis We have cause to be uneasy. I ended my last broadcast with the idea that in the moral law, somebody or something from beyond the material universe was actually getting at us. And I expect, when I reached that point, some of you felt a certain annoyance. You may even have thought that I had played a trick on you, that I had been smuggling Jesus in, carefully wrapping up to look like philosophy, what turns out to be one more religious jaw. You may have felt you were ready to listen to me as long as you thought I had anything new to say. But if it turns out to be only religion, well, the world has tried that, and you cannot put the clock back. If anyone is feeling that way, I should like to say three things to him. First, as to putting the clock back. Would you think I was joking if I said that you can put a clock back, and that if the clock is wrong, it is often a very sensible thing to do? Notice, Jonathan Haidt talking to Joe Rogan wants to call himself a 20th century man, not a 21st century man, because according to Jonathan Haidt, we reached an achievement in the 20th century that we have lost in the 21st. I thought that was very interesting, given our progressivisms, and I thought it was very interesting. So Joe, again, here's Joe. Joe's supposed to be the guy with the tats, the guy who's the radical, and the guy who really doesn't want to have his kids do sleepovers and doesn't want to let him walk home alone, the guy who was the latchkey kid. And so here's Jonathan Haidt being, in a sense, the conservative and the radical at the same time. Funny how these things go back and forth. But I would rather get away from that whole idea of clocks. We all want progress, but progress means getting nearer to the place where you want to be. And if you have taken a wrong turning, then to go forward does not get you any nearer. If you are on the wrong road, progress means doing an about turn and walking back to the right road. And in that case, the man who turns back soonest is the most progressive man. We have all seen this when doing arithmetic. When I have started a sum the wrong way, the sooner I admit this and go back and start over again, the faster I shall get on. There is nothing progressive about... It's funny how often math illustrations come into C.S. Lewis's stories, because C.S. Lewis was famously terrible at math. He couldn't, C.S. Lewis didn't drive, he couldn't manage anything. He was the, in some ways, the quintessential useless professor. Being pigheaded and refusing to admit a mistake. And I think if you look at the present state of the world, it is pretty plain that humanity has been making some big mistake. We are on the wrong road. And if that is so, we must go back. Going back is the quickest way on. Then, secondly, this has not yet turned exactly into a religious jaw. We have not yet got as far as the God of any actual religion, still less the God of that particular religion called Christianity. We have only got as far as a somebody or something behind the moral law. Something that's outside the box we see from the Nine Darks. We are not taking anything from the Bible or the church. We are trying to see what we can find out about this somebody on our own steam. That, in a sense, is natural religion. And that's what I'm saying Jordan Peterson's project is. And I want to make it quite clear that what we find out on our own steam is something that gives us a shock. We have two bits of evidence about the somebody. One is the universe he has made. If we use that as our only clue, then I think we should have to conclude that he was a great artist, for the universe is a very beautiful place, but also that he is quite merciless and no friend to man, for the universe is a very dangerous and terrifying place. The other bit of evidence is that moral law which he has put into our minds. And this is a better bit of evidence than the other bit of evidence. And I think we should conclude that moral law is a better bit of evidence than the other because it is inside information. Now again, the moral law is something that we find ourselves not escaping from. That we might, again, as Lewis rightly says, we find many, many excuses for which why we broke it. But even when we appeal to our enemies, again, watch the Democrats and Republicans bicker back and forth, quarrel back and forth the wall. We need the wall, we don't need the wall, the wall is bigotry, you promised Mexico would pay for the wall, on and on and on and on, watch them bicker. Watch what they don't disagree with is that somehow standards such as fairness and right and wrong should govern. Now they might disagree about the interpretation of current events, but they don't disagree on the platform. And the question is, where does that platform come from? Well, we've developed that platform throughout history. Well, it's a funny kind of platform and it's different from all the other natural laws. You'll find out more about God from the moral law than from the universe in general, just as you find out more about a man by listening to his conversation than by looking at a house he has built. Now, from this second bit of evidence, we conclude that the being behind the universe is intensely interested in right conduct, in fair play, unselfishness, courage, good faith, honesty and truthfulness. All things which at regular points in our lives, in fact, do not help us but hinder us. And again, to get back to the movie Gladiator, why do we esteem Maximus so well? Because at the cost, at the risk of his self, he puts others ahead of him. He puts his troops ahead of him. He puts his emperor ahead of him. He puts the values that he sees above the emperor that he esteems Marcus Aurelius because he sees Aurelius as manifesting those values that are not, that even though Aurelius himself will betray them sometimes, he will follow Marcus Aurelius and not Commodus because, as Jordan Peterson just said, because Aurelius aligns with those values. Well, where are those values? We can only see them in the box within the nine dots, but they must come from outside the box because every example that we see in the box is an imperfect copy of what we imagine we see outside the box. In that sense, we should agree with the account given by Christianity and some other religions that God is good. But do not let us go too fast here. The moral law does not give us any grounds for thinking that God is good in the sense of being indulgent or soft or sympathetic. There is nothing indulgent about the moral law. It is as hard as nails. It tells you to... And this is part of why I find it so often so ironic when people laud justice. Again, a generation ago in Christianity, justice was what by virtue of the sacrifice of Christ we found mercy from. Now, you can only be... You can only imagine you can wield justice if you believe justice itself won't come back on you. Again, that's outside the nine dot box. Well, can justice come back on you? What would that be? What would the language game around that involve? Do the straight thing and it does not seem to care how painful or dangerous or difficult it is to do. Look, he's going up a hill. He's got a boulder, not a cross. If God is like the moral law, then he is not soft. It is no use at this stage saying that what you mean by a good God is a God who can forgive. You're going too quickly. Only a person can forgive. And we have not yet got as far as a personal God, only as far as a power behind the moral law and more like a mind than it is like anything else. Now, this gets into the irony of I've been planning on doing a video about materialism, pantheism, because here's the irony about everyone likes to talk about karma. Does that sound attractive to you? Karma sounds wonderful. Conservation of moral energy in the universe, as I heard someone describe it. Well, and then when the Dutch football coach says, well, he believed in karma and therefore children that were born with disabilities were paying for the sins of previous lifetimes. It's a perfectly reasonable statement to make if you believe in that worldview. Something which a traditional Hindu wouldn't think twice about. And then Dutch society was horrified. Why? Well, because the Dutch have had a lot more built into them than mere karma. And their unconscious assumptions about who or what must guide the universe. Here's the problem that happens with pantheism. Pantheism, because it's impersonal, is wielded by the personal. The personal always colonizes the impersonal. Okay, so who's running the person? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Now, my third point. When I chose to get to my real subject in this roundabout way, I was not trying to play any kind of trick on you. I had a different reason. My reason was that Christianity simply does not make sense until you have faced the sort of facts I have been describing. Christianity tells people to repent and promises them forgiveness. It therefore has nothing as far as i know to say to people who do not know they have done anything to repent of and who do not feel that they need any forgiveness it is after you have realized that there is a real moral law and the power behind the law and that you have broken that law and put yourself wrong with that power it is after all this and not a moment sooner that christianity begins to talk and i think this is part of the reason that jordan peterson is bread-pilling people because if you look at these stages even though he's not using these words that there's a real moral law that there's a real right and wrong that there's real value in the universe and this real value can be known and that at least there's god number one there's a functional thing behind there's a functional thing outside the box so maybe it's deeply within the box maybe it's maybe it's been generated throughout history in terms of evolution in the a priori structures that have developed in us since the my lobster keeps falling since the lobsters and needs you need some air uh... gravity it that that you have all of these things and and then he tells you jordan peterson says there's right and wrong here and you are often not right this isn't jordan peterson just give me a pat on the back and saying your you're a wonderful human being and everything you've done is great here's your participation trophy pain style wouldn't tolerate that for a minute neither does joe rogan it joe rogan understands there's peril in the world he's tasted it so so what about this world when you know you are sick you will listen to the doctor when you have realized that our position is nearly desperate you will begin to understand what the christians are talking about they offer an explanation of how we got into our present state of both hating goodness and loving it they offer an explanation of how god can be this impersonal mind at the back of the moral law and yet also a person they tell you how the demands of this law which you and i cannot meet have been met on our behalf how god himself becomes a man to save man from the disapproval of god it is an old story and if you want to go into it you will no doubt consult people who have more authority to talk about it than i have all i am doing is to ask people to face the facts to understand the questions which christianity claims to answer and they are very terrifying facts i wish it was possible to say something more agreeable but i must say what i think true of course i quite agree that the christian religion is in the long run a thing of unspeakable comfort but it does not begin in comfort it begins in the dismay i have been describing and it is no use at all trying to go on to that comfort without first going through that dismay in religion as in war and everything else comfort is the one thing you cannot get by looking for it if you look for truth you may find comfort in the end if you look for comfort you will not get either comfort or truth only soft soap and wishful thinking to begin with and in the end despair most of us have got over the pre-war wishful thinking about international politics it is time we did the same about religion so that's the last one we have an innate experience of the moral law now when i first time often before i make one of these videos i'll listen to one of peterson's videos three or four times because i realize i don't get it all right away and i don't understand what he's saying and it's too complicated and i and i need time to listen to it and think about it and and work it through and mostly slow down it was so interesting to me the first time i heard this how he he's going through conscience and and part of me what was initially kind of rolled my eyes that all conscience conscience conscience is so variable conscience is so fallible conscience is so formed by by how we've been raised and what we've been brought up now it's it's helpful to remember that the word conscience con is the is the greek prefix with and science cnca is is is knowledge and so conscience being privy to knowledge being knowing it's it's it's insider information and and so when i listen to what jordan peterson had to say about conscience i thought wow this is this is quite cs lewis like if you read miracles and you read lewis on reason yeah so who do you this is like uh... a compressed version of the thesis who do you think suffers more in this story is it is it common is or maximums because here you have the question comments are maximus because again in the in the materialistic box it's obvious who suffers you win the lottery you don't suffer your poor you do suffer so grab all you can get what you can and in fact i saw maybe i should i should pull it up i won't play it this this is my blog leading church dot com or paul vanderklaai dot me uh... i'd i'd just it's a link dump for me in many ways i just throw stuff here that i find interesting not necessarily that i agree with but this this very interesting video facing a moral crisis of epic proportions we're going to talk about it in this video even though it's raining like crazy out here so you'll have to excuse me i'm trying not to get all my camera gear wet it's really coming down and my umbrella is tiny anyway uh... this is a serious topic that i need to talk about and it's something that's really really bothered me about china ever since i got here and i'm going to tell you about the first time that i actually came across this whole idea of there being a huge problem with just the moral landscape in china that was within the first year i'm not going to talk about like the the sort of terrible way animals are treated anything like that because that's for another time just talking about like society in the way people treat each other and the first time it really dawned on me was i was uh... walking to work the first year i was here and i noticed a pickpocket reaching into the pocket of a young lady in front of me with some medical tweezers to pull out her cell phone he was already halfway done so i started to shout in chinese you know thief thief and um... the guy was taken aback it was as if he wasn't expecting anyone to say anything and so he backed off and hit his tweezers and then just disappeared uh... the young lady was very appreciative she said thank you know she was very very appreciative she was like thank you thank you thank you uh... in chinese the thing is when i went to go and tell my co-workers you know i got to work and i was like hey i just stopped a pickpocket from stealing a phone from a from a young girl outside they were all horrified they were like what are you doing don't do that don't ever do that again i was like what on earth is wrong with you people why why should i not help someone who needs help like that and they were like no no those guys those those thieves they're they're they're kind of working gangs and uh... they've got other people watching them and if you try to stop one of them from stealing the other guys will beat you up or stab you or you know all sorts of nonsense like that you know the only reason this kind of stuff is allowed to happen is because no one ever does stand up to them of course you know it's been very difficult to try and figure out why this sort of uh... attitude has developed but it translates into every walk of life here if somebody gets hurt nobody wants to help them and the reason they don't want to help them is because they're worried that they're going to be embroiled in a scam or some kind of a a long-term thing where they they have to pay for the person's medical fees and there are a lot of people who do did you see that she first kind of almost throws the child in front of the in front of the minivan and then she herself falls it's like again well why why are we so astounded by this why why do we react to this well this has been built into us well what's it been well it's our culture yeah but is it also a moral law that we say transcends that we say is higher up on the hierarchy above this this layer this very realistic layer of a degree of cultural relativism where we says well various cultures work things in different ways and of course they do but above this there is in fact a higher moral law and that moral law should be expressed in our actions and behaviors so let me see let me get back to boom boom boom boom Hanestyle okay so what happens more in this story is it common or maxims well it's the same question that that that social it's imposed in the Guglielmo to some degree it's like do you do you want to lose your what's worse to put your life at risk let's say or to put everything you love at risk or to lose your conscience and and this then is the question for China what's worse to well I I'll get heard if I say something well you're a Westerner you've got a conscience formed in you that's that's pretty important and so is it since conclusion was that there's no suffering greater than that which accompanies loss of conscience that's hell and how well there's something very very profound about that because one of the things I've just been writing about this interestingly enough it was the prophet Elijah who's who first seems to have it's in the story of the prophet of the prophet Elijah as far as I can tell where there's the first intimation that God might speak to human beings not as the external force of natural power storms fire wind winter earthquakes all the all the overwhelming natural forces that human beings were subject to now remember this is Peterson is whether he calls it it's or not he's doing natural theology he's trying to build this from the ground up and so you're going to have a lot of these evolutionary arguments that's going to be part of the package here for Peterson and whether you like it or not that's this is his project or maybe even not as internal forces that would more characterize some of the other polytheistic gods like lust or rage or or terror but as the voice of conscience itself which which is which is described in in one kings which is this contains the story of Elijah as the still small voice that's the first time that that phrase emerges and so it's the idea that there's something that as a psychological factor conscience itself that calls to you that that has a dialogue with you conscience doesn't tell you what to do it hints at what you shouldn't do right and it it whispers to you from outside the nine dot box that you see it isn't a deterministic force it's not like when your conscience grips you you're forced to act in a manner that's in accordance with your conscience because you often violate it you can choose to violate it and so there's this idea that god transforms himself or becomes known as the voice of conscience and that that's the link between human beings and divinity itself i actually think this is a highly credible hypothesis and let's say that while you need a powerful sustaining meaning to keep you from the bitterness of pain and that's to be found in the relationship with something of divine significance well maybe that's mediated through your conscience and this relationship is absent within cain so he has severed his relationship with consciousness and that's why he's not with consciousness but with conscience conscience oh yeah yeah right with conscience yeah consciousness is a different word conscience with ciencia well that's right because conscience is imagine that conscience is the manifestation of the instinct for good and evil yeah it's what now so so we can take the argument apart a little bit a lot of what makes people bitter is that they feel that there is wrong in the world it might be a large scale society is unfair the natural world is a catastrophe human beings are intrinsically malevolent the the structure of being itself is wrong in some moral sense now if you go back to the to the man talking about china it's very interesting because what he will go on to say is communist did this communism did this and and in fact china is post-communist which means they they not only got to accept this the world is within the nine dots but what's the ramifications of that well i another video i wanted to do was uh peter rollins and zizek commenting on peterson that a number of people sent to me and i started working on that but i haven't done it yet because this video came up in this video grabbed me a little bit more than that video but my skepticism about communism and and about a lot of these a lot of these strategies is that people are not that good people people are just not that good well i am going to sacrifice my welfare for others because because of what because of pride because of the esteem of your peers well that'll take you a little while but it'll also turn you into a hypocrite and you're only going to do the good things for the purpose of being seen by others jesus addresses this in the sermon on the mount directly don't do your goodness thing so that others will see you and reward you then you you've got your reward that your reward is the approval of others congratulations there it is do your goodness in secret so that your heavenly father who sees what is done in secret will reward you do not practice your righteousness before others jesus addresses this in the first century let's get back to peterson and conscience okay but that's interesting because they wouldn't be bothered by that if they didn't have some sense of morality itself of morality itself if they didn't have sense so conscience is this is this sense of this is speaking to you of from another place of another world from another reality this is coming to you from outside the nine dot box and you're hearing it in conscience innate experience of moral law we call conscience it's no suffering greater than to violate your conscience now what that means is hell is a violation of a command whispered to us from a world we've never known i'm going to say that again hell is a violation of a command whispered to us from a world we've never known now let's get back to gladiator if you take a look at the movie what is the opening scene in the movie i mean pretty early on they have this really dramatic scene of the romans fighting the barbarians and and and here we get to see maximus being the hero being selfless being be loved devoted to his emperor being loved by his men being excellent in battle willing to sacrifice everything while while comodus will hide in his tent this is saul and david i mean it's archetypal in that it's a it's a pattern that we recognize but the opening scene of the movie is well there's this hand going through a wheat field this is the garden of eden this is the primordial shalom this is paradise lost we see maximus and we think duty remember ecclesiastes ecclesiastes says i've looked at everything under the sun everything within the secular box the best we can do is hear god's command and obey his laws that's the best you can do okay but even that you need something from outside the box fulfill duty responsibility and you will experience meaning peterson is right but there is another side to this a deeper longing for beauty for wellness for shalom for a home we've never seen for a place we've never heard of because just like the two boxes in the laws of nature we get these laws of physics because we see the repetition and the little girl goes out into the rain and waits for her mother because she trusts in her mother because she's known her mother but we have these intimations of another land that we've never seen where people actually do the right thing always because that's not this world where where outside of the age of decay where things don't break down where where our our beloved grandparents who have achieved something amazing and become heroes where they don't grow old and decrepit and wither away and be hobbled by dementia and and all of the things that robs us of our of our health and our youth we we imagine and we long for a place outside of the age of decay where truth will be will be common in the old testament has beautiful passages about this but we've never seen this world just like we've never seen a perfect human being with our eyes under the sun now the book of hebrews talks about this now faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance of what we do not see this is this is far from peter begosian's idea that that that we have faith for made-up stuff and again you can you you can look at you can look at philosophy and and actually paul maxwell talks about some of this on a on a video is it maxwell or no no it's not it's it's vervecky on i think it's class four talks about this how how what happens with contas we get we get this faith and reason actually way before kind we get this faith and reason duality and and with and with equinus so this is where you get your nature grace duality duality that gets built into some roman catholic medieval theology faith is confident in what we hope for an assurance of what we do not see this is what the ancients were commended for by faith we understand that the universe was formed at god's command so that what is seen was not made out of what is visible that that the really important things that conscience whispers to us is not the stuff around us by faith abel brought god a better offering than cain did by faith he was commended as righteous when god spoke well of his offerings and by faith abel still speaks even though he is dead he still speaks through the story jordan one jordan peterson's favorite story jordan peterson is popularizing this this 11 line story of cain and abel by faith abraham when called to go to a place he would later receive as his inherences obeyed and went even though he did not know where he was going by faith he made his home in the promised land like a stranger and a sovereign country he lived in tents added as did isaac and jacob who were who were heirs with him of the same promise for he was looking forward to the city with its foundations whose architect and builder is god and by faith even sarah who was past child bearing age was unable to bear children because she considered him faithful she went out in the rain considered him faithful who had made the promise and so from this one man and he as good as dead came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and countless as the sands on the seashore not just biological god can raise up children of abraham through faith they're his children through faith all these people were still living by faith when they died they didn't see it they did not receive the things promised they only saw them and welcomed them from a distance admitting that they were foreigners and strangers on earth they were built for another place and they knew it what do you mean built for another place is it haven't i've been talking about what the gospel really is is the reconciliation of heaven and earth people who say such things show that they are looking for a country of their own if they had been thinking of the country they had left they would have opportunity to return instead they were longing for a better country when abraham got out of his mama's basement he was looking for a country better than canaan instead they longed for a better country a heavenly one now heavenly there is an adjective and this is what gets confusing it's a quality as much as it's a geography because the bible looks for is the unification of new heavens and new earth therefore god is not ashamed to be called their god god is not ashamed of us though we are evil though we are sinful though we none of us attain this moral standard for he has prepared a city for them now i want to pick up and bring someone else into the conversation i've mentioned before peter creeped because the moral law gives us a sense that there's whispers from another world but like i'm arguing with what the what the what the young man from hein style is looking for and being drawn to is not just because morality often insights within us the a beauty of pride that i can be moral and this is what drives the sjw movement that i am more moral than you that i am more woke than you that i am more that that i have i have gotten in touch with my privilege more than you and and how do i understand this because i've watched these games played within conservative religious communities my whole life and underneath it is that we need a righteousness which is alien to ourselves something that comes from outside the box something that is gifted to us not something we achieve and and so what drives us is not just pride about morality of being more upright than you because that just drives us into into self-righteousness which is exactly what hein style will will you know will mock because we rightly mock the self-righteousness we see in others because we know we are duplicitous we're putting on shows and other people and so hein style is gonna tear it down well what can't be torn down beauty that's why gladiator grabs them because beauty is more foundational well so so cs lewis starts mere christianity and he starts talking about starts talking about the moral law but he's not talking about the moral law as if that is going to drive us somewhere we need to go because if the moral law is your driver it will make you self-righteous because if you if you don't achieve the moral law the weight of the law will crush you and if you do achieve the moral law you will look down on others what you need is a beauty that will allow you to to what to love to surrender my well-being at your expense to to sacrifice myself for the other this is what we see in maximus and this is what drives that young man well let's bring in peter kreef because peter kreef does an excellent guide to cs lewis and and there are two things you can find a lot of his stuff online and the peter kreef.com audio slash 23 underscore desire or peter kreef.com slash topics desire htm and where he's going to lay out the argument from desire let's pull up all right here we go but it's the third category of arguments arguments from the will and good that i think are the most fascinating and there's two main ones one is about the will's connection with morality and the other is about the will's connection with happiness the moral argument is that there is this thing called moral experience or obligation or conscience that's data if there is no god and and again this is what cs lewis has just been running through at the beginning of mere christianity how do you explain that data and and this is i think what what peterson is intimating when he's talking about conscience here in this video that are the old fashion version which starts with proving the existence of a real objective moral law as cs lewis starts near christianity and then saying there must be a lawgiver behind the law the modern version which is more effective with people that don't believe in an objective morality is newman's argument from conscience nobody admires somebody who violates their own conscience who's deliberately dishonest and hypocritical why why does conscience have absolute authority unless it's the prophet of an absolute god and this is why we have no respect for comodus those are the two main forms i think of the moral argument the argument from desire is the other kind of argument from the will and its desire for goodness namely a psychological argument and the end here is not so much morality as happiness those two things by the way have been pretty clearly and sharply distinguished in modern thought and not in ancient thought and i'm not too sure that this is a useful distinction rather like beckhart's distinction between spirit and matter it's a valid distinction but the temptation is almost unovercomable to commit the fallacy of misplaced concreteness to take these two abstractions and to think that they are two separate things i think can't play it into that and so did utilitarianism utilitarianism talks only about happiness and ignores duty cant talks only about duty and ignores happiness i think both are unhealthy now now what creeped is trying is advocating for is more of a pre-modern approach a pre-modern meaning to happiness that is deeper than just defining happiness um let's let's use the word felicity which i think in english is is a bit deeper than happiness happiness is oh i feel happy jordan peterson's stock you know cocaine will make you happy it'll you know flood your flood your brain with these chemicals and you feel enormously happy and you'll never again feel quite that happy it is more than just an experience it is it is pre-modern so it is it is more i would say felicity and often if we use these these other words we get resonances from past eras more than than we have access to commonly today utilitarianism is much more unhealthy than can't the argument from desire is about our search for happiness it's the one thing that everybody agrees on is that they want to be happy uh even a suicide wants to be happy if he was happy wouldn't commit suicide now so the best version of the argument from desire i've ever seen is c.s lewis's if lewis goes down in history as a contributor to philosophical apologetics this will be his main claim to fame there are passages in other writers notably augustin that may be profounder and more moving founder and more moving but there is nobody who has specialized in this argument more has said more about it and has used it more effectively than i know of than lewis the argument is very simple it has two premises and one conclusion the major premise the universal principle is every single human desire corresponds to some objective reality that can satisfy the desire if there is hunger there is food if there is thirst there is drink if there is loneliness there is society if there is sexual desire there is sex if there is curiosity there is knowledge if there is the love of beauty there is beauty to specify a little more exactly however not all not all human desires correspond to real objects only innate and natural human desires there is a desire on the part of many little boys to fly through the sky like superman there is no superman here is a desire that doesn't know jonathan pageot might do a video on the existence of superman and yeah it's a great video onto a real object but it's not an innate desire it's conditioned from comic books and to show that it's not innate all you have to do is ask if it's universal anything that's innate to human nature is found wherever human nature is found in any time place and culture everyone admits that the desire for happiness is innate and everyone knows that the desire for superman is not and very seldom is there a borderline case where you're not sure whether a certain desire is innate and therefore universal or only conditioned and therefore not universal now via jordan peterson we might argue that there's an archetype of superman that is more innate and in fact the reason little boys find superman so attractive are because of some of these patterns that are out there that so i don't love creaf's illustration here but understand this point so we're talking now only about innate and therefore universal desires desires that come from human nature itself every innate desire corresponds to some real object we always assume that we would be exceedingly surprised to find any counter example we never have found any counter example i suppose we could imagine it it's not just unimaginably self-contradictory like doing to making five but suppose you took a rocket ship and you found a race of beings on some other planet that had no stomachs and couldn't digest any food but they kept getting hungry that would make no sense or suppose you found the ends on some other planet but there were only male ants and no entwives but there never were any entwives they didn't lose them they didn't die they don't exist so you that's from talking slower the rings the ants have here a planet full of romeo and longing for juliet ends which never existed and never will exist you can't even write a decent science fiction story about that doesn't make sense all right so every innate desire corresponds to some real object premise two among our innate desires there's one that stands out from all the others and is radically different from every other not by degree but in kind louis calls it zane zucht in his autobiography surprised by joy he uses the word joy for this desire that's tricky technical language joy usually means the satisfaction of a desire in fact a an unusually deep desire he uses the term in a technical sense to mean the desire itself which is a little misleading and often misunderstood the german word for it is a zane zucht deep mysterious longing there are two characteristics of zane zucht that distinguish it from all other desires by the way all this analysis is strictly non-religious that is totally independent of any religious assumptions any divine revelation or any religious faith whatsoever for its natural theology for apologetics to work you have to start where the unbeliever starts so all this is checkable by your own ordinary human experience characteristic number one this desire has never been satisfied you want a kind of happiness that's deeper than you ever had truer than you ever had more beautiful than you ever had more ecstatic than you ever had a happiness that will never get boring nobody can imagine that unless you're a mystic i don't even think you can imagine heaven that way take a piece of paper put a vertical line down the middle and right on the left hand side all the things that you want to exist in heaven and the right hand side all the things that you don't want to exist in heaven and now wipe out the right hand side and think about the stuff on the left hand side and imagine that you're in this heaven of yours forever how long would it take you to get bored it's very strange that we don't know what it is that we want well then why do we think there is anything that we want because we want it why do we think we want it because we're unhappy say that's only because we're we're poor or stupid or oppressed no it's precisely when we're rich and smart and free that we feel this desire the most it's precisely those peak experiences those highest moments in your life that you feel most clearly and poignantly the desire for something more this lovers quarrel with the world this happens not among the poor but among the rich not among the uneducated but among the educated not among the insensitive but among the sensitive when you see the most remarkable natural beauty or find the most complete human love or reconciliation it's then when it looks most like a pointing finger a prophet an icon from heaven a suggestion that there's something more the perfume that you thought was its own end when you get close to it seems like the perfume from a beautiful woman who's unattainable a goddess maybe it's much clearer if you put it negatively nothing in this world is totally satisfactory we are discontent the more self-aware we are and this is why to go back to the beginning of this video this is the this is the affluent person's disorder pigs are content insofar as we transcend pigs we are discontent so the greatest of us who appreciate the great things in this world the most are the most discontent why if we had it all why are we discontent well we don't know this is the book of eclesiastes we want something that we can't define and we can't attain and we can't even imagine attaining in this life that's very strange second characteristic when we feel this deep longing it is painful in fact in some sense more painful than anything else yet it is pleasurable and and you have this when you see when you get into lord of the rings and the the fellowship of the rings encounters galadriel galadriel's beauty and the beauty of laflorian smites them and it's it's terrifying and it's enthralling and it's and it's all of that together and we we often think of these little categories well how can how can beauty both be terrifying and addictive this is this is what the power of beauty in fact we often prefer the pleasure of this pain to any other pleasure this hunger is better than any other satisfaction you see this pretty clearly in the romantic poets especially wordsworth he's maybe fooling himself about it but he does express very poignantly this longing for his lost youth of soul oh to feel as i did then the great longings appeared in me like beautiful waves on a stormy sea and now everything is calm and dull so this longing itself like a prophet seems to have come from a higher realm and is more desirable than any other satisfaction so if you don't have it for a long time you want it and then you desire the desire the conclusion if you put these two premises together is that that which corresponds to this desire that which i has not seen here has not heard nor has it entered into the heart of man yet is desired by the heart of man must exist and that's a negative definition of god that which transcends anything imaginable or conceivable in the realm of goodness that which could satisfy the demands and desires for joy deep happiness without boredom without imperfection forever augustin says nothing can satisfy one who would not be satisfied by god well that's hell hell is one who cannot be satisfied by god it simply doesn't have the taste for it so louis i said uh has the best texts on this let me give you five if you want to do some more reading the clearest thing is the preface to pilgrim's regress which is his earliest full-length published book where he especially explains those two features more clearly than i have the second is his autobiography surprised by joy a great book in itself a sort of a 20th century confessions of saint augustin although that's putting it into too high and palmy company i said there were five i've got six the third one is the heaven chapter in the problem of pain which is the best six pages about heaven that i have ever heard from anybody who hasn't had a mystical experience the best philosopher or theologian i know in the world to talk about heaven with the possible exception of some passages in augustin but i plead with you to read at least three or four times that chapter on heaven the fourth is the sermon the weight of glory which is i guarantee uh two things one the first time you read it you will be intrigued and puzzled and number two even the first time you read it the ending of it will move you deeply and it will be unforgettable five in mere christianity the chapter on hope and finally louis's best book i think profoundest and best written his novel till we have faces the whole story but explicitly about a quarter of the way through just before psyche's death or marriage or sacrifice whichever it is i deliberately left myself obscure so i don't spoil the plot if you've never read it before how good is this argument what are its pluses and what are its minuses let me give you three pluses and two minuses then i'll stop it there and again if you want to listen to it this this file is available online peter creeped has a number of files like it where he where he goes through a number of things now what's interesting and i didn't get all the way to the end of this because i had my conversation with john the dunk which i posted and john the talks that media was said oh i don't know i was stepping on your time let's don't worry john it's all gonna work out jordan peterson on sacrifice so so here basically you've got this sense such this desire this this this both beauty driven painful longing for another world and and i think for for hein style when they when they look at gladiator that's exactly what they see it's this it's this longing for another world and this is so beautiful so engaging we will will we take suffering yes will we take death yes is it is it beautiful yes but it's it's so beyond it's it's beauty and goodness and truth and it's all coming together and we say what what is what is my life worth in comparison to this it's the pearl of great price it's the it's the sumum bonum the the greatest good it's not just the greater good it's the greatest good it's the thing that we will although we love life we're healthy we have many gifts so we have much to live for we say this i will sacrifice my life for and and right there we begin to see and this is yeah this is exactly where peterson is going this is why i say this is the most potent this is the most potent natural theology of our generation perhaps lewis was of of his generation but it's it's 2019 so here here these two are gonna gonna gonna rev up and we'll play it to the end i understand that good good see the problem with the identity politics types as far as i'm concerned is that their proclivity is always to sacrifice someone else my well-being my moral status at your expense so yeah we will improve the world and you're gonna pay for it the oppressor and it's always externalized the oppressor but in the individuation process you're the oppressor you are the oppressor and it's much c why do i always end my sermons misery deliverance gratitude why does the heideberg catechism say well the first question to answer what is your only comfort in life and in death that i am not my own but belong body and soul life and in death to my faithful savor jesus christ who has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has rescued me from the tyranny of the devil he watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head without the will of my father in heaven this is this is the first question answer like wow that i i am owned i belong i am beloved i am what is the second question answer what do you need to know i need to know how great my sin and misery are well what do you mean by that i need to know that there's a moral law and i have fallen short of it well what about the moral is that the 10 commandments is that the 613 commandments you can derive from the Torah in the old testament well go back to as peterson does in this the summary of the law that jesus gives in Matthew 22 love the lord your god with all your hearts whole mind and strike love your neighbor as yourself there it is it's right there how can you fulfill this moral law no if you attain it in your own mind you will be self-righteous and you will look down on others that's the sjw movement if you fail it it will crush you that's karma how can i be delivered from this well what if someone was crushed by this but he was innocent and this is also the problem this is something i really came to understand when i was writing the forward for the new version of solzhenitsyn's gulag archipelago because of what's the problem here well something has to be sacrificed to put the world right well who what who or what is going to be sacrificed but you better make the proper sacrifices or you won't establish the right relationship with the transcendent well let's identify the evil as something external to us and sacrifice that but what does that mean well what it meant in the russian revolution was that everyone died but more more specifically everyone was killed they were made into a burnt offering to god and it was inappropriate it's like well if you're going to sacrifice because you have to you sacrifice yourself right that's the cross that's the that's the that's the crucifixion metaphor and what you sacrifice is you allow those parts of you that are unworthy to die you encourage them to die even and but we don't want to be foolish and say that that's merely a matter of pursuing your bliss let's say in in the in the joseph campbell manner or in the maybe in the satirical the satirical i mean that's being a bit hard on campbell but it was an unfortunate phrase yeah because it it and he knew better because he knew about the journey into the abyss yeah the sacrifice is even if it's partial it's still a death i think also that this is why the death and rebirth theme resonates so immediately in popular culture and in literature for example gandalf who fell into the underworld he fought the bell rock and then emerged as gandalf the white right and everyone's everyone's soul well and that's like that's a that's a re-representation of the transfiguration of moses in christ gandalf the white so and it's not like tolkien didn't know these things yeah he knew these things perfectly well that's right and such a relief i remember when i was a kid reading the lord of the rings for the first time i was so appalled when gandalf disappeared and so relieved when he made when he was like oh no gandalf's gone like it's the death of god right what what are we going to do now but the great wizard has has disappeared yeah yeah and then you can find in peter creep stuff quite a bit of stuff on tolkien it is a terrible trial and you see that with gandalf's experiences in the underworld and and he comes out white well it's funny he comes out white white's interesting because white is the sun and white is purity but white is also age you know and and to undergo those experiences is also to risk while the physiological the psychophysiological stress that that whitens your beard and that that grays your hair i'm going to tweet out now jordan beaterson says white is purity yeah you're toast man no the thing is you also see this in more shallow popular culture have you ever heard of dragon ball z no it's it's kind of it was a cartoon it's an anime and uh these creatures they're called saiyans and whenever they're they're warriors and whenever they're in a fight with some eternal enemy and the moment they're about to die they can their spirit and their body can't take anymore they become super saiyans which is they resurrect and they transcend and their hair stands up and it turns turns turns yellow and they get electricity all around so whenever they are about to die that's when they transcend so they have been completely destroyed and that's when their transcendence occurs and in the beginning they can't control it and it's interesting that this is again this is shot through our culture we don't leave this alone nobody we play with it and we we give it to children and we say well here it is and then as adults we grow up and we say oh but that's just stories for children oh but what what do our hearts long for and that's the theme that keeps the entire saga together is this continual transcendence of the of the figures one of the things that i developed in maps of meaning is that there's ways of construing yourself like you construe yourself as who you are that's a stable state let's say who you are right now that's me and then that all falls apart and then you construe yourself as the chaos that that is ensues when everything falls apart and that's a state of hopelessness and nihilism and then maybe you recover from that and you establish a new sense of order yeah you say well i passed through the underworld and now i'm in a better place and this is me this better place but then it's subject to fragmentation as well and so what you learn is that you're not the order no matter how compelling and secure and promising that order is and you're not the chaos that ensues when that order is fragmented and you're not even the re-establishment of new order you're the process by which that transformation continually occurs i would say you're the locus for the process and in fact this gets back to my my assertion that that we are not we are stories that's what we are and that's where where consciousness and matter intersect and that's the process of death and rebirth and that's what you identify with is that ever renewing process of death and rebirth and that's the identification of the process of death and that's the identification with christ that the christians that the christian narrative is aiming at instilling a man and and this is where i i agree with what he just said but here's the question and this is the question he keep coming into how big will this scale okay so so when i if you go to school and you get a bad grade this is what again jonathan height is talking about in terms of a safety culture a coddling culture that well let's not let the children fail no they must fail because it's this process and where he says you know we don't have this word we don't have this word that that that is some some something to the fact that we'll give pregnant mothers peanut butter so that their children won't have peanut allergies and what actually happens when we go to the gym is that we're we're tearing up in tiny ways our muscles and our bone and so we lift heavy weights in order to be stronger and in fact we we grow stronger with this and so this is death and resurrection it happens in our muscles and it happens in our bones and it happens with our character and so we we need our children to go out and to fail in order that they may become strong and succeed so that is death and resurrection but it keeps scaling and it keeps scaling up and how high will it scale up and of course this is where peterson keeps going with the question of the of the physicality and the individuality and the the physicality of the resurrection what are the limits of this scale and peterson says we don't know and he's right but i would assert that this is what christianity has always taught that when jesus comes he says you know touch my hands touch my feet and in fact again i think if you look at first colossians or the book of colossians that first first corinthians has first corinthians 15 has the earliest resurrection story colossians basically the the resurrected body of jesus is the beginning of creation 2.0 it's beginning of the new heavens and the new earth it's the beginning of the renovation of man and and time isn't just following linearly in this it has begun and so you have these overlapping ages of the now and the not yet and this is this is all standard christian theology but how much will this scale and this is what this is what c.s lewis talks about and you can find it in the the c.s lewis lewis doodles the grand miracle it's in two parts it's in his book miracles but c.s lewis often took a lot of these ideas and and and rehearse them in in different places but i should let peterson finish to the degree that something like that aims yeah see to the degree that something like that aims it's aiming after something and this is where the world outside of the nine dots it's aiming beyond those nine dot the lines go past the nine dots and it's aiming at new heavens and new earth and it's aiming at shalom and it's and this is where gladiator comes in because we can taste in gladiator where all this is aiming at this is also the the rope nichi refers to that man is a rope between beast and overman i know that's not exactly the christian delineation but it's still the i think that's more i think that's probably more associated with the idea that we were talking about earlier i mean these ideas are all linked but i think that's more associated with the idea that of the partnership between man and god mediated by conscience yeah exactly yeah yeah man is that is that intermediary thing because we're moving towards the ideal but we're clearly not that yeah and that is a tightrope place because moving towards the ideal is precarious right because you're not the ideal and you can tumble at any moment yeah and so there is a precariousness to our being psychically psychologically and spiritually as well as physically it's well that's part of of the eternal crucifixion as well as is that that that constant vulnerability of being yeah it's part of the burden of being human yeah but the necessary burden i suppose to me in my more i don't know what would you call them i don't know you have these moments of thinking where they're more metaphysical in my more metaphysical moments i suppose then i do see that god and man are engaged in a partnership to bring about the kingdom of god on earth something like that right there it's genesis it's genesis the image bearing of god it's the it's the garden of eden and it's the goal thy kingdom our father who art in heaven hallowed be thy name axel age divided heaven and earth hallowed be thy name thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven i'm working on mark one this week for my sermon the beginning of mark one and jesus announces the good news of the kingdom what does that mean well well well the reign of heaven has come to earth dallas willard goes into this again and again the reign of heaven has come to earth and we are his co-laborers the apostle paul says now now you have to be careful with this because you can very quickly slide off into christian triumphalism and and actually a big element at least in the churches of this new s this new ascendant morality is a triumphalism that says we are going to establish this utopia and and this is part of the reason why in christian theology the consummation this is consummation is when it's finally completed this this is this is heaven to earthward it's not earth to heaven natural theology has its place but but our finally finally our rescue comes from someone else it comes from above it comes from our hero and it's in the actions of our hero that all of our actions gain their valence and their resonance and and it's to the degree that we are in alignment and to the degree that we reflect that hero and his work is the degree that we're recognized and our work has meaning even though in this age so often it fails that there's something about that story that's exactly right that we should be struggling uphill with our burdens towards the highest possible ideal and if there's something about that that's true now one of my favorite scenes in the lord of the rings movies comes at the end of the twin the two towers where where where where gandalf has gone off to find the rest of the roheram to come to helms deep and rescue them and gandalf says in the fifth day think of monday python life of brian were three and five keep getting mixed up in the fifth day look to the east and and now they've they've lost all those elves have been slaughtered all the soldiers have been slaughtered there's theadin there's aragorn and and what are we going to do it's all lost and and and aragorn says to theadin ride out with me ride out with me we know that there is there's no chance we can win there's way too many orcs there's no chance we can win there's no possible way that this can be redeemed but but let us go out together and and what a story it will be and so then they go out and and it's hopeless and it's it's a little they're cleaving their way between the orcs a little bit and they look up in the sky and where does their help come from gandalf is there with i forget his name you'll put it in the comment section gandalf is there with the rest of the rohiram and they ride down the hill and the sun is behind them and gimli blows the horn and it's it's the second coming it's gandalf the white now comes and and and saves them and and this is the story and and so all that we do in this world you know i know some people say well you know you should stop talking about the little things and and and when i when i do talk about the smallness of my church and the insignificant significance of my ministry and yeah is it a humble brag yeah there's some of that there but but a lot of it is true because all of our work whether you're whether you're bill hybels in a chicago mega church or or you know whatever you are it's it's always a mixed bag and it's always mired by sin and it's always corrupt and it's always too small and it's never enough and that's what life is in this world but it's it's the resonance it's the alignment and it's the faith and trust of of looking for that kingdom and abraham and isaac and jacob and and abel never saw that which they long for and that's why the book of hebrew says it and it's encouraging that the first century christians you don't you don't know you don't have it i understand that the beginning of the book of revelation where where john is castigating and talking to the seven churches of asian minor and and in a sense he says to these churches you will overcome the world and at the end of the first century that's just crazy talk and then it happens and this is the christian life and we yes we die as failures my father you know my father the church that my father poured 36 years of his life into small and tiny and struggling amongst poor people he wrote a little two-wordy biography with with lots of his stories which is chains of grace which you can find on amazon kindle in my opinion it's glorious but it's you know it's too long and you know my sister who passed away was kind of the editor but my father you know he just wanted to get his stories down and right there is glory and so i look around at the people that that no one will ever know and see and their names will never be in the newspaper they're the ones who quietly suffered in in a job or in a marriage or with a disabled child and and they gave their life to something that this world does not esteem and it's gandalf coming down and saying i understand that you're surrounded by orcs but we're here and the day is coming and your salvation comes from above that is the gospel we gotta finish gotta finish that we gotta let jordan peterson finish this thing with the with the guy from hein style or at least it's more true than anything else we can conceive of yeah and so that's the great adventure of life that's what you want to be called to and i think you are called to that by your conscience yeah yeah we we've talked for about 90 minutes now i think that's a very good time to have two and a half hours into this video uh what if this is all just bollocks what if this is some just so story just made up story what if there is no other world what if beauty has no source or destination what if all those what if beauty is just something that our brains uh our brains feeling satisfied that we we see pattern what if all those who sacrifice did so in vain as they so often do under the sun what if it all just ends in the heat death of the universe you might not see it but your brain does says mr plinket and the nihilism creeps in and we say is this all there is can this be all there is so i looked at how does gladiator end these these cynics these mockers at hein style uh no you can't you can't live there you gotta you you got to know it so of course well watch the movie which is running to to the the fallen body of maximus there was a dream that was rome and and and he sees the elysian fields he sees that the the the the the ripe wheat that he was hand running his hand through in the in the montage at the very beginning of the film he sees his slaughtered beautiful wife and boy he's there's a and and and she calls to rome and says this is there was a dream that was rome make it real it's beauty our heart sings sense such it's beauty that smites it's it's it's beauty that's that that terrifies us but we can't get enough of it and we and we must have it there was a dream that was rome so what will you live your life for that's the question not quite two and a half hours leave a comment