https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MWVriIxLZVc

 Last week I tried to take on CS Lewis's Miracles Chapter 2 mostly by playing the audiobook and there were some technical problems with the first one and then there were some copyright problems with the second one and so I've decided I'm gonna take my treatment of CS Lewis's Miracles, his book entitled Miracles, in a different direction. If you want to buy the book, if you want to listen to the book in audiobook form, go right ahead. I'm sure you can find it out there and so I thought I would do more like I do with Peterson with Lewis and and also got introduced to Mr. Rationality Rules, and I'm not quite sure if it's if it's rules of rationality or rationality rules and then someone in the comment section abbreviated him Rat Rules, so I thought that's a cool thing. So we're gonna what we're gonna do here is we're gonna sit down in a sense in my imagination because actually the story is a lot about imagination. Jordan Peterson, Mr. Rat Rules, because I don't know his name and once someone gives me his name, I'll use his name instead of Mr. Rat Rules, and CS Lewis and we'll sit down for a chat about nature and Supernature. Now I want to do a review of CS Lewis's Miracles Chapter 1 because CS Lewis begins the his book with a ghost story and he makes the point that the only person he knows that has actually seen a ghost does not believe in the in the after-death existence of human beings and seeing that ghost did not convince that person in the after-death existence of human beings. Therefore, CS Lewis says, people don't really believe on the basis of seeing and there we're bringing in John Lockett at a video about John Lockett a little while ago because we're not just the the tabula rosa blank slate upon which impressions and sensory experience comes on to us. That's not what we are and and ghost stories are a wonderful example of this. CS Lewis is an amazingly brilliant man. And so actually I noted that in the H3 podcast number 37 towards the end of the podcast Jordan Peterson tells a ghost story and what's really fun is that I'm I actually have corroboration of this ghost story from the other person that was with Jordan Peterson in that hotel room. Basically the ghost story goes like this. Jordan Peterson in the H3 podcast he he talks about Nashville and the other person I talked to that Peterson mentions in the podcast said no, it wasn't Peterson's remembering it wrong. It wasn't really Nashville. It was Memphis and so this person was with him. So Jordan Peterson goes to his hotel room. He moves his bags in so on and so forth sets up fine. Goes out for dinner comes back and all the dresser drawers are open all the drawers in the room are open and he thought oh this is strange and so he thinks you know someone has been through my room, which is the natural thing to believe but my computer's still here. Nothing nothing has been taken. So he you know goes down to the desk and and and says you know someone just want to let you know that someone was in my room and the woman behind the desk claims she has a baseball bat because she knows that the place is haunted and she's terrified of the ghost and I'm not exactly sure what the baseball bat is supposed to do against the ghost but she's got a baseball bat and Jordan Peterson laughs and he goes back up to the hotel room with with this this colleague of his and They they check all the drawers to make sure that they're not real loose so that maybe a passing truck wouldn't have come by and the doors would have opened. So then they set all the doors right and they sit down and they're having a conversation and don't you know it but they turn around and one of the doors has one of the drawers has opened itself again. Now with both of them in the room and so they know nobody else came in the room. How did that drawer open? If a tree falls in the woods will it make a sound? Drawers don't just open. How can we explain this in terms of rationality? Now in my last video I talked about the attempt of science and I'm going to get into this more deeply in this video. The implicit assumption of science is an is a monarchical vision transcending the individual. And what I mean by that is if Jordan Peterson just saw this told this story and if Jordan Peterson was you know had these experiences now you might believe Jordan Peterson because why would he have to lie about this? This is reasonable. This is rational. Why would have to lie about it? But if just Jordan Peterson witnessed this event we might say well there was something going on. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. This is reasonable. This is rational. Why would have to lie about it? But if just Jordan Peterson witnessed this event we might say well there was something going on in Jordan Peterson's mind. Jordan Peterson is given to believe in supernatural things because of Jung or maybe you know who knows what happened in Jordan Peterson's noodle to imagine that the doors open. But we have a second witness and this is critical to science because what science does is strips out the subjective and says it's not just a viewer. It's not just a viewer. It's not just me who testifies to something. It's at least one other person because this this leap of inference says that every person would see that. And so what we have in this ghost story is that any person walking in that room any honest person because we know people lie. Any honest person walking in that room would see the drawer open and if it not just Jordan Peterson and this other person but a third person was in the room you or I we too would see the drawer open and we too would have known that we had closed the drawer. And the drawer was therefore open even though no other person was in the room. You're talking about a hotel room. It's not a house. It's just a hotel room. They were in the hotel room someone else coming in the room they would have known they checked the drawers to make sure the drawers you know weren't loose and just kind of fell out on their own if if some trunk truck went by and you know jiggled the desk so that the drawer would open. No they eliminated all of this and the drawer opened. Okay. What does rationality dictate. Well something or someone somehow the drawer opened. We know this as much as we know that a tree fell in the forest. But that's CS Lewis's point is that CS Lewis's point is that the CS Lewis's point in this is that this this other observer besides Peterson so okay so Peterson's an agnostic he leaves the door open for God. But this other observer is a scientist and he is a he is a very credible scientist and I've had now some a number of correspondence with this man and I find him to be a wonderful human being I find him to be generous I find him to be kind I find him to be credible. He's not a liar he would have no motive to lie for this in fact he would have motivation to discount this story he would have motivation in fact to tell me it never happened he would have motivation to throw Jordan Peterson under the bus if if he wanted to be tribal about his skepticism and in fact denial of the supernatural but he doesn't he is an honest man and so he tells the truth and when I asked him about this story he just said. And this is a great example of CS Lewis's point in Chapter one of the Book of Miracles that we are walking around with our ideas and just seeing something doesn't unseat our worldview our worldview is in a sense more primary than all of the other things that happen and what how our worldview works is it acts as a filter we take in all of this information through our worldview and whereas all the normal things might pass through the filter. The drawers opening in this hotel room in Memphis does not pass through the filter I do not believe in so this person does not believe in ghosts because ghosts don't exist for all of the worldview reasons so therefore the worldview is a filter and and the ghost story does not pass through the filter you leave it outside your frame of reference and you simply say this is one of these things we can't explain. That's CS Lewis's Chapter one in his book miracles now let's get into Chapter two he begins Chapter two with this little quote. Gracious exclaimed Mrs. Snipp and there is a place where people venture to live above ground I've never heard of people living underground replied Tim before I came to giant land came to giant land cried Mrs. Snipp why isn't everywhere giant land. Now what does this little quote from Roland quizzes giant land intend to communicate by Lewis well we're all living in our own little bubbles we're all living within our worldviews we all have our filters and our filters let some things through but our filters don't let other things through so my friend who witnessed. Jordan Peterson's ghost story his worldview doesn't let this through this he leaves outside of it and says there's lots of things we can't explain but this is still my worldview I believe it for all the credible reasons I have I'm not going to give it up just on the basis of one weird night in a in a Memphis not Nashville in a Memphis hotel room sitting with Jordan Peterson I'm not going to give it up. Now Pete now CS Lewis is going to get into definitions I use the word miracles to mean an inference interference with nature by supernatural power unless there exists in addition to nature something else which we may call the supernatural power. I use the word miracles to mean an inference interference with nature by supernatural power unless there exists in addition to nature something else which we may call the supernatural there can be no miracles some people believe that nothing exists except nature I call these people naturalists now there's a footnote here in the footnotes important. This definition is not that which would be given is definition of miracles again this definition of miracles is a miracle is something that interferes with nature by supernatural powers and again super means greater than more powerful than when we talk about super heroes we talk about heroes that are more powerful than. We talk about super heroes we talk about heroes that are more powerful than firefighters or first responders or soldiers or all the normal kinds of heroes we have superheroes like Iron Man and and Captain America and all of these people they have extraordinary powers and that's when we go to a movie and we go to a superhero movie we are fine with Superman flying or Wonder Woman with her bracelets or Iron Man with his suit they are super heroes. Now Lewis says this definition is not that which would be given by many theologians I am I am adopting it not because I think it in an improvement upon theirs but precisely because being crude and popular it enables me to easily to enables me most easily to treat those questions which the common reader probably has in mind when he takes up a book on miracles. Now it's important because this in a sense frames Lewis's book Lewis during Lewis during the second world war that actually did quite a bit of apologetic work and did some preaching to RAF pilots who were fighting the blitz and Lewis actually has an essay on this which is quite good which talks about language and what he found people to believe with and so on and so forth. So Lewis and his book is saying I am writing this book for ordinary people not theologians people who just have an ordinary idea of what miracles nature and super nature are and in this sense if someone says yeah but this really isn't a technical philosophical book I would direct you to philosophers like Alvin Plantinga if you are looking for technical books. This isn't a technical book and this is why I am using this book for this conversation. Besides nature there exists something I call so so what Lewis is saying is that some people believe nothing exists except nature I call these people naturalists. Others think that besides nature there exists something else I call them supernaturalists. Our first question therefore is whether the naturalists or the supernaturalists are right and here comes our first difficulty. Before the naturalist and the supernaturalist can begin to discuss their difference of opinion they must surely have an agreed upon definition of supernaturalism. Both of nature and super nature but unfortunately it is almost impossible to get such a definition and if you've ever had a philosophical conversation with someone who differs with you philosophically you'll find that this is how we are this is how we have these conversations. We talk past each other and so in the hope of maybe not talking past each other we can discuss our differences of opinion. Let's begin with defining terms and so this is a sense what Lewis is doing. Just because the naturalist thinks that nothing but nature exists the word nature means to him merely everything or the whole show. Or whatever there is and if that is what we mean by nature then of course nothing else exists and this is where you get the idea that well all there is is the world as we know it now there are people who are not naturalists. And so we have to be careful about that. And so we have to be careful about that. But we describe the world in a way that says if a tree falls and nobody hears it the tree always makes a sound. That is the assertion of our game and that is we are in a sense defining the world and if someone comes along and says well God could make a tree fall and have it not make any sound we say wrong, wrong, not right. God there is no God. God can't make a tree fall and have it make no sound. And then we get into all the village idiot arguments or the village atheot arguments. Sorry. Where was I? Just because the naturalist thinks that nothing but nature exists the word nature means to him everything or the whole show or whatever there is. And if that is what we mean by nature then of course nothing else exists. The real question between him and the supernaturalist has evaded us. Some philosophers have defined nature as what we perceive with our five senses. But this also is unsatisfactory for we do not perceive our own emotions that way and yet we presume that yet they are presumably natural events. In order to avoid this deadlock and to discuss what the naturalist and the supernaturalist are really differing about we must approach our problem in a more roundabout way. I begin by considering the following sentences. One, are those teeth natural teeth or a set? Two, the dog in his natural state is covered with fleas. Three, I love to get away from tilled land and metal roads and be alone with nature. Four, do be natural. Why are you so affected? Or maybe why are you so triggered? If we use more contemporary language. Part of the issue of dealing with C.S. Lewis is that language has changed a lot in the last 60, 80 years. And Lewis is a medievalist so he is often using words that we Americans aren't necessarily using commonly anymore. Five, it may have been wrong to kiss her but it was very natural. Me too. A common thread of meaning in all these usages can be easily discovered. The natural teeth are those which grow in the mouth. We do not have to design them, make them or fit them. The dog's natural state is the one he will be in if no one takes soap and water and prevents it. Now if you've ever tried to get fleas off with soap and water you know that doesn't work. We have far better treatments for that now. Anyway. The countryside where nature reigns supreme is the one where soil, weather and vegetation produce their results unhelped and unimpeded by man or humanity. Natural behavior is the behavior which people would exist if they were not at pains to alter it. The natural kiss which is being given if moral or prudential considerations do not intervene. What Harvey Weinstein has done and what Bill Cosby have done is natural. Now once you say that you presume human nature but that's a whole other conversation. In all the examples nature means what happens of itself or of its own accord. What you do not need to labor for. What you will get if you take no measure to stop it. The Greek word for nature, physis, is connected to the Greek word to grow. Latin natura with the verb to be born. The natural, well the natural is what happens on its own. Now it's very interesting because we have a lot of faith in nature. And if you've never read Walker Percy, he's an awfully fun author. He's got a book. Do I have it here or do I have it over there on my shelf? Lost in the Cosmos. It is a fun book. Walker Percy, Lost in the Cosmos. Pick it up used if you can find it or take it out of the library. Lots of fun little problems that just show how unreasonable we really are and how strange the universe is. So natural or organic food. Nothing about our food. You know we love if you go into Costco and everything's natural organic and this marketers have used this because we have this idea that the modern industrial world has polluted our bodies. This isn't a bad idea. It's the idea seems to be true. And that evolutionarily we were developed to have a certain diet and we have we have gone astray of this diet. If you listen to Jordan Peterson talk about his own diet, he's eating meats and greens right now. And that seems to be really helping his body. Now the assumption behind this is that we evolved at a certain point. And so this diet, if we stick to this diet that somehow approximates what you know at the point of our at a certain point of our evolution before the agricultural revolution. And again mean read Yuval Harari's Homo sapiens. Interesting discussion on the pros and cons of the agrarian revolution. But so then you have the paleo diet and we should eat a paleo diet. We should eat what foragers would eat and what hunter gatherers would eat and not what agriculturalists would eat. All these all these refined starches that are so easy to grow and multiply and have allowed population to multiply and grow. And you begin to see already how tricky this word natural is. Yet as a culture right now we have a tremendous faith in the natural. And so when I go to my doctor, my doctor wants wants me to eat as my body. Now my doctor is a Christian doctor actually. But but he wants me to eat as my body has been designed for. Well, even when you phrase it that way, you assume a designer, but we'll leave that to the side for now. So so I should eat a paleo diet. It would be as if I was running around in the in the African plains with a spear and killing that antelope. And well, now we've evolved to cook things again. You can listen to Peterson talk about that. So cook things over the fire. So I'm eating the gazelle. I'm eating the the the particular green leafy things that I find. Now, Peterson isn't eating fruit apparently, but you know, I can eat the berries that I find. And if I eat those things and assumedly if I walk around as much as your hunter on the African plain is walking around, therefore I will be healthy. But the difficulty with this picture is, of course, that life expectancy, I would imagine, for a prehistoric homo sapien living on the African plain is a lot shorter than mine. Even if I'm smoking, drinking, eating foods governed from brought from all over the world, so on and so forth. But this is our idea of natural natural man or natural humanity for us as a human being that is living before we took control of our food supply. Now, right away, you'll see there's a problem with this definition because the dude running around with a spear on the African plain is taking control of his food supply. Via the spear and humanity is taking control of his food supply by farming. And so you have to actually get pre human to find what is natural. And that's the point of Lewis's definition. Currently, nothing about our food supply is natural by definition. We have tinkered with it. We have secured it. And right away we begin to find the cross pressures of this world word natural because on one hand it is natural for us to secure our food supply. On the other hand, the only way we can secure our food supply is to make it unnatural by things like agriculture instead of hunter gathering. But now notice how we've used language. We can't help but assume our extra natural status in the world. By definition implicit in this definition of natural, we assume is nonhuman. But why would we make the definition that way? Because, well, we're stuck. Because how can we be nonhuman? How can we not exist to temper with our existence? How can we not exist in order to see our existence? We simply can't do that. We can't help but assume our extra natural status in the world. Our entire civilization is predicated upon, nested within, and assumed it. We don't see it. Hence Lewis's statement about giant land. We are like Mrs. Snip. What's giant land? And Tim says, you're living in giant land. And she says, all there is is giant land. Well, here we are with nature. And we're saying, well, what is nature? So the smart person would say, well, you have to include humanity in nature because human beings are the product of nature. And if we go back to the quotes I've used from the Metaphysical Club, you will see again and again that the leap of Darwin, the significance of Darwin in the 19th century, was that he postulated a story by which we can have the development of humanity without a designer. That is the point of Darwin. And it's the point of, in fact, this entire conversation that we're having. That humanity is natural. And this strange habit we have of language, which defines ourself outside of nature, is in itself an illusion. And so if you really want to be a naturalist, you will have to say that human beings are the complete product of nature. No designer, completely nature, but that has implications for a lot of things. In fact, that has implications for our entire world. Another book that I've referenced recently is 1493, which is a fascinating book because it talks about how Columbus changed the world by re-knitting together Pangea. Colon is Columbus's name, not Angloized. Colon's single accomplishment was, in the phrase of historian Alfred W. Crosby, to re-knit the seams of Pangea. After 1492, the world's ecosystems collided and mixed as European vessels carried thousands of species to new homes across the oceans. The Columbian Exchange, as Crosby called it, is the reason there are tomatoes in Italy, oranges in the United States, chocolates in Switzerland, chili peppers in Thailand. To ecologists, the Columbian Exchange is arguably the most important event since the death of the dinosaurs. Unsurprisingly, the vast biological upheaval had repercussions on humankind. Now again, notice the language. The Columbian Exchange was unintentional. Columbus and all those who followed him did not know what they were doing. In that sense, we can say that the Columbian Exchange was utterly natural. But if you think about how we frame these terms, we say, no, it wasn't natural. Columbus built ships. And this whole political, cultural, religious stream of events that brought Columbus and put him in those ships and cross them across the ocean and finding the Americas and wiping out the Taino and on and on and on and on and on and on, none of that is natural. All of that is human. Now, now we're working on, well, there's the common view of natural and human that we like to use when we shop at Costco. But here's the better definition of natural. You would have to say Columbus's journey to America and all of the species that hitched a ride and re-knit Pangea is, in fact, completely natural if you include human beings in natural. And right away, what Lewis has exposed here are a whole bunch of implicit things going on in our language that we don't look at and don't use much. A few people look at it and you'll find them if you Google it, but most people don't talk this way. But Lewis is saying, okay, let's be fair. Nature, Mr. Rationality Rules, is all there is. It doesn't matter if that tree was planted, if that tree that fell in the woods was an invasive species, it still makes a noise. It's one thing. And then we're going to have to concede that Columbus's journey of America, including all of the religious motivations that Christopher Columbus had, including all the religious motivations that the Spanish had who conquered the New World, including all of these things, is all natural. It's nature. That's all there is. That's what it means to be a naturalist. And for example, this is my five-year-old self. I think about, I think it's about 1968, me and my mom and my little sister were camping. And right there is my father's 63 Chevy wagon that I vaguely remember in my mind. And I do know, Mr. Rationality, that all of these things existed before I had the consciousness to see it. And I believe because, in fact, I still own this tent. And sometimes when I go camping at Fairwoods in Whiteensville, Massachusetts, shout out to Fairwoods and my Whiteensville relatives, I put up this tent and I sleep in it still. But here we are. But what are we doing out there? You know, someone would say, and in fact, in the 60s when camping became a big rage, people, Well, why on earth are you getting out of a perfectly good house to go and sleep in a canvas tent and to, you know, actually when it rains on this tent, I have to get out and I have to adjust things. Otherwise, all of us in the tent get wet. And why on earth when we go to Fairwoods when I have plenty of relatives and I can sleep in their homes and the relatives are always kind of like, why on earth do you go out there and sleep in that silly tent? And then my cousins would actually come and sleep with me. Well, why are they coming out to sleep in the silly tent? We want to be closer to nature. But if you look at this picture, there's nothing natural about this lawn. There's nothing natural about those trees. Why are we doing any of this? Well, we want to get in touch with nature. Something deep in us is going on. And well, so we live in nature, but we don't really want to just kind of lay out there in the woods. We wouldn't call that a vacation. So we construct canvas tents and aluminum poles and nylon ropes and 1960s lawn chairs all packed into a 1963 Chevy wagon. This is what we do. So rationality is natural, is it? What is rationality? Now, in my last video, I was making the point that the scientific imaginary assumes we view nature from a point of view actually outside of nature. Now, this again is a really interesting conundrum because if you are a naturalist, our viewing of nature from outside nature has to be natural. It has to be a product of this entire system. And in my last video, I made the point that the vision of nature from outside nature is monarchical. And what I mean by that, it is from one point of view. So when Mr. Rationality Rules paints his picture of the world, he paints that picture from a focus of one, but he's got a democratic justification. In other words, he's saying this is a point of view of one observer of nature, but this is a point of view of one observer of nature, but it is not subjective. We have stripped out the subjective. All we have here is the view, an objective view of one nature. And based on the critique of this, you get the entire critique of postmodernity against this vision. Because the postmodern saw that, you know, all these stories you're telling about objective science, this is the line between modernism and postmodernity. All these points of view between the modern, you can't tell this story, Mr. Rationality, like this. You are embedded in the way you tell this story. You have a monarchical view with a democratic justification. That's what science is. Now, can this be a true picture when our brains are the products of nature and therefore part of it? And I'm already beginning to give away the main point of Lewis's book. And the reason I'm not worried about giving it away is because I can't find this darn quote, but one guy in Bell Labs once made the observation that if you actually have a new idea, don't worry about someone stealing it. If your idea is actually new, you're going to have to beat it into the heads of anybody else to actually see it. And that is what is true in our particular context where the subtraction story, I made a video of that a little while ago, where the subtraction story really reigns supreme. Because here's the question. Here's the question. If this view of nature, if this monarchical vision with a democratic justification is true, and if you're a thoroughgoing naturalist, then this view of nature is also part of nature. And if it's also part of nature, it has the truth status of, well, of what? Here's a little doily that one of the Coffee Break laters made and gave out for the, it's a doily or a coaster. I don't know what it is. But it's real. Okay. It's real. If this falls on my computer, it makes almost no sound because it has like almost no weight. Here, I'm just picking up random things from my very unsorted messy office. Here are little candies. This is also from the ladies coffee break meeting. And I go in there for eats and they share with me. Here are some blue diamond walnuts. Are these natural? Well, what do we mean by the word? And in fact, our entire, all of this is within nature. That's the point. Now, then you have the question. Can we use this word true? What does this word true mean? Are these truly natural? Depends what you mean by natural. If you're a thorough going naturalist, you have to say these are completely natural. You say, but they're not natural because we took these, we took these, whatever preceded the almond, or if you live in Ripon, California, shout out to my good friends in Ripon, just a little ways down the valley. I was there yesterday. The ammins, shout out to the ammins farmers here, the good Dutch ammins farmers. What is natural about these nuts? But, you know, we grow these nuts in a very unnatural way and we mass produce them. And then because we really like them, we add vegetable oil, canola and or safflower oil, salt, corn, maltodextrin, natural hickory smoke flavor, natural hickory smoke flavor. Tell me how natural it is to put hickory smoke flavor in a little bottle. Yeast, hydrogylized corn and soy protein, natural favors. But don't be afraid, it's peanut free. Is this natural? If you're a naturalist, you have to say, yes, this is natural because human beings have their fingerprints all over it. We won't call it natural in the store, but it has to be natural because human beings are a product of nature and therefore everything we do is natural. And now you have a difficult definition of what do we mean by true? Is this truly natural? That's the entire conversation we're having. All right, back to Lewis. Nature means what happens of itself or of its own accord. Of what you do not need to labor for. What you will get if you take no measures to stop it. Again, you is built into this. And you already in this definition have separated yourself from nature. What the naturalist believes is that the ultimate fact, the thing you can't go behind, is a vast process in space and time which is going of its own accord. Inside that total system, every particular event, such as you're sitting reading this book, or you sitting and listening to this video, happens because some other event has happened. In the long run, because the total event, capital T, capital E, is happening. Every particular thing, such as this page, such as this video, is what it is because other things are what they are and so eventually because the whole system is what it is. I am making this video because Jordan Peterson has made videos because Mr. Rationality Rules has made videos because C.S. Lewis has written the book. And all of these events go back through time and they're all caused by other events. That is what nature is. It is the whole show. All the things, events, are so completely interlocked that no one of them can claim the slightest independence from the whole show. And you might watch this video and like the Carl Jung guys out there, his society that always leaves messages, he says, Yeah, you're just spouting this stuff because you learned it in Divinity School. Yeah, I watch your videos sometimes. Others will say, Yeah, you're just doing this because you're a Christian. Yeah, and so now we have the bulvarisms, and you'll remember that from the other ones. Bulvarisms are all basically discounting things because they have been caused by another thing in the chain. Even though naturalism says that, everything has been caused by another thing in the chain. And this is why when Mr. Rationality Rules complains about Jordan Peterson's motive, he gives up the game. Because here it is. Everything is caused by something. And why do you think a motivation is a less true or authentic or reliable thing than anything else? If I'm sitting in that Memphis hotel room with Jordan Peterson and the other guy and me, If they all say, Boy, that drawer opened by itself. And I say, No, it didn't. And I say, No, it didn't because I'm pissed at him because Jordan Peterson has more subscribers than I do. Well, that's caused by something. But Jordan Peterson's view is caused by something. And the other guy's view is caused by something. So you have a pastor, a non-supernaturalist, and an agnostic in a room. And we have different positions. But they're all caused by nature. They're all caused by something in this great chain of beings. The only reason Paul VanderKlay is making this video, again, a la another commenter, is because my screwed up parents really screwed me over in making me believe that crazy stuff like God and the Bible exists. Well, of course, you can blame my screwed up parents on their screwed up parents and their screwed up parents. And all the way back when some crazy, crazy guy named Abraham and Earth thought he heard God say, Go to your other country and I'll make you a great nation. Well, now we have the Israelis and the Palestinians and we have all of this stuff. And you keep tracing it all the way back to, of course, the singularity. And boom, nature, the whole show. Paul VanderKlay, Jordan Peterson, Mr. Rationality, C.S. Lewis, Blue Diamond almonds grown in the Central Valley of California. Maybe, you know, Blue Diamond. Send me a little something something. This is how it all comes from. This is nature. All there is is the whole show. This is what Lewis is saying. For free will would mean that human beings have the power of independent action, the power of doing something more or other than what is involved by the total event. So total series of events and any such separate power of originating events is what the naturalist denies. Spontaneity, originality, action on its own is a privilege. Let's own our privilege. We don't own it because we don't have it. Only nature has it. It's a privilege reserved for the whole show, which we call nature. Therefore, dog on it, those those rip and ammond farmers had to grow these darn nuts. And Blue Diamond had to put all this stuff on them, thus making it unnatural. And Paul VanderKlay has to believe in Jesus because his parents taught him so. And poor Paul, his parents were good people who didn't abuse him or neglect him. In fact, his parents were wonderful people who took him camping when he was a little boy. Darn them and their crazy theistic ideas. It's all the whole show. There's how are you going to critique this? How are you going to say should or not should? The whole show simply is. There's no such thing as free will. Free will is an illusion. Of course, this is rational. And so, well, we're going to get back to Mr. Rationality Rules a little while. This is why a guy like Sam Harris has to talk about free will. And he and Jordan Peterson are going to talk about free will because Jordan Peterson is going to say as a pragmatist, You know what? We all act like we have free will. And when you treat people like they don't have free will, they get upset. And even more so, when you treat people like they don't have free will by violating their wills, you are a tyrant. Now, I haven't listened to a lot of Sam Harris's podcast, but I heard the one that he had Timothy Snyder on. It was a wonderful podcast. Timothy Snyder wrote this terrific little book called On Tyranny. And he goes through 12 rules. The whole point of tyranny is that you treat people like they don't have free will. You don't respect them. And this is why Jordan Peterson is waging his war because he's saying this whole thing is leading us towards this idea. We are simply working out the product of this naturalist worldview. And as Nietzsche, I'll try to say his world right to my German commenter, as Nietzsche made the point, We are still embedded in Christianity, but we're talking like we're not. And Nietzsche is saying, give it up. And in a sense, what Peterson is saying is Nietzsche is right in that we're talking like we're not. But actually now we're finally learning to talk like we're not embedded in it anymore. And what that leads to is tyranny and nihilism. That's Peterson's point. And so then Peterson says, well, what's his justification? You reveal what your truest beliefs are by how you act. And this is where Nietzsche and Peterson's conversation comes in and says, well, you know, people, Mr. rationality. I, you know, Mr. rationality. I mean you absolutely no offense. But, you know, so we're going to play this game and I'd love to sit down with you. And I'm sure if we sat down together, you and I would probably have as much fun as me and the other guy, Jordan Peterson. You know, Jordan Peterson's friend who he and I correspond lovely. He doesn't believe in the supernatural. I'm a Christian pastor. We have lovely conversations. And if he lived in my town, I'd love to be his friend. And I'd love to take him out for coffee. And, you know, I do this with the most glorious people like the ones who come to my church. I do it with idiots and assholes like sometimes ones who come to my door. This is what it means to be a Christian. It means to love your neighbor, not just the smart ones, not just the nice ones, not just the good ones. It means all of them. Anyway, you reveal your truest beliefs by your actions. And I think Peterson is dead on right. And so when Mr. rationality, he's not going to make a response video to this because I'm down the hierarchy from him. He is going to make a response video to Jordan Peterson because he's up the hierarchy from him. There's a hierarchy in play in this little game that they're doing. And we can't have this little play this game without story. And we see tools. And so the more videos Mr. rationality makes, the more he, in a sense, affirms Jordan Peterson's view on this. And again, in my last video, I walked through that. Back to C.S. Lewis. The supernaturalist agrees with the naturalist that there must be something which exists on its own right. There needs to be a foundation to this thing. And this is at some point we're going to get into Hinduism and the East because, well, we're going to go there. This goes there eventually. So there must be something which exists in its own right, some basic fact whose existence would be nonsensical to try to explain because this fact is itself the ground or starting point of all explanations. And, you know, it's hard to tell just based on one video, but Mr. rationality basically says stuff, the stuff that the, you know, the petroleum that we mined from the ground that we use to make this plastic, the stuff that makes the almonds, the stuff that was in the singular created by the singularity, the Big Bang. There it is. That's the stuff that exists in and of itself. And Lewis is making the point that, well, if you're a naturalist, you, well, whether you're going beyond the mere naturalism, but you say the energy, the, you know, whatever it is that was unleashed in the singularity, that's what is. And the thoughts that we have, the thoughts that I'm thinking right now, Jordan Peterson thoughts, C.S. Lewis thoughts, Mr. rationality thoughts, these are all the products of the energy and the stuff released in that Big Bang. That is what exists on its own. But he does not identify this fact as the whole show. He thinks that, okay, some basic fact whose existence it would be nonsensical to try to explain because this fact itself is the ground or starting point of all explanations. But he does not identify this fact with the whole show. He thinks that things, oh, we're talking about the supernaturalist here. He thinks that things fall into two classes. The supernaturalist does. The naturalist says all there is is the whole show. The supernaturalist says there's two things at least. First class we find in the first class, we find either things or more probably one thing, which is basic and original, which exists on its own. And the second, we find things that are merely derivative of the one thing. Now notice in the commenter who said, boy, this guy's parents really screwed him up because they, you know, they really screwed him up by being kind and rational and lovely parents. And because they believed in these crazy ideas of God, this guy before you, Paul Vanderglay believes in the crazy idea of God. Boy, they really screwed him up. Well, there was the derivative thing, which is me, and then there's the source things, which are my parents. So now this is where you get, you go all the way back and see us, Louis, and I'm going to go back and see what's going on. And then there's the source things, which are my parents. So now this is where you get, you go all the way back and see us, Louis says the supernaturalist says that there's a source to the stuff of this world. That isn't the stuff of this world. It's not in the whole show. It caused the show. It caused nature. But it isn't itself nature. In the second, we find things that are merely derivative from that one thing. The one basic thing has caused all other things to be. It exists on its own. They exist because it exists. They will cease to exist if it ever ceases to maintain them in existence. They will be altered if it ever alters them. And here's where we have Elon Musk's idea. Are we in a computer simulation, which led to that dude in San Francisco with the terrible interview of Jordan Peterson. The difference between the two views might be expressed by saying that naturalism gives us a democratic and supernaturalism, a monarchical picture of reality. And this is where when I say the assertion of what science is by Mr. Rationality is a monarchical picture of reality, but it has a democratic justification. Because, you know, if Jordan Peterson just said the drawer's opened, well, you know, maybe he's lying. Maybe he's deluded. But Jordan Peterson and this other guy, both, I've never met Jordan Peterson, but I've corresponded with this other guy, you know, he's the same guy. He has no reason to lie. In fact, he would have every reason to tell me a lie the other way, but he doesn't. And what that leads me to be quite rationally is he's an honest man. And he will admit his worldview filter and that the drawer's opening don't pass through like they do. And that's outside. This is one of these things we can't explain. The naturalist thinks that the privilege of being on its own resides in the total mass of things. That my bag is, it just exists. Just as in a democracy, sovereignty resides in the whole mass of people. The supernaturalist thinks that this privilege belongs to some things or probably one thing and not others. Just as in a real monarchy, the king has sovereignty and the people do not. And just as in a democracy, all citizens are equal, so the naturalist, one thing or event is as good as another, in the sense that they are all equally dependent on the total system of things. Indeed, each of them is the only way in which the character of that total system exhibits itself in a particular point in space and time. The supernaturalist, on the other hand, believes that the one original or self-existent thing is on a level different from and more important than all other things. Do you understand that? That this bag exists on its own, the tree falling in the woods exists on its own, and it's just there. Now it's the product of this whole long chain of things, and so nature is this entire system that has this. A supernaturalist says that all of this stuff is built on something else. And eventually, because C.S. Lewis is a Christian, someone else, and we're going to have to talk a little bit later in the video about whether existence is personal or impersonal. Nature, we know to a high degree, is impersonal. I could be a genocidal dictator, I could be the most horrible person in the world or the best person in the world, and this bag would be exactly the same way. And this is where we get this monarchical vision, democratic justification of science that we've been talking about. Everyone will have seen that the one self-existent thing or the small class of self-existent things in which the naturalists believe is what we call God or the gods. I propose for the rest of the book to treat only that form of supernaturalism which believes in one God, partly because polytheism is not likely to be a live issue for some of the readers. Now this has changed since Lewis's time. There are more polytheists around, I suspect. And partly because those who believe in many gods very seldom, in fact, regard their gods as creators of the universe and as self-existent. And this is where, there's an important point here, because if you look at mythology, you might have a creator god, but then you have other gods. And so the critique of the subtraction story is that humanity projected upon this live world, and by live I mean seemingly acting world, projected gods upon this world. But Lewis is making the point that what we have in the Abrahamic religions, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, what we have here is a monarchical view of one God who is above all other gods. And as I get into my, at some point I want to do a video about culture and belief because in the Hebrews you find it all over in the Psalms. You are above all gods. What are these other gods you're talking about? And I forget the guy's name, but somebody pointed me to his videos. And he's a good Old Testament scholar and he points this out. And a lot of contemporary Christians who are thorough going monotheists say, well, what is this? I think we talk about henotheism and about a bunch of all other things. But anyway, so Lewis's point is that the gods of Greece were not really supernatural in the strict sense, which I am giving the word. They were products of the total system of things and included within it. This introduces an important distinction. The difference between naturalism and supernaturalism is not exactly the same as the difference between belief in God and disbelief. In other words, you've got naturalists over here and supernaturalists over there. That's not identical to atheists and theists. It's more complicated than that. So don't rush in there right now. The great interlocking event called nature might be such as to produce at some stage a great cosmic consciousness. And indwelling God arising from the whole process as as human mind arises, according to the naturalists, from human organisms. Now we're kind of into Jordan Peterson land in some ways here because Jordan Peterson is an agnostic. And every time he is asked to talk about the resurrection or belief in God, some things like this, he you know, metaphysics and, you know, coming down. He does that on the on the on the Rubin report with with Ben Shapiro. He does that with Robert Coffin in his interview. And so Peterson is an agnostic. But but in Peterson's world, God might be the product of our minds, the product of our watchers over evolution since we were the lobsters making our way to where we are now. And this is why in my last video, I said, which is where CS Lewis is going to finally wind up. You can't have science without this God. It finally doesn't work. And what Peterson, I think, would say against Brett Weinstein is that what we're seeing in society, our current attack on science is the natural playing out of this process intellectually and philosophically, which is kind of a crazy thing because ideas are immaterial. But but Peterson would say that there's there's rationality at work built into our minds, built into evolution. And so we need a God to maintain this monarchical picture of the world, which we call science. So Lewis makes the point that this isn't necessarily theism. The great interlocking event called nature might be such a such a thing as to produce some stage of great cosmic consciousness and indwelling God arising from the whole process as human minds arise, according to the naturalist from human organism, a naturalist would not object to that sort of God. Now, this is why Mr. Rationality and Sam Harris are interesting because Peterson hasn't really asserted the God beyond it. He has only said, I'm leaving open that possibility and they're already jumping in. They don't want we don't want you to go there. And he's saying, I got to go there. I got to leave it open because of my Darwinian epistemology. I'm limited here, so I cannot exclude him. And that's why Jordan Peterson, I think, is technically an agnostic more than a theist, despite the conversation he had with Dennis Prager. Dennis Prager is talking about religion. But I think Jordan Peterson could take his conversation with Dennis Prager and say, yes, religion is good for us. Religion is natural to us. Religion is foundational for this this western this game called Western civilization that we are maintaining. Religion is essential to it because if you lose God, you lose this monarchical vision of reality and you lose with a democratic justification, you strip out the subjective. You lose this game if you lose this. And I think this is what is behind Jordan Peterson's agenda and his efforts. But now Lewis rightly says you can have God in this natural system. You can have it. You can still have it. But he's a little different. What naturalism cannot accept is the idea of a God who stands outside nature and made it. See, that's where the line really lies. And this is why you can have Jordan Peterson on one side of the line with the agnostics and the atheists. But not well, kind of different from the atheists. But saying religion is a natural part of the world and people are naturally religious. And you really can't deny that religion is a natural part of the world. And we really can't deny that religion is embedded in this entire Western civilization with its idea of science, which again is a monarchical vision with a democratic justification. And we really can't deny this. So let's just accept it and embrace with Carl Jung that in fact we're healthier because of it. But the difference here lies, well, the real line you cross is to say that, well, there is a God who stands outside of nature and made it. That's the line. And now this gets fuzzy because you might say, well, it might be pragmatic to believe this. It might, life might work even better if you believe this than if you don't. Okay. But then you start getting into this funny little head game. Well, I'm going to believe in this God because it works for me. But I have this mental reservation in the back of my mind that says, but I don't really believe him. Well, then do you believe him? And this is where you get into Jordan Peterson's act as if this God exists. Okay. Well, I can play that game act as if this God exists. But every time I say act as if this God exists, now I'm kind of butting heads against the Jordan Peterson lying thing because because aren't I isn't acting as if kind of like lying. It's I'm playing pretend and so while I'm not being disingenuous, I'm not being duplicitous, but aren't I kind of being duplicitous with myself? Now you might take it in sense of an AA aphorism like fake it till you make it. And I think in fact, there's a lot of truth to that. And this is as a pastor what I will do to people who come to me and say, well, I've got my doubts about the existence of this God. I'll say, okay, fake it till you make it. If that works for you, keep working it. But right away you can begin to see why Peterson, people who are listening to Peterson keep falling over into this other camp and saying, I kind of want to believe in this God because I don't believe in him. I believe in this God because my life is working better with this God. I like myself better with this God. I like the world better with this God, just like Star Wars fans will say, I like the world better with Star Wars or like the world better with Harry Potter. But the implications of actually living in this world and then the fandom, which is the Christian church, which is a lot more real than the fandom of Star Wars and Harry Potter and Lord of the Rings. Well, this is why Tolkien wrote Lord of the Rings because he wanted people to live in that fandom and he wanted the Lord of the Rings to be a gateway drug into Christianity. That's why he wrote it. But but here's the line. So so is this God a part of nature, a product of nature, or is this God the author of nature? So but again, here's Mr. Rationality and he's standing outside of nature. When he does his video, he in a sense takes a step back and says, ah, I see nature. I see nature from the outside. He's giving up the game. You can't see nature from the outside if you're a naturalist. Well, you might say, well, I imagine I'm seeing nature from the outside. It's as if I'm seeing nature from the outside. Ah, but what is nature? You are just as much a product of nature as my bag of blue diamond almonds. And you're just as natural. It's all one show. It's all one thing. You are in a sense of category of no greater categorical significant element of nature than this mostly eaten bag of smokehouse almonds, which I only bought because it was on sale at Costco because I'm a cheap Dutchman. So here we are. You're this. This is me. This is you. Can this see outside of nature? Can you? Well, that's the question. How can you? I mean, it's the same problem as, you know, idiot me who believes in God because my screwed up parents who were lovely human beings, you know, if my parents were the kind of horrible Christian parents that you read about in deconversion stories where they abused me or neglected me or did terrible things to me and brought me to a horrible church so that by the time I grew up, I'd say, ha, I don't believe in God. No, poor me. I had great parents so that I believe in the whole thing. So poor me maintains in my delusion, unlike this bag of nuts that has no similar delusion. Poor me. Yay. Bag of nuts. Thank you. I'll be me. I'll eat the nuts. We can't stand outside of nature and see it because that entire process must be part of nature. Why? Well, then let's ask, did this imagination appear in the West? We know this historically. This scientific revolution happened in the West. Why? Could it have any connection with Christianity? It has every connection with Christianity. Now, you can make this argument from a naturalist position because, of course, it grew up in the West. One thing caused another. And this is what Jordan Peterson is arguing. The enterprise is nested within a monarchical imaginary, but in the case of Mr. Rationality, he refuses to admit it. He is maintaining a monarchical imaginary, but he's acting as if he's standing outside of nature, but his own system says, I'm sorry, buddy, you're part of nature just like me, and you're just running your script. Now, again, if we look at, well, how do we know this? Well, my watchers in back of my mind are watching this. And one of my cynical watchers back here looks at Mr. Rationality and says, there's something wrong here. I might not be able to put it together, and I'm going to wait until someone else puts it together for me, like Jordan Peterson or C.S. Lewis. And once they say it, well, actually, I'm going to have to read the book 10 or 15 times to actually understand it because my head is too thick. I'm a Dutchman with a wooden head. You know, until I see it and begin to realize Mr. Rationality, if he is true to his system, can't stand outside of nature and take a look at it, which is exactly the thing that science says you can do. And this gets at Brett Weinstein's post. His comment in this conversation with Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Pigeot, his big argument is this. What makes the scientific truth hierarchically superior is that it explains all the subordinate truths in a way that is logically consistent. You cannot state the scientific truth without stepping outside of nature, which means that scientific truth itself is nested in this monarchical vision. It is dependent upon it. Therefore, this monarchical vision is a bigger truth than the scientific perspective. The scientific, and I made this point in his theology poetry, the scientific perspective fits in. But other things fit in too. This other truth is bigger. And this is the point with this. The scientist or storyteller locates him or herself implicitly, observing from the perspective of the author, creator, or viewer, or even reason, because reason itself is a perspective. You cannot tell the story in any other way. Now pay attention. Listen to Brett Weinstein. Listen to Sam Harris. Listen to Mr. Rationality. Every time they tell a scientific story, they tell it from outside nature. That is the only perspective by which you can view it. Period. By reason. Be rational here. That's where you have to stand to see. So in other words, what you have done is in a sense made yourself God. That's how the game works. This is Peterson's point. And to make this even worse, western storytellers are really bad at pantheism. Now I remember a number of years ago when Avatar came out, because this was Dances with Wolves in Space. And so you have this wonderful natural planet which no human being has actually messed up. And then all these terrible militarist, industrialist, we are the space invaders in this story, we come in and looking for our unobtanium, I don't remember what they really called it, and we come and we go and we rape the planet. What is this story about? Maybe we'll see if Jonathan Pigeot has done a treatment of this story. He probably should because he probably doesn't even have to because the story is so thinly veiled in terms of what he's trying to say. But westerners keep giving up the story because in fact the very structure of a story leads to the conclusion of the movie where the prayers of all the tall blue people are heard by the supposedly pantheistic God for her to fight on their behalf. And the great cry is that Uya has heard. And I remember watching this movie and thinking, well they just put Christianity back into the story. Because this is the point. You have to personalize your God to have the story, to have the movie, and you just gave the thing up. Now you might ask, well what would it be like to really work hard? And I don't mean just, what's the guy's name, Cameron, who made the movie, made Titanic. What if you and your entire civilization really worked hard at having God within the story, having God within nature? What would that look like? Well, fortunate for us, we can find it. Go to India. Go to India with Carl. Because I love Carl and his idiot abroad because off he goes to India. And what do you have? Well, you have naked holy men. Well, why are they naked? Why are they doing what they're doing? God is within. And so what are they trying to do with all of the stuff of nature? They're saying, this bag is an illusion. The nuts are an illusion. It's all an illusion. And everything in my mind is trying to get me to accept the illusion. So what I need to do is I need to meditate. And I need to take off all my clothes and torture myself and have one hand up in the air and do all of these crazy things in order to stop believing that I exist, that I am independent from the whole show. And actually when Lewis was, you know, he deconverted from the materialist, the naturalist perspective. And then for a while in his life he tried to decide, should I be a Hindu or should I be a Christian? And you can read about that in A Severe Mercy, correspondence he had with Sheldon Van Auken. But don't read that book if you're prone to depression because, no, don't read that book if your marriage is weak because you might have an affair after reading that book. If you read the book, you'll know what I mean. But it's a powerful book, A Severe Mercy by Sheldon Van Auken. But the point is there that, yeah, well, we've been trying to get at this idea of God within and the reasonable thing to do is what the holy men in India are doing. But what most of us look like are kind of like Carl going to India and trying to get his mind around it. And in the end he says, I don't want to live like that. Well, okay. We are now in a position to state the difference between the naturalist and the supernaturalist despite the fact that they do not mean the same thing by nature. The naturalist believes that a great process of becoming exists on its own in space and time and that nothing else exists. We call particular things and events being only the parts into which we analyze the great process or the shapes which that process takes at different moments and gives at different points in space. This single total reality he calls nature. The supernaturalist believes that one thing exists on its own and has produced the framework of space and time and the process of and the procession and the procession of systematically connected events which fills them. This framework and this filling he calls nature. It may or may not be the only reality which the one prime thing has produced. There may be other systems in addition to what we call nature. And then Lewis goes off into another section, a little section into other possible worlds, so on and so forth. It's fun to read, but I'll skip it for now. You can read it yourself. All this at present, all this is at present purely speculative, meaning the other worlds. It by no means follows from supernaturalism that miracles of any sort do in fact occur. God, the primary thing, may never in fact interfere with the natural system he has created. If he has created more natural systems than one, he may never cause them to impinge on one another. But that is a question for further consideration. If we decide that nature is not the only thing there is, then we cannot say in advance whether she is safe from miracles or not. There are things outside of her. We do not yet know whether they can get in. Now we're going to talk about Charles Taylor and his buffered self. The gates may be barred or they may not. 306 highlighters agree. But if naturalism is true, then we do know in advance that miracles are impossible. Nothing can come into nature from outside because there is nothing outside to come in. Nature being everything. So in the hotel room in Memphis, the door opened. You can't explain it. You just set it to the side because you can't explain it. It's not an irrational thing to do because all of our systems have outliers. None of our systems are perfect. So he can't explain it. And even a Christian, this is why the ghost story is fun, because Christians don't actually really have a very, let's say, an agreed upon framework for talking about what ghosts are. So ghost stories are kind of a nice middle ground between, say, a non-supernaturalist or a naturalist who will say, well, I can't explain. I don't believe in ghosts, but stuff happens. And Christians who say, yeah, ghosts don't really fit real well into our system, but here they are. And we're not we don't have a philosophical problem with ghosts because we do believe that people do exist after death in a certain form. But theologically, we don't really have a consensus around where ghost experiences come from. Some people might say demons. Some people might say illusions. A lot of that depends on where you sit culturally. No doubt events which we no doubt events which we in our ignorance should mistake for miracles might occur, but they would in reality be just like the commonest events and inevitable result of the character of the ghost. The character of the whole system or the whole show. Our first choice, therefore, must be between naturalism and supernaturalism. That's the end of Chapter 2 in Lewis's Miracles. But why do we fight so hard about this? Why does Mr. Rationality go to all of the trouble making a YouTube channel about this? And he says the reason he does it is we debunk and refute predominantly religious and supernatural arguments. Why? Why does Craig Keener, if you want a book that is filled with contemporary, many of them validated miracle stories, read Craig Keener's huge two volume book on miracles, the credibility of the New Testament accounts. Craig Keener is a New Testament scholar and he married and his wife is an African native, which culturally then forces him outside of the Western bubble. And inside the majority world where most people in the world believe in miracles. Most people in the world have a worldview which is not naturalist, but is in fact supernaturalist. And this again gets into the reason science stands against this is because it's a monarchical view. It doesn't care. We don't take a vote. Let's count up votes. Naturalism versus supernaturalism. And well, supernaturalism is going to win in the world. Sorry, China, India, Africa, South America, Christians, Jews, some Jews, Muslims, some Christians. Supernaturalism will win a democratic vote. But a scientific worldview is a monarchical vision of the world. But why is he fighting about it? Because, well, I'd say because he doesn't believe his own story. He has to refute the story because, well, because, you know, you have to convince people of this story. Well, why? Because their supernatural ideas are just part of the whole show. So this is a natural process that you're doing? Maybe. I suppose it is. And then I think about my friend Alexander and he's working on all of this stuff. He's trying to sort himself out and he's done a YouTube channel and we're having conversations and he's trying to figure out Christianity. And so he's working on all of this. But implicit in the Christian or Abrahamic belief or motivation is if I embrace the correct frame, then I can act with power or authenticity or correctness or effectiveness in the world. This is why Mr. Rationality is making his videos because he believes he actually has agency. And I think that is intention, if not contradiction, to the worldview he is promoting. Because if you think Christians have a hard time explaining how a good God could allow so much suffering in the world, try getting a thoroughgoing naturalist to explain why I should care. Why should I care? I'm the same as this bag of nuts. Here I am. Why on earth should I go on YouTube and try and convince all of you of whatever idea I have? Whether that is that nice knitters make doilies. Who cares? And so then when I talk to people who are listening to Jordan Peterson and coming to the point of saying I have to look at this again, one of the things I hear from a number of them is this. Jordan Peterson taught me that what I do matters. Well, what does that mean? It means I shouldn't waste my life, you know, watching porn and doing video games and living in my mother's basement. That what I do matters. That I can change the world. Well, worldview is implicit in that argument. Embracing this idea even implicitly assumes you have agency. It assumes that you are, you have an element of supernatural within you. It assumes that nature is out here and I'm here and you know what I can do with nature? I can make a doily out of it. You know what I can do with nature? I can take nuts and I can mass produce them and I can put salt on them and I can put natural smoke flavor on them. That I can change the world. That what I does matters. That I am somebody. That I am a human being. That I am an agent. That I act. That I contribute. And that all of this isn't just me being screwed up by my parents who have the good sense to be decent human beings and good parents. Instead of monsters so as to raise me and have me reject Christianity. Someone who is a thorough going naturalist able to see behind the curtain will struggle with resisting nihilism, which is the West, or embrace it, which is the East. That in a sense is what the Hindu holy man is doing. That is why they are practicing yoga. And this is why a lot of people look at modern Western yoga and say, well that's cultural appropriation. Because you know, all the North Americans they just want to be hot or spiritual or whatever, maybe feel better. Go ahead, do your yoga. The person in the West, the person in the East, the yogi is doing it to try and say, I have to somehow get myself out of the idea of my own agency. And this is why I look at all the Western Buddhists. And I think, okay, I kind of understand your program, but do you understand your program? I think suicide would be easier than meditating. Because if you really want to get yourself out of existence in the West, the answer is suicide. So this is why the system is working out the way it is. Why it's devolving into tyranny and nihilism. Because tyranny says you are not an agent and I will be the agent. Tyranny again is a half measure of naturalism. Tyranny in a sense, like everything else, says I am God because I observe the system. I know and I am going to get rid of all of you other agents. And that of course leads, tyranny leads to the gulag or the death camp. So tyranny is the public view. And nihilism is a little bit more consistent which says I don't matter. So now, shoot, I've got existence. Either I can distract myself from life or I can end my life. That's very rational in this frame of reference. The East says, no, I've got to go and I've got to try and convince myself that I am not an agent. But I am just one little part of the entire whole being. That's the East. And if you want someone who lays this out pretty well, listen to Peter Kreif's The Dark Side. I'll put that in the comments section. Or I'll put that in the notes. So there we are, C.S. Lewis's Chapter 2. And so that's where I see the choices. And when you ask me, well, why are you a Christian? I say, well, let me look at my choices. I could be a naturalist. Well, if I'm a naturalist and I'm a really consistent naturalist, then I have to embrace my unity with this bag of nuts and say, finally, I and the bag of nuts are one. See, the East got to this a long time ago. Because that's in a sense what they said. I can say namaste to my bag. I recognize the God in you. I don't think this is God. I don't think I am God. I think there is a God. And I think, and this is why I'm a Calvinist, I think the power of that God to hold me is more important than my power to hold him. The East long ago said, me and the bag are one. And me and the bag are God. Blue Diamond. Send me some love, Blue Diamond. I've learned this from Freddie. Freddie is always trying to get the Kings or someone to watch our show. As if my YouTube channel is going to get a sponsor from Blue Diamond. I and the bag are one. I'm not one with the bag. I'm an agent. I hold the bag of nuts. I can't help but think of it that way. If I were a thorough going Hindu, I would have to find a way to convince my mind that I and the bag are one. Well, here's the crazy thing about this system. I don't want to be one with the bag. I want to eat the nuts. The nuts are good. I don't want to be the nuts. I just let myself open to one heck of a comment. But the West says I am not one with the bag. I am in a sense a little, I have a little bit of supernatural in me that the tiger doesn't have. That the lion doesn't have. That the chimp doesn't have. There's a little supernatural in me. Now, I call it the image of God. Tolkien calls it my ability to be a sub creator. Jordan Peterson calls it the divine spark. But I am an agent in this world and therefore I make videos. And I think if Mr. Rationality wanted to fess up, he would have to say I am God when I give my monarchical vision of the world. And I project it onto all of you. And I try to convince you by my YouTubes that I am God. And I think I've already got a God. I'm sure Mr. Rationality is a heck of a nice guy, but he ain't God to me. Because my God is the source of all of this stuff. I am a supernaturalist. So that's C.S. Lewis's Chapter 2. Now, I'm going, I'm taking a trip this week. I'm going to take my computer with me. I may or may not make videos. I don't know. We'll see. Because I'm going to go visit my mother. My father died five years ago. And so I try to, you know, visit my mother as often as I can. And spend time with my family. And do some of that. So if the videos, if you have a kind of a pause in the videos, don't panic. I'm still into this stuff. And I think this video reveals that I'm still very into this stuff. So here we are.