https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=R4po2hjQG4o

 Hi, this is Paul. I was going to first do the McGill-Krist, a commentary on the McGill-Krist conversation, but the response from many of you has been, do this, do this now. So okay, and having gone through it today, I can see why. This is a special conversation and part, I'm very, I'm disappointed that Fry had to leave because it really started getting good right at the end and we're a ways from the end. So part of me wants to jump, jump right to the end, but you can't really jump to the end because you have to understand where they get there or how they get there. Now they start out sort of talking about the culture war stuff, which in the monk debate that you can watch, Stephen Fry and Jordan Peterson were teamed up and Fry was just devastating in there, but Fry is a gay man and a comedian and a, in many ways, a reliable liberal who, as he says here, has been upset by the, by the fissure that has opened up in society. Now why should that upset him? Those who believe that what is required for our culture to break through traditional impediments and blockages and to arrive at a, a, the great world that can't be had, we're on the opposite side of Stephen Fry. Now if you listen to the whole thing, that begins to make sense as it goes along because in some ways it seems, what would Jordan Peterson and Stephen Fry have in common? Now Stephen Fry has just written two books on mythos and heroes and he's working on Troy, which will come out. I've listened to some of mythos and I enjoy it. Stephen Fry was on my favorite podcast, The Rest is History, which, and his appearance there was tremendous. I really enjoyed him there. He's as Peterson notes, he's a tremendously talented individual, fun to listen to, terribly bright, astoundingly well read, incredibly well spoken, is a remarkable human being. And yeah, of course, like, and I always, I always say everyone has a right to their own politics and religion and part of the genius of the West has been everyone has a right to their own politics and religion and we're not going to imprison you or ostracize you for your thoughts or words. These are a little bit more important so we have laws about that but there ought not to be laws about our thoughts and words. So let's jump in because they begin with the culture war stuff but very quickly go away from it and that's what makes this good. Now understanding where Stephen Fry comes down on the culture war things takes a little bit more work but let's jump in. Little like the monk debate we shared a platform with, it's really because I'm so tired and distressed and worried by the great fissure that has opened up the culture wars, whatever we like to call it, the assumption that there is your friends and your enemy and no ground in between, no commonality of, no cohesion of viewpoint, no shared things that can happen between people who apparently represent different ways of looking at the world or different ways of trying to organize the world or whatever it might be. And why can't we all get along, Rodney King? The very fact that I knew some friends of mine who disapproved of you would think I was doing something wrong by associating with you and I hope our debate showed that wasn't the case and I felt this would take that further forward too. I do think the last best hope for our society in whichever way you want to look at it, whether you want to look at it as some version of the West being able to stand up to the pressures put upon it by China and Russia and other countries that are less interested in liberality in economics and in the traditional political sense of liberality or kind of open society or whatever you want to call it, that if we continue to fracture and we continue to find enemies amongst our own kind so much, then really it's a very, very sad look at it. I mean, I'm hardly the first person to say this, but and I think you are, you know, a very interesting thinker. So in other words, if we continue to weaken ourselves by perpetual infighting elements such as China and Russia will gain increasing supremacy on the world and the West will lose their hegemony and this will be a bad thing for liberality, as he says. So in many ways, you know, he, like Peterson, sort of a classical liberal. And writer and talker. But it's clear that there are many who would really admire you and like you and follow you, with whom I would have less in common than perhaps with you. I think on both sides, if you want to call them sides, it's very easy to be a bit lax about disavowing people who like one, but whom one doesn't like. If you see what I mean, it's so flattering to the ego to have followers, to have people say, you're great, I love the things you say. In other words, can people discipline their fans? In some ways, what he's referencing here are the monks and the mooks and knights that that this terrific article that I talked about a while ago, mooks and knights, will the knights, will people be captured by their audience? It's quite hard to say no, but you've misunderstood me. That's not what I meant. That's not what I meant at all. To quote Elliot. So obviously, I've spent some time pointing out what I regard as the excesses of the radical left. I've certainly spent no shortage of time pointing out the excesses of the radical right in my classes particularly, but I'm not publicly known for that specifically. It's my resistance or, or, or, yeah, my resistance to certain maneuvers on the side of the radical left that propelled me into the public eye. I've thought for a long while that the only people who can probably control the excesses of the radical left are people who are in the moderate left, not people on the right or on the extreme right. They're out of the argument to begin with, and it's, this is associated in some sense, the difficulty of this is in some sense. We can't really control them in terms of the kinds of control we want, which are nonviolent and mostly verbal and persuasive. The difficulty that you just described. If people have an affiliation with you, then it's much more difficult to differentiate perhaps where you should. And so the mooks capture the Knights. Perhaps you see on the left, the moderate leftists and then the more extreme leftists, but the extreme leftists are also on the left and they're friends of a type. And drawing that line is extraordinarily difficult. And that's actually why, at least part of the reason why I'm leery of any attempts to restrict free speech, because in those cases of difficult differentiation, the only possible solution we have is dialogue about the problem. In other words, if we're not going to descend into violence where these ideological tribes war on each other and shed blood, we have to talk. Exactly where to draw the line. Because otherwise we can't. No one knows how. And I guess it's because extremism also exists in degrees. And so you say, where do you stop? And well, that's very, very difficult to say, especially among those who think like you, except for certain exceptions. Yes, this is very true. And it's a sort of basic philosophical point, isn't it? That you can draw lines between what is reasonable and they can be very narrow lines. But if you keep drawing them out, they become extreme. So for example, you can have what some people might regard as a reasonable age for the termination of a pregnancy due to some issue. Most European nations have their legislation about abortion. They have restrictive legislation about abortion after 14 weeks. And you can just look that up on Wikipedia. But the point he keeps making is, well, you keep chopping this up day after day after day pretty soon. But if you keep adding days to it, it then becomes a serious problem. And anything in that nature of differentiating and drawing lines is bound to cause that to be a problem. And I, however, am less confident than you are that the left would be persuaded by someone like me, the hard left, the one wants to call it extreme left or the radical left, wherever it is. And this may sound a bit like a bit of boohooing, which is very easy to do. But if you're a soft liberal, as I think of myself, I can't find any other designation, but that sort of thing, a centrist. These are insults to the left. I mean, in English politics recently, for example, centrist was the boo word of the Corbynistas, the more socialist end of the Labour Party, a party I've been a member of since I could vote. Now, he's got a real point here. I mean, Fry is a very sharp guy that in many ways, it's the softies, it's the moderates that are the ones that are most distasteful because they're not serious. They're not out there. And you hear this all the time. It's the apathy of all the well-meaning people who are in the middle of a political crisis. Well-meaning people who sort of think like us, but don't take to the streets or the barricades and overthrow the government. This is a very off, this is an oft-repeated complaint of any vanguard which wants to change the world that it's the apathetics. And you see this in almost every culture war. This is part of, let's say, the first century Jewish culture war where it's going to be the Lord comes back and he's going to not only take out the corruptors of the chosen nation and the cherished people and the promised land, but he's going to mop up all of the wobbly people who didn't get their act together and weren't shrill and on the barricades and committed to the cause. And so it's a devastating point made by Frey. I felt very, very, very much buffeted about and despised for my, oh, dear, but really, and oh, must we? You're a gay man. You're supposed to be out there with us. Why? You're letting down your tribe. Very, you know, I do think of myself as a sort of cardigan, beslippered old fool who is loathed on both sides. And it is, of course, historically true that in the 1930s, which is the decade we always go back to when we were very worried about the direction we're traveling in now, the communists and the Nazis both were absolutely of one mind when it came to people like me, Jewish, semi-intellectual, soft liberals who went, oh, no, but shush. And for the communists, for example, the revolution, according to Marx, was supposed to just sort of well up. And of course, it's the Leninists that said, no, you need to be the vanguard in order to make the revolution happen because the regular people, they're like mice. They're apathetic. It's ironic that one should really say that affluence is the opium of the people rather than religion because people will overturn the state for religion. But affluence and a comfortable shelter and reliable food and affordable distractions, this is what makes a population docile. It's just true. Because we didn't have any positivity, any certainty. We didn't turn. We didn't, you know, it's. And as you say, I know it sounds like I'm sort of taking on a victim status here that, oh, poor liberals, because after all, we've ruled the world for 200 years. And part of the political and cultural argument in the world at the moment is that the liberal project, the enlightenment project, if you want to call it that, has failed. I would say we've cooperatively guided the world. Now, before we get to Peterson, what Peter just said, which I think is an excellent point, too, this whole conversation is good. How has liberalism failed? What has liberalism failed to bring? Well, it's failed to eliminate. Well, depending on what your big baddies are, failed to eliminate the patriarchy or racism. It is it has failed to. But again, when when you talk to utopians, it's really important to invite them to, okay, describe for me this world that you would like to bring in in detail. Draw a picture for me, please, because you're basically saying in order to have the omelet, you have to crack the egg. And of course, it was, you know, where's the omelet? Or at least describe the omelet to me. Draw me a picture. And but but not just a vague picture that that has a soundtrack, as John McWhorter said. Um, show me the picture in detail, because, you know, I'd like to see what I have to sacrifice for before I make the sacrifice. Because I think ruled is the wrong term. I would like a man project if you want to call it that has failed. I would say we've cooperatively guided the world because I think ruled is the wrong term. That's such an interesting turn that he takes there. We've cooperatively guided the world. Okay, then what's doing the pushing? Monarchs and tyrants rule. And it's a really important distinction because that power is grounded in the sovereignty of the people. And and it's almost cooperatively guided. It's it's it's it's more of a belief in progress of a certain posture than, let's say, you know, the inevitable progress that was abandoned by the Leninists that was inherent in Marxism. Very interesting turn by Peterson to jump on this moment here. Imperfect as that may be, it's more grounded in the sovereignty of the people than any other system we've ever managed to whip up. And it's very Jeffersonian grounded in the sovereignty of the people. Well, what is the people? The people is this is this this construct and a little bit later, Fry's going to quite rightly make the point about Uncle Sam, but but that the people sort of embody the together as a community, they create something that we that we rightly attribute agency to. So, I mean, it's it's difficult also because it's central. It's difficult to make centrism dramatic and romantic. And it's much easier to make extremism dramatic and romantic. And that's one of its primary attractions. And then Peterson makes this point with his the the types of conversations he does where people are saying, oh, the world is getting better and we're we're actually going to make progress on climate and economics and poverty and all of these things. But this in many ways, Peterson is a gradual lists apologist. That attraction should not be underestimated. And it's partly why I'm so interested in talking to you, because you are this incredible dramatist. You have this unbelievable. Every time he says drama, I always think a drama mean I always think dramatist just accent. But every time he says it, I always think drama, drama. That manifests itself in a manner that I thought I was reading your Wikipedia biography in some detail, and it requires that I thought if you want to give yourself an inferiority complex quickly going through your Wikipedia entry is a very good way of doing that. I mean, you have 50 films and like 40 TV shows and five novels and seven autobiographies and a career in comedy. Seven autobiographies. The most autobiography life imaginable that was absolutely outstanding. That would have been a lifetime achievement in and of itself and a whole variety of honoree doctorates. And you have an intellectual end that's not trivial as well, because you were involved with Hitchens and Dawkins and the horsemen of the of the atheist movement. Yeah. And I want to really want to talk to you about that, too, because I especially am interested in your opinions because of all those people, you're the one that has the most connection with with with with drama and literature and fiction. And you you you just published a couple of books. I think after listening to this is he is a far greater opponent than those four horsemen. Very, very, very, very powerful myth, mythos, heroism, heroes, heroes. And there's there's a third one in that trilogy. It just escapes my mind. Troy, Troy. And so you're obviously extraordinarily sensitive to the power and necessity of literary accounts. But then you're also a humanistic atheist. I'm very curious about that. I mean, someone like Dawkins, he's so rational that I think for him and I don't know if this is fair and it might be a bit of a of a stereotype, but it'll do for rhetorical purposes. He's not gripped by drama in the same way you are. And there's a truth in drama that's not trivial. And that truth is L.I. So I want to go there, too. I can't speak for it. So truth and drama that's allied to religious truth. I mean, it's just a little throwaway sentence, but it's it's really true. And it's it's a very profound comment. People are sending me books now. I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to read them. I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to read them. I haven't had a chance to look at it yet, but someone just sent me this ritual in human evolution and religion. It should just be in his 80th birthday. So we wish him happy birthday. And he's not the shrill beast of atheism that some people regard him as. But I won't speak for him, obviously. But what I would say is that, yes, you're right. He's a rationalist. And I don't think I am. I think I'm an empiricist. Now, what he says here and what he does now is key to understanding this entire conversation. And he he lays it out beautifully. And I think that's part of my love of drama and myth and story and literature and history even is these are all to do with experience, with human experience, the register of human experience. Now, in my previous videos last week, I talked a lot about, and this is so much of what the McGill-Christ-Peterson video goes into, you have just the words that I've been using. You have your narrative and you have your data. And so think about how he lays out his reason versus empiricism as sort of a which side is more heavily weighed, your narrative or your data. Now, obviously, for both, you need both. But which side sort of has the thumb on the scale? Of testing an idea against what actually happens and how people actually behave rather than devising a system of reason. And it's not the reason when the empiricism are always absolutely opposed, but they sometimes are. And in the history of science, they have been. And you have to say that reason and empiricism are always working together. They're always working together. And in many ways, it just depends which side has the supremacy in terms of the weight. And a lot of that is sort of the difference, at least with the Myers-Briggs, between the judging and the perceiving. So empiricism would be a bias towards the perceiving and rationality would be the bias towards your narrative and the judgments of your narrative. You know, you could argue that Pascal was a rationalist and Newton was an empiricist for all his great mathematics and so on. He actually took a piece of cardboard and punched a hole in it, which is something that a rationalist probably wouldn't do. So it's experimenting in the crucible of human activity and observing what people say and hear. These are the things comedians do all the time. It's the comic mode. Which is part of the reason when comics do films, I remember some Steve Martin films were, I find comics to be tremendously perceptive. They have to be. And I think that's what he's talking about here with his empiricism. Is to hear somebody say something grand and then say, yes, but GK Chesterton is the perfect example of that. Now, he was certainly no atheist. He was a very religious man indeed and a great hero of the Catholic Church in some people even believe he should be, if not be atified, even sanctified. But he was a huge influence on me as a teenager growing up because I read his essays. And here's an example. This makes me want to look at one of his seven autobiographies. He read, he opens an essay by saying, I read in the newspaper the other day this following sentence. At the trumpet call of Ibsen and Shaw, modern woman rises to take her place in society. And I thought to myself, this is very good news. Very encouraging. I wonder if it's true. Let's see now who's a modern woman. Oh, Mrs. Buttons. She comes into clean every Tuesday and every Thursday. She lives in Clapham. She comes on the omnibus and she scrubs the floors and she has three children. And if I say to myself, at the trumpet call of Ibsen and Shaw, Mrs. Buttons rises to take her place in society, I realize the sentence is not only nonsense, it's pernicious nonsense. I would be far more hesitant to debate this man than Sam Harris any day of the week. And that's a sort of almost comical example really of saying you don't trust an abstract statement. You do not trust someone saying A plus A equals 2A because there is no such thing in the universe as A. And although we're all capable of doing substitutional metaphorizing or algebra, as it were, with ideas, the fact is it's much better to say one thing of something that is real that we know plus another thing of something that is real that we know and have experienced is two of those things. Once you start abstracting, and that's what rationalism often is, it's going off on an algebraic journey which can produce beautiful thoughts and ideas and beautiful schemes. But for me it is beating that out on the anvil of human experience is the absolute key. And it's a long intellectual tradition. That was just a terrific example and a terrific illustration of substitution, of abstraction, of theorizing. But it's important to recognize that what he just delivered to us is in fact the thing that he just also undercut because he just delivered to us a rational theory and abstraction. In fact, it's up quite a few levels, meta-abstraction of abstraction, and he's saying we ought to be careful about these abstractions. And so we ought to be careful about this one too. But he's so clever that he made an argument for what he's calling empiricism and skeptical about abstraction. And the argument itself is an abstraction. And this is one of the things about thinking that we can't get away from. And he's of course right. You have to test this, but there's a this you have to test and you use this to test this itself. And it's easy to say, oh my goodness, that's so true, forgetting about the fact that he's just in some ways undermined what he's just said. And there's a lot of that in his arguments. And I think we're in danger of losing it in a way because I want to unpack three things that you should get the sense of Peterson's that there's holding it in and he's holding it. I can't take it anymore. But I'm super excited about wave two because Peterson's better, especially in these conversations than he was in wave one. And if these conversations have a tremendous amount of potential, certainly far more potential than interviewing, doing interviews with the press and certain kinds of potentials. He wouldn't be talking to Stephen Fry if he didn't have his big blow up with Kathy Newman. And this is where again, this I hear a lot of dismissive comments about mass media is going away. YouTube is the wave of the future. Oh, no, but mass media remains continues to have its place. It is still massive as compared to this. Many people I would imagine believe Jordan Peterson has gone away when, you know, perhaps there's the potential here for him to do some of his best work. That you just said that are very, very complicated. So the first thing you did was draw a distinction between rationalism and empiricism. And you associated Dawkins more with rationalism and yourself more with empiricism. Yes, not entirely, but yeah. No, no, no, fair enough. Just as example. And you did that in an attempt to also describe the effect or influence or consequence or reason for your interest in drama or for the fact that drama grips you. So I want to start with the distinction between human or between empiricism and rationalism. So everyone listening understands. So walk us through that first. Well, empiricism is an intellectual tradition of using experience or trial and error or experiment to prove or disprove or to investigate an idea. So if you have an idea, I mean, pay attention that that explanation of empiricism was itself a rational abstraction. So again, I'm not saying that to debunk or anything. It's just that these two always work together. They can't help but work together. And he's talking about a bias towards one rather than the other. Perfect example is in the 18th and 19th century, a lot of women were dying of childbirth, at childbirth, appalling deaths, what we would now call septicemia. The babies and the mothers were dying and nobody knew why because there was no germ theory. Nobody had an idea that there were these tiny things that could infect our systems. So people tried to reason and they said, well, maybe it's the smell because it's a bad smell. And there was a miasma theory and other people just said it was God or other people said that it was some moral quality on the part of the women. But a man called Semmelweis in Hungary, Igna Semmelweis, tried lots of different experiments. He chose a certain number of people to do different things on what we've now called cohort testing, you know, or not quite random double blind testing, such as used in medicine to prove the efficacy of something. But eventually he got a group of medical students who were attending on these births to wash their hands before doing it. It was an almost random thing to do. And suddenly the death rate dropped. I mean, absolutely plummeted. It was almost random. It might have been called religious washing and religion as a very old, just, you know, Jesus critics. We notice your disciples don't wash before they eat. And the reward for Semmelweis? He was sent to a madhouse. Now, this is a great example of empiricism. Later in this conversation, when he gets to talking about religion, he is going to complain about what he's calling now rationalism does, which is to transport us in some ways up into the heavenlies, to take something that is of the moment, of the now, in the physical, and turn it into a rule or a law or an always or something that is above. And that's the heart of his empiricism versus rationalism. His skepticism that he says we've taken too much up there and made it eternal. But now pay attention. The example is above the practical and the here and now. And what it leads to is, of course, germ theory. But germ theory then is that process of taking it up into the heavenlies and making it a rule, making it a policy that everyone who assists a woman in the process of child labor should wash their hands. We have good reasons for it, but that is now a rule. And even if the reasons are lost, it will still work. That is part of the process of this narrative data issue. And often, once something becomes so complete that the narrative gets higher and higher and higher, the recollection for the data is lost. And we've had a lot of examples of this in the pandemic, because when the pandemic hit, suddenly there was an awareness of, oh, that's right. Buildings used to have all of these windows that we could open, and we have sealed ourselves in these climate-controlled places that recirculates the air, and this might be a problem. Because nobody believed that. Where he died, I believe. Because the rationalist said there's no reason that that could be right. But a true empiricist would say it almost doesn't matter what the reason is. But you need the rationalist to say it always matters to wash your hands. The true empiricist would just keep washing their hands and say, I don't know why washing my hands works, and I am, in fact, going to resist making a rule about it and transmitting it to my children. Well, I'm just going to leave it at the practice of hand washing, and that's where we get into ritual. But rituals are, in fact, practice plus habit with a degree of intentionality, and I would argue faith. But anyway, again, this is a tremendous conversation. The fact is it's repeatable and verifiable, and even not understanding, because it took later. See, and verification. So what is rationality? Rationality is sort of this checking, this substitution, this hypothesizing, this substitution of the check. And again, he's not against reason, but I'm just pointing out you have to use reason in order to check and then abstract to what is assumed behind this excellent illustration he uses. Of course, we all religiously believe in germ theory, and I love that illustration because I would, when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, I would watch these incredibly well-meaning young people go into these small Haitian communities, and they were usually attached to religious organizations, and they would go into these communities and lecture the people on the idea that the world was filled with tiny things that they couldn't see, and that what they needed to do was wash their hands and keep the animals out of the house and not let their children, you know, crawl around where the animals had been, and this would keep them from having parasites and all of the kinds of things that kept the infant mortality rate high in their communities. What were those young medical brigades doing but offering rationality and religion? Anyway, Until Koch and Pasteur and microscopes could show what the process was, he actually did end up in a, and he's a hero man. I actually went to Budapest to go to the Ignace Semmelweis Museum in Buda, just to sort of pay homage to this remarkable man, and I mean it's a bit unfair on the doctors. They had no reason to know, if you like, but that's the point. They had no reason to know. An example we all deal with of empiricism, which, and now we do have a reason to know, and that reason is carrying us even after we forget what hand washing is for, and we tell people, it doesn't matter whether you know it or not, just wash your hands. What can be very annoying is in insurance. What's called actuarial tables or actuaries are people in insurance companies who look at the statistics, and if they discovered that when your name is Jordan, you are 10% more likely to have a car crash, you would pay 10% more of premium on your insurance, and it's no good you saying, but why? They would just say those are the odds. That's the empirical truth. That's the epidemiology of accidents, if you like, is this is a tremendously interesting example because the knock against religion is that we can't see the rationality, and this is part of the reason why he is less reactive to religion than, let's say, a rationalist like Dawkins or Harris because he says, I just look at the data and sort of like the insurance actuarial table, they seem to outperform, but then he's going to have to live with that, and that's where we get back into into data narrative because he's chosen as a narrative and a non-religious path. The people called Jordan or more famously, of course, actors pay more, and you can then try and look for a reason, and that's a very valuable thing to do because we all want to know the reason, but sometimes I think there is a beauty in testing and looking and seeing and trying things out and experimenting. It's not a discard reason. The two go together in finding out the truth. So how do you associate that with your interest in literature and your clear recognition that the dramatic end of existence is? He says dramatic, not dramatic. I gotta leave that alone, but I think it's just peculiar. Valuable. Well, I suppose it's, I mean, in an obvious way, all literature people, literature snobs, I might say, will look at politics. I mean, all through my life, I've looked at people like, I don't know, Margaret Thatcher or indeed on the other side, Gordon Brown and thought if only they read Shakespeare. Why do people read books of political philosophy and books on this being a good idea on, you know, how parliamentary history without actually reading about how humans behave? Now, I love this argument. It's a powerful argument and his argument is, you know, if you read literature, but isn't literature, and this is an argument Peterson makes often. He says in a way, literature is more real than a life. And in some ways, it's an argument that's connected to the actuarial table argument that in some ways, statistics are more real than individual performance. And he's going to get into this a little bit later when he talks about, you know, the fact that you can make predictions about a community of people far better than you can make predictions about one person. And that's a point that bears a lot of contemplation, but his, you know, again, he just said, and I'm not trying to straw man him at all, but in terms of this argument about bias, Shakespeare in some ways is already rationality built into it. It's just, and this is going to get into a mouse example that he has later on. It's just pre-conscious, non-intentional mice. Because again, as as Peugeot, the point that Peugeot makes to Benjamin Boyce, if you set out with all of your archetypes and use that to frame your story, it's probably not going to be a very good story. So you say, well, where does the story come from? Well, there's a good question. And seeing how evil and good are played out in drama, because I think not just literature, but ceremony and ritual are extremely important. You know, but again, ceremony and ritual are the rationalized expression. And what's incredible is that this is, this is one of, for me, one of Peterson's really compelling things is that sort of like Shakespeare's stories arise out of Shakespeare's experience, but he cannot say from where and ritual arises out of the practice, the work of the community. That's what liturgy is, the work of the people. They arise out of the work. They are in some ways liturgy and ritual are the rationality of the subconscious, of the unconscious, of the collective. That's what they're doing. In understanding everything. And you don't have to be religious to believe in ritual. I love liturgy. I love church liturgy. I am absolutely passionate about hymns and songs and the Eucharist and the language of it. So as we try and get a sense of Frye, we would say he's perhaps biased against intentional self-conscious liturgy, rationality. That's what he calls it. But he is a fan of unintentional emergent rationality. We won't call it rational. Maybe it's not rationality because we're not using our rational faculty. It simply emerges. And again, when he later on gets to this example about the mice, this will emerge. And that's why I thought about jumping to the end of this conversation with one of the really hot stuff. But again, after seeing the whole conversation, going back and listening to it now, I can begin to see where the seeds are sown of what will come into full bloom later in the conversation. You know, the outward and visible sign of an inward and visible grace is one of the most beautiful phrases I think ever written in the Eucharist of the Episcopalian Church, as Americans call it, or the Anglican Church, as we call it. And there are magnificent shortcuts available if you look at ceremony and the dramatization of human issues, rather than attempting to abstract some essence from them, some truth that you can say that is applicable to all. But that is what the liturgy is. That is what, and again, I think what comes out of this is Fry is finally an intuitive and not a rationalist in his sense, which is I take it all up into my conscious reason, and I myself choose. In that way, he is the opposite of Nietzsche. In the sense we're all children who have to be shown puppets before we understand. Do you know what I mean? Does that make sense? Yes. I've stopped, sorry. No, no, no, no. Well, it's just- Jordan's thinking. It's good. It's good. Just stopped and made me think. I mean, the reason I got interested in religious thinking, I went down the pathway that you're describing. I mean, that's why I got interested in religious thinking. Because from a psychological perspective, I mean, the first thing that I realized, and I believe this is what you just pointed out, is that there are truths embedded in fiction, for example, or in spectacle, ritual, drama. Okay. Those truths are, that's the narrative part. And again, these are embedded, not, we're going to sit down and we're going to, the liturgy sort of emerges, not, it emerges through an individual, but then through a community of individuals. But it is much more of an artistic endeavor, rational, rather than, let's say, we might even argue that engineers are also subject to this because science itself is always this practice of insight and then hunting down the data to support the insight, which is of course why it must continue to be tested back and forth. And well, then you ask, well, what is it, those are attractive and they're entertaining and they automatically engage our interest. And, but way more than that, they're also that which culture centers itself around Greek tragedy, for example, which seemed to be integrally associated with the Eleusinian Greek mysteries, something that we know very little about, unfortunately. But for me, and I was influenced by Carl Jung in this mode of thinking, culture is nested inside a narrative structure. Now, having everything I said and myself not knowing a lot about Jung, Jung obviously comes into the conversation here because Jung, more than many, had this belief in this bubbling up that comes through. By necessity, I even believe that science is nested inside a narrative structure because the narrative structure is what makes the science practically applicable and useful. Yes, what it's covering the eye, you need, you need the manifest image in order to apply the scientific image. What else is the standard model but a narrative structure? What else is the standard model but another way of saying a narrative structure? The standard model is just that. And that is the basis of physics today, isn't it? It's a story. Well, and the idea that we have that science is a useful endeavor, the fact that we're looking to the material world for redemption, that's all part of a narrative. And we're looking to the material world. This part of the conversation was really helpful for me. We're looking to the material world for redemption. We're not exactly sure. Again, let's push our friends the way we push our rivals. Redemption from what? Well, from all of this suffering, from all of this suffering. Okay, but we don't really want suffering to go away. What does redemption look like? I was absolutely staggered by Jung's analysis of the emergence of science out of alchemy. And his notion was that the alchemical tradition was a 2000 year old dream, a narrative dream, a counter position to Christianity. Now, dream, it's, you know, having listened to Peterson long enough, when he says dream, see, you can use the word myth and dream both dismissively. And that would come from the left brain. Okay. Gilchrist, the what, what Stephen Fry will call the, the rationalist, but a dream is an image. It's a vision. It's something which motivates and draws us. And that's so when we say redemption, well, there's a dream. With its emphasis on abstract narrative dream, a counter position to Christianity with its emphasis on abstracted spirituality, suggesting that what we lacked could be found in the depths of the material world. So it would be a dream. A dream first prompted in a garden that may be whispered by a serpent that you have enough stuff down here below to build a tower to the heavens. And that was, and, and, and so there was this motivational dream that if we paid enough attention to the transformations of matter, we could find that which would confer upon us, uh, eternal life, infinite health and wealth. Now we have to eternal life. Let's see. Now we have to sort of, we're going to have to, not only do we, we must borrow from heaven the images we attend to construct from the stuff here below. And Jung's point was, well, until that dream was in place, there would be no motivation to undertake the process of the painstaking analysis of the material world that didn't produce any immediate gratification. And you could look at that in terms of the scientific method, because at first the scientist has the insight that some sort of analogous to the dream. And then he does all the work to try to say, okay, can this dream keep be constructed? That's all the motivation to go down and dig it up out of the matter of the earth. And it took thousands of years for that idea to assemble itself with enough force so that we could start to have scientists. So the narrative operative thousands of years before the, before the, before the technical process was instituted and laid the groundwork for it. I found that time incredible. And maybe also took that time for, for the brain of humans, if you believe Julian Jaynes, and I kind of do in a metaphorical way. I don't know if you know his book. Yes, I do. I'm sure you do. Yeah. That maybe, you know, our brains weren't even capable of processing in that way. Messed up my recording just a little bit, because I didn't know who Julian Jaynes is. So let's not be so proud of ourselves that we can't admit who are you talking about? Julian Jaynes. February 27, 1920 to November 21, 1997 was an American researcher in psychology at Yale and Princeton for nearly 25 years and best known for his 1976 book, The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. And we're knocking on the big old Chris door again. His career was dedicated to the problem of consciousness, the difference between what others see of us and our sense of our inner selves and the deep feelings that sustain it. Men have been conscious of the problem of consciousness almost since consciousness began. Do we have documentation on that? That seems like a long time ago. Jaynes' solution touches on many disciplines, including neuroscience, linguistic psychology, life born in West Newton, Massachusetts, career and motivations. Publications and thesis. So will the Iron Age collapse, speculated by Jaynes, to have been the ultimate cause of the breakdown of bicamerality? I'm sure some of you in the comment section will know way more about this than I am, but at least now we know who we're talking about. And a little bit later in the conversations, Peterson's basically going to say, not impressed. So So if you believe Julian Jaynes, and I kind of do in a metaphorical way, I don't know if you know his book. Yes, I do. I'm sure you do. Yeah. That maybe, you know, our brains weren't even capable of processing in that way around the time between language and writing, you know, that sort of time. We were finding ways of describing the world to the Egyptian. I believe I'm right in saying this is the derivation. El Chemet, the magic became El Chemi, which then became chemistry. And it became drilled down into an investigation. But first you had to believe that there was a Chemet, there was a magic inside everything inside substance, to which we could be tuned. Yes. Right. A redemptive magic. Yes, if you like. So basically, Frey is agreeing with Peterson just laid out in his sort of a different pathway to get there from Peterson and Jung. And this is not to repudiate science and numbers. And, you know, a very good friend of mine, who was a priest said, you know, physics is a theology that makes machines work. That's really clever. Physics is a theology that makes machines work. That's really clever. And there's some sort of truth in that. And I love, for example, the story. I take it in a footnote in mythos, but it's very, very early on in Greek mythology. When the primal entities, the primal deities are Ouranos, the sky, or Uranus, as children, we love to call him, and Gaia, the earth, and Gaia, the earth, who mate, the sky and the earth mate is a common theme in what they call a mytheme in lots of different myths, as you can imagine, the sky and the earth mate, and they produce whatever is in between the zones. And, you know, that's part of why I say I don't know that we're going to get rid of any two worlds mythologies, because they're all over the place. But, but now, of course, in, in the Christian story, there's the God that makes the earth and the sky, and so on and so forth. And which we inhabit between sky and earth, and that next generation are called the Titans, of course, but, and there's the famous story of the birth of Zeus, his father, the Titan, eats all his children and the mother Rhea is determined that the last child, Zeus shouldn't be eaten. So she goes and gets a rock from close by where she lives on Mount Orthrus, and she covers it in swaddling and hides it under her legs and then makes the child, makes the noise of childbirth. And Cronos, the Titan comes, thinks it's a new baby, swallows it whole. And the actual baby is then born on Crete and becomes the leader of the next generation of gods. But the stone she takes is from magnesium in Greece, which is near Thessaly. And it's a stone that the Greeks have noticed had a very extraordinary property, which is the most interesting property that any object can have on earth and is very rare and that it can attract things remotely from a distance that without there being a physical force connecting them, apparently, piece of fluff or paper, it's very rare, apparently, piece of fluff or paper could fly towards this stone from magnesium. And so stones that have this property are named after that part of the world. They're called magnetites. And from magnetites, we get magnets. And the story of magnets and how magnets were then joined by Thomson and Faraday and others to make, and Maxwell to make the electromotive force that allows you and me to talk the way we do and to use that action at a distance, which science is brilliant at turning into extraordinary magical machines. The Greek for at a distance is tele. So it's telecommunication, telephone, television, and teleporting, anything that goes from one distance to telegrams and so on, telegraphs. And gravity is the same thing. Something moves and there's nothing between it. And it makes us thrill. And science can do that. And what we've never found a way to do is, or at least what we try to find, is to do the same with our fellow people. But our fellow people are, you know, the world is surprisingly stable. There's magnets around the place and there's gold and this stuff and you dig it up and you can do terrible damage to it as we have. But we have moved from small groups, clans, to tribes, to nations, to this strange myth of a nation and so on. And the individuals within it are much less controllable than the objects around us. And yet we can control those objects so superbly that it gives us an idea that we have a special place and a special power. It does give us that idea. And now maybe we say, well, okay, so there's the data that, well, there's all of this data that we're different from everything we see. And it gives us this idea, well, let's not get this idea. That would be rationality too quickly. But to resist the idea would also be rationality because intentionality is built into an embraced and articulated bias. And I suppose really what we want to do is to reconnect ourselves to the same motive forces that are thrilling like magnetism and electricity that exist in also all throughout nature. That we look at them, you know, which of us can't honestly almost sob with joy when spring happens. And you see that once again, these leaves are being pushed out of dead branches. And as he's going to say a little bit later, but the animals don't sob with joy when spring happens. They just act. Glossums and insects are flying towards them. There's this. And so it's, see this is, so on one hand it's almost, well, why are we so, why are we so awake that we notice our separation from sister nature? But you cannot sob with joy at watching her unless you are separate from her because nature herself doesn't sob with joy at springtime. Fantastic process going on. And somehow we've allowed ourselves to feel outside it as if we are special. We've given ourselves a god. But again, you can't look at it without being outside it. We can't see ourselves and that's, we see each other. There's this bias. And the more I look back, the more confidence I have in looking forward. I suppose that's one of the other reasons I love myth so much. Okay. So, all right. So you described yourself as an empiricist and then you talked about, you started to talk about the attraction that the mythological and narrative of mythological and narrative world has for you and some of the reasons for that. And then, but you also differentiated between you and Dawkins to some degree. And so while I'm curious about why. Oh, I mean, he's, I mean, I'm, as I said, I can't speak for him, but you use the word rational. And I understand that. And I don't have any particular points of disagreement with him. I'm really fond of him. He's a friend. And I only feel sorry sometimes that, and this is a cheap point. It's, you know, but most of us are a bit fed up with this attitude that it's all about presentation. And I could argue that Richard's presentation, his passion is real. His love of science is real. His love of the joy and the wonder of discovery is real. He's written books on wonder, which is a huge and marvelous and much under explored human. Books on wonder. Okay. To, to naively experience wonder is wonderful to take a step back and observe wonder and to study wonder. Is it as wonderful as being in the wonder itself? It's a really remarkable little turn when, you know, we have this and again, I'm not trying to kneecap him or anything in this because the stuff is really hard, but it's, it's built. I mean, the religious rulers say to Jesus on the tri at the triumphal and it ran to rain in your disciples. And Jesus says, well, the rocks would cry out. It's, it's built into us to have this part to play to celebrate the creation of the universe. And it's a really wonderful thing. And I think it's a really, really wonderful thing to have this kind of a conversation because it's glorious. And we only, we can not only in our ability to notice glory, glory is intensified. And he's right that self-consciousness can get in the way, but science has shown us and it really can just can't be contested that we are part of a continuum of life. DNA demonstrates this, the DNA we share, not just with our close ape-like and other mammals, but also with plants and flowers that also have DNA and as we know, viruses and, and, and yet, or RNA and, and yet I don't think, I think it's fair to say that blackbirds don't look at the sunset and go, my God, that's so beautiful. Did you see that? I want to paint it. I want to remember it. How is it, you know, this. And wouldn't it be a shame to have sunsets uncelebrated. There, there is, there is something to this celebration. There is something to this creation. This is something to this second orderedness that, that we, that, okay, the data is the sunset. It ought to be celebrated. C.S. Lewis, you know, praises inner health made audible. The sense of literally of marvelling. It's the only world we know. When we're born, we don't think, of course, there are 70,000 other globes with much better sunsets. This is the only thing we've ever seen. And yet it staggers us. It surprises us. We're surprised by what is the case, to use the phrase that Wittgenstein loved, you know, the case is everything around us. Now it's interesting because. It's the case. We're staggered by it. It's, isn't this the motivational joy? You know, I often tell this story about glory, that glory is glory can be diminished. Let's imagine the world, the world's best pastry chef makes a cake. And the glory of that cake is multiplied when let's say the chef puts it before a group of people anonymously and just watches and someone picks up the cake and, oh, when you watch their eyes light up, that the glory that is in the cake is sort of potential, but it's when it comes into contact with a conscious, a living, breathing enjoyer that the glory is manifest. Now the glory would be diminished if it's the same cake and the same baker comes and says, well, I made that cake. Isn't it good? It's good, isn't it? It's good. Isn't this the best cake you've ever eaten? And so what does the maker of the cake do? Stays hidden, stays anonymous and says, here it is. Here's the sunset. Here's the hummingbird. The hummingbird is, is, is not in awe of its hummingbirdness. My daughter adopted a little cat and we have hummingbirds in the backyard and I watched the cat, you know, try to, has aspirations of catching a hummingbird, maybe one of these days it will. And I look at the hummingbird and its glory, but I look at the cat hunting, you know, the honey, stalking the hummingbird and its glory. And glory is found in strange places. And we don't know another one. And yet he's just setting up C.S. Lewis here. We go, wow, why should we go wow at what is absolutely ordinary? There must be a reason I suspect that we are astonished by the everyday, by the fact of what we see when we look out of the window or when we go for a walk, we're astonished by buds and grass and rabbits and sky and clouds. These things are astonishing. But we're astonished by what we want to imitate. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I've thought about that idea for a long time. It's not a casual response to your question. Well, the sun is a hero. The sun is the hero. You just get the sense from this part of the interview that Fry is just not going there with him. That fights the darkness at night and rises anew in the morning. The sun is associated with consciousness. And we have to imitate the hero. And we see what we have. Where's that have to come from? We want to, something in us longs to. Imitate everywhere and it reduces us to a state of, of awe and awe is an invitation to imitate. And, and imagine, so you, you see what you are not yet, but what you could be. And you need to see that because you need to turn into what you could be because what you are is not sufficient to redeem you. Well, we got to get at this redemption. I see that from a union point of view, but I'm Joseph Cambly sort of way too. But in terms of the way, Joseph Cambly, sharp way, myths, and then religions developed the idea of imitating these symbols of this, of complete power and creation, like the sun, whether it's raw or whether it's Apollo or any other deity or sense of solar greatness, you were supposed to supplicate or sacrifice to or acknowledge your weakness to, but we could sacrifice, look at sacrifice. That's a great, that's a great inward point. So I ask my students, especially the children of first generation immigrants. And you can see him ask it if you watch his lectures, because those are some of his best videos online. What did your parents sacrifice to put you here? And they can answer that instantly. And sacrifice, like we look at sac ancient sacrifice and we think about it as something primordial or even detestable, especially in its more extreme forms and no wonder. But we had to act out sacrifice before we could psychologize it and understand it. And what we learned, and this is absolutely crucial, this issue of sacrifice, what we learned was that if we gave up something that we valued in the present, and so that could be a false idol, that's one way of thinking about it. If we gave up something in the present that we valued, the future would improve. We learned that we could bargain with reality itself by sacrificing counterproductive values. Now notice what we're doing. We see the sun and we aspire to something in it. We see the glory in nature and it wells up in us and inspiration to, and I think, okay, so the redemption. Well, what is this redemption that we are inspired towards? And I know Jonathan Pigeot and he talked about theosis and of course the Roman Catholics got triggered and said, hey, wait a minute, we believe that too. And of course the Protestants said, you know, we're there with the apostle Paul. We long to be clothed with Christ. We long to be in Christ. We long to participate. The Protestants didn't say that because, you know, dancing, we long to participate. Lewis said it this way, you know, participate in the dance. And sacrifice is something that, and now I think Frye will diminish it in a few minutes, but sacrifice is something that pulls us towards it and we're, well, how can we see it and we wish to, we wish, we approach it relationally. You know, I've been thinking about this a lot and this is a conversation I had with John Vervecky a couple of years ago and I talked about it in my probably inscrutable video that I posted earlier this morning with some of my Sunday leftovers, but it's this argument that I've made that continues to grow in strength for me that I borrow Pascal's spirit of geometry and spirit of finesse. We approach, we posture ourselves towards the glory-filled natural order in an inquisitive, curious, appreciable way that we approach it with the spirit of finesse, not the spirit of geometry. Now we've made, science has made a lot of geometry out of nature and productively so in many respects. Remember, nature is not our lord, she is our sister and so we are to, in many ways, we are to partner with her, we're not to abuse her, we're to collaborate with her in the larger product of glory and that involves sacrifice and our sister makes sacrifices and we sacrifice with her in order to achieve the glory that is built into both of us. If you look at the man and the woman in the garden are not idle, they are gardeners and if there's anything that gardening is, it is the mutual sacrifice between ourself and our sister in order to produce more glory. If you go into a supermarket you find big red apples that are glorious. How did that glory come about? It came about with a mutual cooperation between us and her sister from the implicit, the implicit tiny little apples that once were. I was listening to, I've been listening to so much lately because so much good stuff has come about. Oh, it was The Rest is History, Aztecs. I'm going to now look up the author. Camilla Townsend, The Fifth Son, she was talking about, you know, there's a question, why were the Aztecs thousands of years behind the Spanish when the Spanish came and that whole idea has fascinated me. I may very well do a podcast, do a podcast, do an episode just on that conversation and I ordered the book and yes, I order way too many books, more than I have time to read, especially since Jordan Peterson is back on the scene. You know, I had lots more time to read books when he wasn't putting out videos like he is. Not that I'm helping you, but why were the Aztecs so far behind? Well, you know, you can read Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs and Steel. Well, you sort of require the agricultural revolution. Well, what does the agricultural revolution require? It requires having the flora and fauna available to you that can facilitate and establish life. And it took a long time for corn to be sufficiently domesticated with peas, let's say, or legumes or, you know, they needed to be able to grow and sustain enough plant, enough plant protein to afford established agricultural communities. You know, the Americas had another problem of so few domesticated animals and hunting doesn't allow you to, you know, forces you to stay on the move. And so all of these things are part of this march to glory whereby corn is a very different thing than it was. So this march to glory has taken a while. To move ahead. And so we acted that out long before we could make it into a psychological truism. And so there is that supplication element, but it's also the case that you should be prostate in some prostrate in some sense in front of what's ultimately ideal, because otherwise you don't have the proper humility. And I'd love for him to go more into that because proper humility for what? Is it instrumental? Is it pragmatic? Or is it even deeper that something in us knows we are a little lower than the angels? And so we prostrate ourselves even before them. Every time an angel shows up in the Bible that who isn't coming in incognito, that who isn't coming in incognito, everybody hits the floor. Yes. I mean, I see what you're saying. It makes rational sense. But then the empiricist in me says, Well, okay, I'm the mother of some of those children in Mexico who are being slaughtered to the gods in order to make the harvest better. And lo and behold, it doesn't work. Okay, now things get interesting, because this is, of course, the great complaint of the enlightenment, which is, well, it doesn't work. And now to double down on his empiricism, how do you know it doesn't work? Is it a question of time? Because this is where the evolutionary biologist and the evolutionary psychologist would say, Now, wait a minute, if in fact, this repeated pattern throughout history doesn't work, why is it still there? It might not work in your lifetime. It might not work in the individual case. But what if it scales and is necessary for the civilization? And Fry himself will make the point a little later, we can't predict what one man does, but we can sort of predict another. What if this working is on a different scale than the woman and her prayers and not losing? And for the most part, again, if you listen to that episode, mostly men were sacrificed to the gods and often those who lost the war. And this is a repeated pattern all over the world, because if you lose a war, you either become dead, or you become slave, which is analogous to dead. So because there is no causal relation between sacrificing children on a pyramid in Texas. That is a rational argument, Mr. Empiricist. That is rationality speaking. That is the left brain with a conclusion rather than the right brain that says, I wonder if there's a relationship. And again, an evolutionary psychologist would say, if there is no relationship, why is the pattern so reliably reproduced? And we might say, well, we haven't, we've given it up, and we're doing just fine. And then, of course, the answer is, well, for how long? Well, I don't know, the future is open. Well, there you go. It's not a deal breaker. It's not a closer. But the right brain keeps you wondering, while the left brain says, nope, I'm sure. And the harvest improving. In fact, there may well be an earthquake the next day and more people die. That very often did happen in the whole civilizations. Mayan and Mexican and others disappeared. And the more that. But why did, why did, I mean, if, if this is such a catastrophic thing, why did it persist? See, that's the haunting evolutionary question. And that if, you know, surely why were the Greeks conquered by the Romans? The Romans were more religious than the Greeks in some ways. You know, the Greeks are about the only sort of atheistic people we can find until the Christians who, you know, ironically. And I would, I would say that in Christianity, we begin to, you might say, okay, well, there's, there's, there's going to have to be a balance here. Too much sacrifice is going to undermine you. Too little sacrifice. Well, we don't know how is this modulated? They were threatened the more they sacrificed, and the less use it was. So there was no, it may have had a psychological purpose that I don't know. I mean, it seems to me the psychology of sacrificing your children or even your very rare cattle upon which you may depend for a year to eat to gods who will apparently placate you by making a better harvest or not. And, and again, if you, surely there were people who loved their children too much to sacrifice them. Surely there were people who loved to eat more than to sacrifice their cattle. Why didn't those tribes thrive and out compete those who sacrificed? And then why is Christianity in the, in, you know, the, it's early period considered atheistic because they're not sacrificing. Well, what happened to their sacrifice? Well, it was psychologized in many ways. Well, okay. So, you know, are we just, are we just putting sacrifice behind us? Well, not if you listen to everyone saying that we must sacrifice in order to, in order to what? We must sacrifice the vision of our faces. We must sacrifice the, the, the, the health of our arms. We must sacrifice, we continue to be called to sacrifice. Send a tidal wave this year that will destroy the port and all the other things that our ancestors found in the contingent world in which they, an unstable world in which they lived. Be careful with that tsunami example because of Brett Weinstein and his example of the boxing day tsunami because that religion saved its people and the skeptics drowned. So I can understand why a 19th century figure like Fraser or, or, you know, the golden bow or, or, or, or like Mary McCarthy or Jung or, or Joseph Campbell can, can make wonderful myths out of myths. They're telling a story about stories and telling us what they mean. Well, I, I don't refute it. I repudiate it. I, I allow myself to believe, no, actually, yes, it's, it's all very well and you can, you can build a very nice theory about what these myths mean and who these hero are and what these quests are and how they're only seven stories and, and yes, but again, the, the standup comedian type empiricist system, he says, okay, so I'm a small Roman person under those circumstances and what is this really meaning to me? I'm sorry. No. Meaning to me. What about us? Well, us is, well, us is a function of that narrative too. I've got, as Wordsworth put it, it's getting and spending and doing and having children and looking and hoping life gets better and. Now right there. And, and I think this is, this is where we're going to, this, this is where I see the conversation gets interesting and we're going to get back here towards the end of the conversation a little bit later, a lot later. We're only got a whole nother hour to go. These videos take so long because I think this is where Fry winds up. He, he's one of these people that I think at the bottom, there's a meaning crisis, but he's happy and contented enough in the feelings of wonder to not long for the kingdom that the wonder points to. Enjoying life with my friends, but. Is it Epicurean? To erect it into a spiritual language and a theater of, of, of, of, of human meaning is delightful and. Unreasonable. But I think we have to recognize that it's a game to some extent. It may be. There's that left brain conclusion. And again, it's back and forth. It may indeed be true. I mean, I, you know, I, I'm not saying this to, to, to, to demolish your argument, but I'm saying it's yes. But you know, in terms of sacrifice are important. Yeah. That's are important. And the skepticism is necessary because you don't want to leave anything standing except that which can't survive the onslaught. And there's no doubt that there's no doubt that the sacrificial idea can go dreadfully wrong. But I would say that that's in the nature of, of the attempt, because it's obviously the case that sometimes you make sacrifices towards a certain end, which is clearly an attempt to bargain with the future as if it's something that can be bargained with. Yes, but sometimes that works. And sometimes it doesn't. And later after that, the, the, the cultures of. What do you do when you bargain with the future? You approach it with the spirit of finesse. You approach it with the spirit of finesse. You approach it as if it is personal. That's what you're doing. That's the spirit of finesse. And we do that with people because we don't do it with populations because populations are in that way, not personal the way individuals are. Sacrifice around the world. There came a new system where it was the gods who sacrificed themselves, which is like the Christian myth, or the many of the dying and reborn kings in various myths that James Fraser in particular wrote about. And there Christ ransomed himself as it was. So suddenly it's, it's as if human said, this sacrifice is getting us nowhere. If God really loves us, he would sacrifice himself or for us. And that is one of the, one of the meanings of the, the incarnation and the, the, the Christian story, is it not? And it's not unique in any way. There are many other stories of, of divine, divine figures being sacrificed to save the society that they, in which they, they make themselves flesh. And he sort of forgets here what myth is for. Of course, Lewis would jump in and say, yeah, but this isn't, this isn't like all the other myths. This is, this is saying that someone acted out the myth and something different happened. And well, what different happened? Well, we all imbibed this myth in a deep way, and it changed our context of thinking. We're going to see that a little bit later. You sacrifice your short-term impulses for the long-term good, I suppose. That's one way of thinking about the discovery of the future. That speaks very well to your books. That speaks very well to your books because, you know, I underline both your excellent books. But you do have to ask why it works. Rules of behavior is that, I don't mean this in a bad way, the simple truth of deferred pleasure being something that seems to be, or deferred advantage being something that seems to have gone out of human culture lately. That we, you know, we're all a bit verucus salt. I want it. I want it now, you know. Willy Wonka reference. And as you said about sacrifices, you suffer or you find, you know, in some way you defer what pleasure might positively be yours now in order to have a future advantage. Right. And then we have an immense discussion that lasts forever about what that optimal future advantage is. And that's part of this religious investigation because you might say, and this is something that's manifesting itself in Christianity, which is, well, we're trying to produce something better in the future. And so then you ask yourself, what does better mean? That's the first question. And what does the future mean? Those need to be... And what us is participating in it? Individualism has a real problem there. My children. Okay. Which children? My genetic children or the children who are believing my thoughts after me? Are those my children? Are they brothers and sisters in church or are they brothers and sisters in biology and genetics? And then the final question is, well, what's the most appropriate sacrifice? And so you get an extreme version of that in Christianity. Hence it's narrative power, which is, well, you sacrifice the most valuable possible thing for what's of ultimate eternal value. That's the underlying structure. And because if a human is the most valuable, well, then a God man would be the most valuable human to sacrifice. In some sense, it hits a limit because it's God himself who sacrificed. And the purpose of the sacrifice is the, is the establishment, the redemption of humanity and the establishment of the kingdom of heaven eternally. So that there isn't anything better than that by definition. No. Although I know if I was to raise out to Sarah or a Marxist view of this and say that it's about the power over the people, which basically denies them any kind of pleasure now on a promise, which is unprovable of a future glorification in some kind or another, either for their children or for themselves in a heaven whose direction they can't point to. What always amazes me about that argument is, okay, so what are you giving them? Well, they're going to rise up and take power themselves. Oh, that's the better path. How do you know? Because it's just as much a dream. Well, they might die in the revolution. Okay. So suddenly staying at home, the opiate of affluence seems the most practical cause. And having known Christians all my life, when they get sick, they seek a doctor. If they don't have bread in the table, they go out and work. It's always sort of established like it's a zero-sum game that Christians, oh, I believe in God, and so I'm going to lay here flat on the floor until God raptures me. I just don't see a lot of Christians lying around. I see a lot of people lying around, but none of us would be confused that that lying around is necessarily their Christian virtue. And not just out to Sarah and Marxists, of course. Many secularists and atheists like myself have said there is a story to be told about religion basically stopping ordinary citizens from having any say in their life and their world. Really? I don't see that much. Now, maybe it's because of the Protestant Reformation and Christians all sort of got activist. But again, I hear this complaint, but I don't see them. In fact, I often see it that once people in fact convert, then they start doing things like, and this is, you see this in Latin America. Once people sort of get into a personal relationship, then the man's money goes to the women and children, is vested in the household. And we've got the Weber thesis that Calvinism is responsible for capitalism. And so the argument that Christianity somehow results in some degree of passivity, that's the summation. That's your rationality. Where's the data? I don't see it. They are told what the truth is. They are told where power comes from and where it resides. And they are told that their poverty and their subservience and their sacrifice are for the greater good. And in almost every case, the subservience and the sacrifice doesn't change because the leaders change. Is there a lot to sacrifice? And why did the West win? Why does Christianity flourish in places of sacrifice and poverty? Well, if they could get out of poverty, and again, I worked among Haitians in the Dominican Republic, they worked very hard to get out of poverty, but they also at the same time believed they had a chance. Now you might say, well, maybe that was that Christianity that told them they had a chance. Yeah, it was. But it also gave their suffering meaning, which just to say, well, there's actually no meaning in any of this. And the best we can hope for is our comforts and our distractions, because life has no meaning. And they must take that authority on its word. And the meaning of the enlightenment was the throwing off of the shackles of Aristotelian ecclesiasticism, which constantly laid down these categories of authority. And people began to question them and say, I wonder, because I think we might just talk about as if they didn't question before. I don't see the historical evidence for this rational story you're telling us. Because I know it interests you. And there are people who have written quite a few books about it lately. Is the distinction between a hierarchy and a network in terms of how you order society? And these religions and these sacrifices all came in hierarchical societies, rather, it seems, in ones that might be called networked, nodal, or some other word. I know Neil Ferguson has written about this, hasn't he, in a book that I can't remember its title. It's got the word tower in it. But it's one of the objections people have to the modern, liberally produced world is that morality is relative and that hierarchies are toppled and that power and authority are no longer seen to reside in some agree. The curtain is pulled away and the Wizard of Oz is revealed to be nothing. OK, so let's say most people who are stuck are stuck. OK, there are real sociological, biological, physical corners that they are in. Two people, stuck. One person believes there is some power at work in their stuckness, which will at some point justify the suffering that they must endure. And in many cases, these people who are stuck and suffering are tied to other people that are dependent upon them for one thing or another. So let's say you're a serf and you have a family and you know all you will likely ever be is a serf. So we have two serfs. We have a religious serf and an unreligious serf. The religious serf believes that, well, they both believe that they're probably going to be a serf until the day they die. It's probably going to happen that way. The religious serf believes that, well, there's a higher purpose at play and that their suffering actually will result in something better in this life and the next for themselves and their children. And so they continue to go forward in their suffering believing that they do not labor in vain. The other serf says, this is futile, there is no reason, there is no purpose. What does that serf do? Probably nothing. Okay. Which serf endures? Why don't we have nihilistic serfs? This is part of the argument that Douglas Murray made. Why don't we have nihilistic serfs in history? I'm sure there are plenty of them. Why don't we hear from them? Because they didn't bother to write anything down. Because they probably didn't bother to reproduce. Because they probably didn't stay in the household and suffer in order to afford for their children at least the meager things they could afford. The nihilistic serf doesn't matter. They don't go anywhere. It doesn't seem hard to me to look at this and say there appears to be an adaptive advantage to the religious because they endure and then they procreate and they, at least to the limited degree they can, they educate their children. The nihilist cuts and runs and hopes for whatever tiny taste of redemption they can find likely in momentary distraction. And again, this leads to my, the true rationalist, to let Stephen Fry off the hook. Well, if you can maximize your pleasure with cocaine and you know that everything after your first hit of cocaine is the downside of pleasure, it's the cocaine and the bullet chaser. That's reasonable. Why does religion, why does Christianity afford a lift? Because the nihilistic serf doesn't write anything, doesn't support his family, doesn't produce anything that will actually endure in the history. And this is part of the reason I think that, you know, for as delightful as Stephen Fry is, he's a product of affluence because I've known a lot of serfs and they work hard and they hope for a better future. And someone might come and say, you know, let me tell you something. If you're an illegal Haitian in the Dominican Republic, well, they snuck over the border partly because they had hoped for a better life and they were Christians. You would even say their Christianity and the hope that was given them by religion spurred them on towards greater things that left an advantage to them and their children. So they out competed the imagined nihilists because you just don't find that many of them because they die and they don't contribute and they don't write very much. They're like the chaff. You know, that crazy video on my Sunday leftovers, Psalm 1, they're like the chaff that blows away in the wind. That's what the wicked are like. That's what the nihilists are like. They're like the chaff that blows away in the wind. Unlike the religious serf who labored and worked because they believed that even though in this world their labor might not result in anything, in tomorrow's world it did. It resulted in their children, which probably also suffered too and on and on and on and on and on to bring us to the world where Stephen Fry and I can live in the kind of affluence and luxury and abundance our ancestors could barely dream of. Like a silly foolish snake oil salesman and the answer lies within ourselves. I have to stop you there because I can't answer. I won't be able to ask this question because there's so many things that you're saying that I want to ask about. There's okay so with regards to the idea of the opiate of the masses. Okay well the first thing we might note I think reasonably is that Marxism is the methamphetamine of the masses and whatever whatever flaws Judeo-Christianity might have had in terms of its corruption was certainly matched by the instantaneous corruption. Yes but the fact that a Marxist has a critique of religion does not mean that it falls because Marxism itself falls. And that's a good point but I would say that affluence is the opium of the masses which is why Marx's inevitable revolution never happened which led to the tyranny of Leninism. No that's not I agree okay so that there's a second question there and so the second question would be something like is the corruption of the church that you described intrinsic to the nature of the church and its doctrine or is it the corruption of something that's valuable? Now let me make two arguments for that. One is that the corruption is intrinsic and the whole thing should be just dispensed with and I would say that that's the perspective of the fore horsemen fundamentally. Yeah and it might and of religious people I mean Thomas Cranmer who wrote the the prayer book during the Reformation there's a great phrase in it there was not anything by the wit of man devised that hath not been in time in part or in whole corrupted. And now we're seeing some Calvinism coming onto the scene because the church recognizes in the church this problem and so you have Reformation and you have this continuity of Reformation and I would agree with I mean Tom Holland starts Dominion all the way back in the Hebrew prophets because he sees the pattern there and it keeps going around and so the church is always reforming and always taking these things into consideration. Absolutely and I think that's also an existential truth. I mean you just talked about Cronos. Yeah. Cronos devours his sons. Well Cronos is the archetypal tyrant and he's also time and both time and the archetypal tyrant devour their own sons so if you're a tyrannical father or a tyrannical statesman instead of encouraging the development of the young people in your charge you crush them and destroy them. He also castrated his own father. With so that's what time does too. That's a I would say that that's something like demolition of the utility of tradition. I mean in the Egyptian mythology you see Horus who's the son fundamentally both the actual son the heavenly son and the son and Osiris and for the Egyptians Horus and Osiris had to rule simultaneously so Horus didn't castrate Osiris he rescued him from the underworld and joined with him so that the tradition which was represented by Osiris which had a Cronos like element because it was tyrannical and destructive had to be allied with Horus who was essentially something like I would say something like empirical attention. It's something because the symbol is the I and so it was like alert tradition and that's different than the castration of the father that's the rescuing of the father from the underworld when he becomes corrupt and senile. Now when you just published mythos we refer to this mythos heroes and Troy and so I would say and you tell me if I'm wrong but from the outside it looks to me like you're involved in a philosophical archaeological expedition to find things of value in the past and to bring them forward into the future and that's what I am trying to do at least for me I would say with regards to Christianity is like I know the critiques and I understand the critiques and it's not like I'm not what would you call sensitive to their finer points. It is an open question right how much of the tradition look I know in Britain right now there are people who say that flying the flag is an imperialist act and so what are they asking they're saying well is our tradition so irredeemably corrupt that we have to abandon it wholeheartedly I can speak to this very directly because it's something I find very very interesting. Again it's so much of it is historical ignorance for those who who are obsessed with the flag and the politicians who want to to fly the flag I would urge them to read Rudyard Kipling who is supposed to be in some people's eyes the poet and bard of British Empire of the Raj that the spokesman for oh that cheap webcam that he has focus focus all this very thing there is a scene in one of his masterpieces Stalkian Co. Get a Sony not a Sony webcam but you know a Sony camera focus works really well very fast. A book set in a school where a politician I'm not sponsored by Sony in any way a politician comes to the school to give a speech and he has a flag and he and the school children are outraged absolutely horrified this takes place in the second year of Gladstone's five-year premiership at the absolute height of the British Empire the Queen is on the throne she's you know her crown and her flag are fluttering all over the world and these boys are at this special school which is actually a kind of feeder for the British Empire they're all be sent out to fight in afghan wars and in india and in the bur war later on and and Kipling describes how they die but the idea to them that anybody would dare to wave a flag and ask them to value it was so disgusting they could barely speak it's a very they were protestants in their nationalism extraordinary passage where he describes their horror at this politician using the flag and claiming to own it he makes the point that one's relationship to one's country is intensely private and it may be that one has great love it's all deeply protestant for it but that it's a love that is complex and confounded with all kinds of disappointment and hatred and and fear and shame as well as love and it is one's own thing but to fly it and to wave it and to say that it means this is is a lie and an imposition on the personal experience of those boys in that story and I would urge everyone to read that because it comes from a surprising source it's no accident that the best would you say the same about burning it is it the same kind because you you you just offered a balanced account because you said well if you're sensible let's say and and that that your feelings for your country so let's say your feelings for your tradition or your regard for your tradition is a complex mix of of emotions from abhorrence and shame and contempt to love that entire distribution okay that seems to me to be appropriate and my sense is that that's expressed mythologically by two figures of tradition one the wise king and the other the evil tyrant and all cultures are a meld of both although to to a greater or lesser degree because you get pure forms of tyranny and pure forms of a benevolent rule okay hopefully I think that's a reasonable proposition okay so it's complex but what you're willing to accept that complexity but what I and what I see and maybe this will tie us back into the political discussion that we sort of started this off with is that um and you never got back to thank you in radical movements radical critical movements and I think I place the the atheist horseman in that category there's no the love is not there the respect is not there the the pointing out of the flaws is there and the contempt is there but the attempt that's not good enough look if you read a piece of literature you can't simply deconstruct you have to offer and they don't have anything to offer and and I would say Stephen Fry's Stephen Fry offers not much more well there's entertainment there's tatat if well that doesn't help the surf either you want to dismiss that which is no longer relevant and extract out that which is crucial yeah that's critical reading yeah it's but the purpose isn't to dismiss no fundamentally the purpose is to mine that I would say and to build another um another very serious argument another um another very central piece of literature for me higher literature than than Kipling most people would say is is one of Flaubert's short stories and pay attention that he just said higher because that's going to come up in a few minutes simple heart which is about a this poor peasant woman Felicite I think her name is and that there's a scene in which she kneels in front of a stained glass window and and this is where the parrot comes from that Julian Barnes wrote about so brilliantly in Flaubert's parrot but she's incredibly simple and incredibly ignorant and uneducated but also incredibly devout and she kneels there with her her knees up in desperate pain because she spends her whole life on them scrubbing floors and she sees a lot of floor scrubbing in this this is Mrs. Buttons I think it was is this extraordinary stained glass and Flaubert is able to describe the incredible corruption and venality that went into the spending of the money on this stained stained glass and the lives of the corrupt priests who did it but also showed the light that stained glass should have been spent on the poor who said things like that coming from her rather than from behind the glass it's a very holy moment and it's anybody who dismisses religion would be well to remember that devotion and piety can be wonderful things as well as terribly brutal things and okay so I want to understand the difference right okay I'm going to read something and forgive me I want to go here you're face to face with God this must be something he wrote Frye wrote bone cancer in children what's that about I wish he I wish Peterson had said what he's reading from because both of them know and I don't how dare you and you in the comment section I'm sure will tell me tomorrow how dare you create a world where there is such misery that's not our fault it's utterly utterly evil why should I respect a capricious mean-minded stupid god who creates a world so full of injustice and pain and then one more because the god who created this universe if it was created by god is quite clearly a maniac utter maniac I get a little nasty here Ivan in the brothers correct now let's take that and we've got the two serfs we've got the one who's devout their knees hurt both because of the hard labor and because of their devotion in church and you've got the other who's the nihilist which one would say something like that it's the nihilist right where does that lead and that's exactly where Peter's gonna Peterson's gonna go there why is this adaptive in terms of evolution one is a dead end the other leads to a better world in the future for their children for their grandchildren for their neighbors for everyone else I'm as off yeah right right now it's okay so what happens in the brothers cram is off is that Ivan wins the argument yeah but a lotia is the better person completely so and so there's Peterson's point Ivan is the nihilist he wins the argument alosha is the better person who wins the life I would urge everyone to read the brothers carama because I do think it's a work of genius there's a lot about dastosky I really dislike because his influence is again people who don't understand dastosky think he's a champion of right wing religiosity without understanding that he went through an extraordinary life experience to come to where he did come and that his novels show his full understanding of all kinds of different points of view but in terms of the dialectic of of that issue about how how there can be a god I mean I was answering a question that I was I know and I'm not trying I'm not really not trying to put you on the spot my point is I don't believe there is such a being but if there a being that'd be a god number two were and he were the kind of being that has been worshipped and described by various religions around the world of monotheistic religions then I would have many bones to pick with him but of course I don't believe there is such a thing but the the so what are you left with well it's this impersonal universe which is cares not and that's a very reasonable thing to believe reasonable but it seems the nihilistic surf is like the chaff in psalm one that blows into the wind and it's the it's the blessed is the man who does not who does not walk in the way of the wicked or remain in the row on the road of the sinners or sit in the company of the mockers that's probably what we're dealing with here but who delights in the law of the lord and meditates on it day and night because he is like the tree planted by the river that bears fruit in and out of season that the the believing surf bears fruit in fat years and lean years what is that fruit bearing fruit for the family for the children for the neighbor for the community not so the wicked they are like the chaff the nihilist lot's wife says or job's wife says lot's wife she turns and looks job's wife says curse god and die that's what the nihilist does end it now job no he's going to bear his fruit in lean years and sometimes the fruit in the lean years is the most precious it certainly gains the most money at the market because it's a lean year the argument from evil as it's known is a very old one and it goes back through the through the through you know medieval religious figures as well as later humanists that this idea it does change and tim keller writes about this in his book on suffering it does change after the enlightenment you know you can sort of find the older version in job you find the atheist version after the enlightenment here that uh it is it is very hard to square this loving god who has knowledge of every hair on our head but the squaring is the rationality that's what's incredible about this conversation is because we begin with this dalkens is a rationalist i'm an empiricist and he keeps going to the rationality with his summations left brains maybe i should have done the mcgill christen the mcgill christen commentary first because that's what this is about it's about grafting well now the mcgill christen conversation is going to be infused with this conversation ed and adores us and and adores little kittens but he also as i say bone cancer in in children but also life cycles of insects that whose whole aim is to burrow into the eyes of children in africa whose aim ah it has no aim that's you're borrowing from a meaningful universe to make your argument it has no aim in your world it just does it's just the data okay and and lay their eggs there and cause blindness for those children i mean you could quite easily picture a universe in which there weren't such an animal is there glory in that animal a kind even in that animal and you might say oh but if there's a glory in that animal let's imagine we had the power to like let's say so you know rick is playing with unreal engine and playing around with my question and answer backgrounds and putting the discord questions up in the chat and playing with this let's imagine that this animal could be eliminated from creation would creation be more or less glorious and in which children were not sent blind with pain and horror by the various bugs and fungi fungi and insects and viruses in the world it isn't necessary there's a worm in africa that burrows under the skin and it's long worm and oh yes if you you can pull it out with a pencil and wrap it but it breaks it's fragile and all of this can be avoided with that rationality religiony stuff that we send youth down in medical brigades we call them brigades to uh instruct people in the undeveloped world who are often terribly pious about invisible things that do them harm and then it gets infected it's a terrible thing and a doctor recently made it his life's work to eradicate that and did it successfully and so then i would so i read what you wrote and i mean i i take it so three cheers for intentionality very seriously and and i what are you reading from jordan tell us we want to enjoy the party too it wasn't i wasn't throwing it in your face i brought it up actually because of what you said about flow bear's attitude you know because what that lacks what your statement lacks is exactly what flow bear highlighted in that woman on her knees and and i'm not saying this is a simple solution right is and then and i would say so let's take the argument you made there and there's a there's a direction that goes in that's nihilistic and resentful and vengeful and angry and all understandable but to me counter it doesn't look to me like there's anything good in it it looks like it's entirely counterproductive it's counterproductive it doesn't it's like the chaff it it makes the problem it purports to have been generated by worse and it so then the question is what's the appropriate attitude given that the argument you make is actually an extraordinarily powerful argument and i don't know the answer to that but i but i do know i think that resentment and anger and even the motive that would make you want to say that to god himself i think that's probably not helpful even though it's so well and and and helpful towards what so the surf is bound they have no chance they're going to die a surf and i do talk about the dominican republic sometime but so i go there and i realize that as missionaries we can pluck a young person or two with potential and maybe send them to the states for an education and maybe save a family but the lot of those haitians might be improved slowly but they're gonna die they're gonna die poor they're gonna die forgotten there was one old pastor who because you know they didn't have any money and part of the reason they wanted a relationship with me was because i had money at least more than they did you know i had a starting minister salary but you know there was more than they had and so when one of them got sick go look for the missionary and see if you can get something out of them and so there's this pastor he's in and out of the hospital and of course the hospital the hospital not like a hospital here in and out of the hospital the kind of hospital that a haitian could afford to get into and it was money and money and money and finally i said okay here's the money do you want to spend it on the hospital or on his funeral the family said we'll spend it on his funeral okay that's how he died and i remember him in that wooden box you'd bury people within 24 hours but they already start to get a little puffy and so i remember the pastor in the box and they took a little hand iron a little you know weighted hand iron this was an iron that you used and people you know it's not electric you don't use electricity you know it's iron you use it's not a metal iron you know you know it's iron you stick it in the fire it has some weight and so you can iron your clothes with it they put the hand iron on his stomach because he was already starting to blow those people had reason they could celebrate and they could have joy these well-meaning arguments about oh these these deceived people who are imagining something better because of their prayer and devotion would you even take the celebration at a funeral from them because that's what you're doing now most atheists are very kind wonderful lovely people they don't go to a funeral and say they don't do that none of us do we're our our manners are better than our rationality and and the point peterson's about to make i think is dead on right this is this is what he's learning as an empiricist that he can't put it together that you know bitterness won't help him it i came to that with great difficulty i mean i've had my reasons to be resentful and angry especially recently and because i'm suffering a lot of pain and it makes me resentful and angry and wanting to shake my fist but i found upon intense consideration that there was nothing in that that didn't make it worse and that therefore that must be wrong even though it's just darwinian wrong peterson looks and says that's like the chaff it goes no place it's defiable right it's completely understandable you must remember that my response was to a question and now the atheist backs up like whoa whoa whoa i'm not trying to well well why don't you well up in the suffering and you don't do it because of this because somewhere all along the line throughout history you learned that to mock the sufferer to to mock jesus on the cross you don't do it because you know a little later fry is going to make the point that people are awfully good yeah how did they get good in this society where were these manners developed where does this where does this this deference towards suffering people this kindness this isn't natural to us it was built into us by christianity that's toms holland's point in dominion we've arrived at this and it's so evident around us that even this extremely articulate brilliant atheist now is on his heels in the kind whoa i didn't mean i didn't you know if you're going to be a neolist show up at the funeral and say doesn't matter no you at least want to be a kind neolist why why the kindness that's toms holland's point why the kindness and and that's simply an assumed definition of a good person and so stephen fry you know backs up before the suffering and says suffering isn't just yeah indifference is the way nature sees suffering not us not after christ you know the dog doesn't walk by and you know well i suppose the dog's less lazarus question i didn't see coming and it was amused it was because i don't believe in this god it's not an issue i'm not really resentful and angry about the fact that there's evil in the world i'm sorrowful there would be no one to complain to very often and i'm united in my admiration for the fact and the real belief i have that most people fundamentally given this dysfunction or this deep trauma most people are so good are so anxious to be good are deontically good have a sense of obligation and and and drive in them to be better than they are i think that's that how did we get this way why is this in our value system how did this happen then it's one of the key things i love about humanity is not just that we are dissatisfied with things that are wrong and this this is humanity when see see it's all of his complaint about the data too rational what does he say when he talks about humanity it's up here it's in the heavenlies it's eternal that's the yardstick that you use to measure he uses it he uses a christian yardstick can't help it you got no other yardstick you look at the other yardsticks of of of the ancient world and you say no that's not a that's not morality that's not a moral yardstick and can be improved but with ourselves we are dissatisfied and that most of us want to be better and where did that come from it's the jews who you know they believe their god ruled the world and then marduk and his armies led by nebby kitnezer came down and burned their temple and they didn't say oh i guess marduk's a better god we're going to worship him no they said oh lord how have we offended you read the book of chronicles what have we done to deserve this calamity if you believe there's nothing in the world you say nothing nothing you haven't done anything wrong there is no right or wrong this whole idea that you you now feel bad about yourself because the babalonians kicked your butt everybody in the world knew they were going to kick your butt they kicked everybody else's butt but the rat that you feel bad about it well that's just your own stupidity give up that god and follow marduk i i know that's true of me all the time every time i go off to sleep i think how did i screw up tonight you're so christian that's practically your prayer before you go to bed i mean it's built into you today how can i be better tomorrow why am i so bad at this only i could manage that in reading the hebrew prophets they're just in everything that you've read in moral terms genuine moral terms yes i think that's an extraordinarily common experience and very much under noticed yeah jesus must have gotten in early and rewired us whether we're going to church or not yeah and part of the reason as far as i can tell that the talks that i've been giving let's say have had the effect that they've had is because i do point out that that's an extraordinarily common experience yeah that that that self-tortured by conscience and it does indicate um you can send jesus your royalties this striving towards a higher mode of being the other question i have when i look at the the the response that that i just read is that the amount of the world's evil that's a consequence of our voluntary moral insufficiencies is indeterminate you know so you might say hypothetically speaking that as part of god's creation we actually have important work to do and if we shirk it the consequences are real and you might say well that's just an apology for god and perhaps that's the case and perhaps there's no god at all and so what the hell are we talking about but but i do think it's an important issue i mean your life is characterized by a stellar level of constant productive creativity that's that that's you and you're offering that to the world and that seems necessary and maybe it's because the problems are real and important and and the role we have to play ethically is of paramount importance truly yeah why else would we torture ourselves with conscience and and i would say that's the flowering of the religious instinct within you well you could describe it as that but then you know there are free i mean you used a phrase earlier than i i wanted to say whoa hang on i'm not sure i know what that means a higher mode of existence um wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait remember a few minutes ago when you said of this other author that this was higher literature and again i hate to you know do a little thieving from jonathan pageau when he's sitting down with jordan peterson and brett weinstein and said wait a minute wait a minute you're smuggling you're you're stealing this from you're stealing this from christendom again and you're not attributing it to this world because where we're going to land there is no high and low um i i don't see i remember having this argument with john klees of all people some years ago he was a great lover of the tibetan book of the dead and gilbran and people like that and i can't not laugh when i think of john klees and i've always found them slightly hard to take and he talked about a he i think the phrase he used was a high level of consciousness and i said i don't and again this is my empiricist thing it sounds cynical and skeptical it's not meant to be but what level who's what describe a level what is a high and and i'm with um fry here on the higher level of consciousness thing because but at the same time he understands higher level of literature value go back to my conversation with civilla higher mode why higher what's higher than another are you saying it in terms of animals um it's a view it's an old-fashioned huxleyan view of evolution that most modern richard dorkin for example most modern evolutionary scientists and and so on the ethologists would would deprecate to say that there is a higher level deprecate is down level of being a higher mode of consciousness is it just like saying well you're better educated you've read more you know more is it you've somehow been enlightened a fair clowns effect as the germans would say which is um which is not necessarily intellectual but is somehow spiritual and if so we're show show me an example of it show me someone who has a higher mode of existence than i do or the i can um isn't his argument that the the devout person who suffers because they're on their knees scrubbing and they're on their knees at church is lower i mean i love the way peterson put it in the peugeot conversation that i mean it's almost by definition that you have to have these things and now i like i like where peterson goes with i can answer that i think to some degree three ways three ways one that higher mode of existence is what your conscience torches you for not attaining okay okay i think my conscience torches me for not attaining is that i was rude to someone yesterday and i shouldn't have been yes tell me about it right but it's the shouldn't part of it yes the obligation it's the t exactly david hugh the problem of ought yeah well and then you think you think you think about how it manifests itself you don't this is why nicha was wrong you cannot create your own values right the values impose themselves on you independent of your will now maybe there you participate well that's what your conscience does and good luck trying to control it this is very anti-nature isn't it it's well i'm a great admirer i know you are that's why i was that's why i made the point well opposite to his philosophy but it's well so you embarked on now it's opposite to fry too because fry is going to be very much not the will okay and and we're going to see that at the end a lengthy critique of nicha and it's part of his work that isn't well known i would say but and we'll leave that be except to say that the psychoanalysts starting with freud well not really but popularized by freud and systematized showed that we weren't masters in our own psychological house nice there were there were autonomous entities yes and those would be the greek gods to some degree that operated within us and we were which is julian janes's point exactly yes we're in yes yes i have my problems with james but as a overarching idea there's interest in it okay so there are things happen that's the best i could do right now as an overarching idea there's interest that's about as far as i'm gonna go happening with us and to us in the moral domain that we cannot control and that's a that that stunned me when i first learned it as a proposition it's oh yes look at that here's one what are you interested in yeah well that grips you okay number two what does your conscience bother you about okay that's you're inadequate by your own standards now what adequate would mean that's a different question but it's defined negatively by conscience yes and then better there's one that i said i would lay out three you can look at jean piaget's work on developmental psychology development of the subject yes he was a genetic epistemologist i'd love to hear peterson talk more about piaget i i think his stuff on piaget i don't know much about piaget but peterson's stuff on piaget really grabs me he wanted to do was this is what he wanted to do he wanted to unite science and religion that was his goal and he wanted to look at the empirical development of values and what he concluded at least in part was that a moral stance that's better than a previous moral stance does all the things that the previous moral stance does plus something else yes yes and you can say the same thing no i was a scientific theory i remember i had a great i i loved piaget and i his observations were so empirical of course yes absolutely the development of the child and the uh not quite the theory of mind that wasn't his thing but but but similar developments and signposts where people become aware of self okay so so now piaget looked specifically at the development of morality and he was one of the first people to emphasize the importance of games and what he showed what he showed was that at two years old let's say a child can only play a game with him or herself but at three both children can identify an aim and then share it in a fictional world so that's partly pretend play and the beginnings of drama and then cooperate and compete within that domain yeah and then what happens and the game theorists have shown this is that games out of games morality emerges there's a reset so i'll give you an example and this is a crucial example so if you pair the rats the rats juvenile rats together that don't develop teenage raptors so then you say map territory so sorry sorry to skip ahead if you've never heard anybody watching my videos has heard about pink saps rats enough that's a great example i did that getting away from the example i just heard jordan say it so often i just want to fast forward to get to the more to the next parts power determines hierarchy yeah then if the big rat play yeah that theory of mind games that were devised by simon barron cohen and others in the question of showing how neurodivergence develops in the autistic spectrum for example but one of the things so interests me at the moment because of the pandemic which is slightly close to this that you might be able to help me with is i've been very interested in as i have been over the years at how completely out of favor bf skinner and and the behavioralists have become since i guess since man you probably don't admire that much since noam chomsky rather demolished bf skinner famously um and on the language front on the language front but also the whole nature of behaviorism and looking at rats and their behavior has but it's hard when it came to this pandemic one of the things that was hidden from the public was that every country had its scientific committees which were mainly composed of course of virologists and epidemiologists and immunologists but all i did i'm watching this carefully and he's hitting the table or something and the camera's moving and we got a little seasick here but hold the camera down always behaviorologists too because the secret to getting out of the pandemic wasn't just following science and tracking a microbe an invisible virus in the air it was how people would take it and sherlock holmes in this and that's key and this this is very much you know all of the stuff that jordan talks about in terms of sacrifice in terms of history you know how the culture net gets into the genetics i mean it's all that movement between these two domains the second shellock holmes book which is called the sign of four says to watson i remember this it's very interesting he says you know watson the statistician has shown that we can predict to an extraordinary order of accuracy the behavior of the average man who uses the word man where it was now we would have to say human or man a woman be not i mean the average man we can absolutely predict how they will behave but no one has yet and probably never will be able to predict how an individual will behave okay take that point and apply it to your point about religion not working it's probably the same dynamic and and and the and the peculiar the peculiarities there you know go to go to the social data and and vervecky points this out to me all the time he says you know religious people perform better they're happier they're wealthier they have more children they outperform people without religious commitments and and even apart from at least see and i would argue at least to agree which religion but i would argue that in fact christianity via the west and what happened in the colonial period of it relativizing religions and this is tom holland's point about india that they didn't know they had a religion in india until the british came and named it for them that that something has happened by which okay and of course the british went to india and said now you may now no longer the widow you may now no longer burn the widow on the pyre of her husband okay you may now know i mean the british went around the world and did a lot of tinkering with things within limits and religious people outperform non-religious people and generally speaking okay in the numbers do better and i think that's an answer to well it doesn't work i asked for i asked for god to heal my son and my son didn't live and you know it's not like religious people don't know this i'm a pastor i pray for people who die all the time and i pray quite consciously for their healing are my prayers not answered often do i stop praying no do people ask me to stop praying in fact it is the rare atheist and secularist who will be offended or ask that i'm not praying part of the difficulty is to say really really stop me i can do it with my eyes open so we we can be talked about as a mass and advertisers and politicians and syphologists and all kinds of other people are very good at knowing how we behave as a group but as individuals we are unknowable without face-to-face conversation and the history and so on so that was one and the other one which i think is connected was i believe it was a bf skinner experiment and it's one i absolutely love because it makes me wonder whether all these kind of conversations are maybe ultimately a waste of time but he said if you take a load of mice and put them on a perspex tray and float them on the water because they are unaware of the risk they're in they move around randomly and their random movement makes the tray even they just randomly moving around don't put any cheese on one end of the tray because they are unaware if you scale it up and put humans on it they sink within seconds because they think oh we're tipping we must run to this end and how did they actually do that experiment did they actually put a group of people on something you see and what's interesting about this story again is through the whole conversation okay what is if i am going to get rational about stephen fries the data at least i have in this conversation and his anti-rationality his point is consciousness let us be unconscious and of course they all run to that end and so it tips over in other words consciousness of the problem attempting to deal with it being aware of it is the the biggest problem of all and that's something new to us it's very interesting how so i was um i was at a party and my son's girlfriend has a guinea pig because she lives in a little room it doesn't have a lot of space and kind of wanted a pet and was like get a guinea pig we had guinea pigs when my kids were little guinea pigs are wonderful pets they make delicious food for south americans but get a guinea pig and so we're at the we're at a child's birthday party at this home and um there's some water around and someone asked can guinea pig swim i said oh yes um because when my kids were little we would put the guinea pigs in the tub with them and you've got those little guinea pigs swim around the tub they they're pretty pretty good swimmers you know who can't swim great apes all the rest of the mammals can swim why what's this darn consciousness but you never know that unless you have consciousness and it goes all the way back to the question of praise why don't the guinea pigs pause at the sunset well the guinea pigs are you know they're from the andes and south america beautiful country why don't they pause and say my this mountain is majestic isn't that the delight isn't that the isn't that what gives us there are our pre our ability to appreciate and delight in glory and then as as jordan peterson said to ambitiously pursue it i think it's connected to the nihilistic surf versus the religious surf and again you never heard of the nihilistic surf because you would never hear about him because he did nothing he's like the chaff blows away in the wind someone and those of you who are only watching this video because a lot more people watch this video than my sunday leftover video and rightfully so is the video was kind of a mess because my thoughts were kind of a mess but i wanted to get my thoughts down and psalm one you know hmm what about that blessed be the man who is not like the wicked and the sinner and the sky and the mocker or the scoffer but is like the serious man who delights in the law of the lord and meditates on a day and night for he will be like a tree planted by a river that bears fruit that brings forth fruit in and out of you know it you know in fat years and lean years blessed be that man it's happy as that's a beatitude of course jesus will riff on the beatitudes blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven and the beatitude that jordan peterson gets wrong blessed are the meek for they will inherit the earth blessed is that meek woman there on her knees what do you mean those haitians will inherit the and and inherit the earth they'll die yeah but i believe they'll also rise again and inherit the earth oh that story yeah but in another way as i said before the nihilist doesn't inherit anything they're like chaff they blow away because in the old days we lived in small groups who just didn't know how awful humanity was and then finally when we got the corn like the aztecs and we were able to get in groups and then we sort of sacrificed people on a mass scale what sins we were committing how dreadful we were making the world it was only through the telecommunication it's better if we sin and don't have any law now he's now he's stealing things from the apostle paul communication and through the the you know the recent uh development of the global village or whatever you want to call it your countryman mcclellan um that you canadians we have actually become aware and are now likely to be running around in that tank and causing it to fall over whereas really we should just be unconscious and get on with living and and and and randomly run about in our tank and then we'll never sing just stay in that basement and get covered with cheetos dust and do some porn and play video games and let mom pay for the internet connection come on jordan rise up engage this battle you can do it i know you can the audience will get quiet when you talk about responsibility predictably predictably reliably does that make sense i want to answer this direct jordan peterson mr meaning intentionality climb up that hill carry that cross the kingdom awaits no let's just let's just be like the unselfconscious mice that get to run around on this pan and don't flip it over unless of course you drop some cheese in and then they're all done to the behaviorist question it's transformed into behavioral neuroscience and and and affective neuroscience and being taken over primarily by the biologists yeah and part of the reason it's vanished is because it's become more and more difficult to do animal experimental work for all sorts of reasons and because it requires a tremendous amount of technical expertise right so um so that's the theory of conditioning is also vanished with it i know it's transmuted and become more sophisticated and and being incorporated into all sorts of theories the most outstanding behaviorist was jeffrey gray and he wrote a book called the neuropsychology of anxiety which is an absolute work of genius and it's very heavily influenced by the skinnerian tradition right um so um i i want to tie something back again and i've been poking you about this and i don't want to so the skinnerians haven't departed they've evolved stop yet back to um the distinction between you and and um dawkins you're because i see you as a border figure you you've got one foot in the the rationalist human rationalist humanist atheist um empiricist world firmly planted but then there's the artist in you which is a major part of your personality and and and and obviously a part that's incredibly productive and very well received and that has an intellectual and and as well the that domain that second domain that you occupy isn't formalized the investigation of that isn't formalized as well by the atheist community they lose what's there and they don't value it properly and they and that's a that's a problem like with dawkins for example i i get letters from lots of people lots and lots of people i bet you do and lots of them are nihilistic and because they're nihilistic they're suicidal they're like the chaff they blow away i had a friend i went for a walk with him the other week and he was a communist atheist when he was a kid he grew up in poland and he had criticized his family for celebrating christmas because it was irrational and then he realized at one point he said i could kill christmas and we just have another week weekend that wouldn't actually right right because right there's a magic there yeah so the answer the fry answer to that is hey you're a mouse in the pan just float along and you inherited christmas put up a tree that that rationalism can destroy yeah and and and for i have exactly that problem politically with the royal family which on the face of it is of course preposterous more preposterous even than christmas and religion is the idea that we still and more costly have a royal family except that like christmas they probably do something for the british economy especially when they uh especially when the royals act out then they're really fun to watch but but you have a ceremony and ritual and symbolism is i look at america and i think if only donald trump and and now uh biden if every week they had to walk up the hill and go into a mansion in washington and there was uncle sam in a top hat and striped trousers a living embodiment of their nation more important than they were is uncle sam real you betcha he's real santa claus too that's the key he uncle sam is america the president is a fly-by-night politician voted for by less than half the population and he has to bow in front of this personification of his country every week and that personification uncle sam can't tell him what to do uncle sam the fortunate thing about uncle sam is he doesn't have children and grandchildren that get into trouble and say no pass this act and don't pass that act and so then we have the obamas who are the royal family for half of the country and we have the trumps who are the royal family for the other half they free these people give them a pardon all he can do is say tell me young fella what you done this week and he'll bow and say was that a slur against america oh well uncle sam say oh you think that's the right thing for my country well that's what a constitutional monarchy is and um of course it's absurd but the fact that churchill and that show everyone had to bow every week in front of this something there's something and also empirically look at the happiest countries in the world that's all you need do and they happen to be constitutional monarchies no wait a minute wait a minute i thought that that woman her prayers not being answered meant that she's lower than an empiricist who sneak a quick sneak some reason in to say ah it's just all bunk and so this is you know he's arguing the other side now always sweden benilux japan they're always right up there on the list there on the list now it may be that we can't find the causal link between their constitutional monarchy but it might just be something to do with that and and and that's it's a way of answering your question in the same yes yes religion is that um i i can see the absurdities of the claims of many religions and i can see the history of the wickedness and depression and suppression particularly in my own instance uh you know being gay growing up gay and there's a long history of religion in particular being intolerant and to this day even this pope francis whom i had some hopes for is seems to be beginning to add to to an ancient slander and and nonsensical attitude towards sexuality which is extremely annoying but but again back to the large group we don't know maybe and you know people ask me about the gay thing all the time and my answer is basically this um it's going to take the church hundreds of years to come to an answer and then it still won't be a a universal answer but we'll know more in a few hundred years we don't know it now and part of the function that the church plays in society is that slow to change you get fast changing things and again so i'm not i'm i'm not disturbed by the liberties and rights that gay individuals have in this country and in the west but um i don't know where this goes same thing for the birth control pill i don't know where this goes we don't know we'll find out i'm watching things change and i think we'll see this might not this conversation might not even last a hundred years and it might go in ways that surprise us and upsetting but um you know i kind of that doesn't mean i throw the whole baby out with the bath water i can see in the same way that i don't believe in in greek mythology in actual fact i don't believe that on olympus zeus lived there with his wife herea but i do believe hermes and herea and zeus live within us there is a hermes inside me there is a there is a trick the funny thing about actual is it's actually a word about time it's now and now is a funny thing in time but actually it's a very interesting word exterior liar a joker a cute funny side as well as a harmonic apollonian and a bestial dianithian side with his appetitive and addictive and and and frenzied and and and i see the value and the truth in in that in those religious manifestations those principles those elements of of my character and the character of of the human family in in in messopotamia the the god who became supreme was marduk and he had 50 different names and one of them was um he who makes ingenious things as a consequence of his own makes ingenious things as a consequence you've heard a lot about marduk too if you listen to a lot of jordan peterson now again i'm gonna say this and i know i'm getting comments from my regular listeners because it's like of course actually if you got to this point in the video and you're already annoyed by me interrupting the other video the other video is on this thing called youtube and you can watch it without me in it very reliably in fact far more people will watch that video than this video but i'm gonna fast forward through the marduk stuff just like i did through the rat stuff sequence of the those of the tribe person goats they came yeah something like that and indeed the greek gods derived from those messopotamian goats they came yeah exactly you know that's an interesting argument too they derived from and and i i get the sense of it but what exactly we don't know how that works either we really don't a fundamental uh what development in the history of religious thinking and dramatic thinking well let's say each god is a manifestation of a value structure yeah and we say well value structures have some commonalities across them just like games have some commonalities across them or languages have some commonalities across them so then you start to aggregate gods yeah and you produce a metagod and the metagod is marduk and he's all eyes because he pays attention like an empiricist let's say and speech yeah and so the messopotamians had already figured out that attention and speech were the key elements of proper sovereignty yes right brilliant and the egyptians right they worshiped the eye same idea and it was the eye in part that the egyptians associated with the immortal soul and they associated that with the proper locale of sovereignty because they started to abstract out the idea of sovereignty from the sovereign and so the sovereignty could be something that was now not embodied in any specific person sort of like the uncle sam figure that you described yes it wouldn't be the i often thought with presidents they'd have a much easier job if the symbolic weight was lifted from their shoulders a fourth branch of government right symbolic they'd have a little less power too which is what a constitutional monarchy exactly is by accident of history certainly not by design but it just somehow the the the bits of the sovereign that were inimical to to human development the tyranny the autocracy the whimsical caprice all these were sort of chipped away because of the right human failings of different sovereigns until by 1688 what we call in british history the glorious revolution when when the bill of rights was written and so on which was the same as the american bill of rights 100 years later essentially but and it became a constitutional monarchy and that was slowly refined as well and and of course i know many people find it absurd and outrageous and they live in palaces and they've got all this money and it's unjust and of course all that is true and i wouldn't defend it on any rational grounds but but i would on empirical grounds which is why your assault on christianity is rational not empirical okay okay and maybe that's a good difference between rationalism and empiricism so this you were talking about the gods within okay and you said well you you believe that the gods are within and yes i know that i know i understand the claim that you're making and and the limits of that claim but i want to explore that okay so as humanity advances we'll say advancement is the aggregation of larger societies are more sophisticated which is interesting because again it was fry who earlier says well if we all stayed in these little tribes then we wouldn't have guilty consciences and yeah but are you saying that when we were a little that religion is a function of the agricultural revolution well certainly is tied to it but it doesn't appear to be because again we can go to the americas and the americas were an interesting time capsule in terms of human cultures we didn't find all these you know even even the even the civilizations in the americas that were predominantly nomadic we didn't find all these nihilistic tribes and atheistic tribes in america at all they were more religious at least in the way that we think about religious than we city dwellers even today the the you know the pagans are the the ones of the country they're you know they're religious view of the world more technological power that sort of thing more ability to predict and control indeed a longer lifetime yes yes and the things that come along with that and more peace by the looks of things and more food and and the the steven pinker things yeah right right things that likely afford the skepticism about religion itself ironically this exactly that so the gods aggregate and unify that happens across as cultures collide and integrate the gods integrate and unify it's the battle between the gods in heaven that's the parallel development to the battle between tribes for dominance on earth but it's an integrative process as well as a submission process yeah right and and you know the one piece that he never mentions here is of course the israelite exception that they somehow didn't get they somehow didn't get incorporated they somehow didn't become marduk worshipers and we don't find them in world cities worshiping marduk there are no marduk temples what happened to marduk well they're probably more the okay so those are those are within yes now you have an integrated god within yes that's what torches you with your conscience yes that's your gemini cricket it's your what philosophers called your deontic or deontological voice obligation so the culture got into us yeah then then you ask yourself and this is a dead serious question so imagine that people are exploring the moral domain whose reality is blatantly obvious but but difficult to formalize let's say we're exploring the nature of the moral realm tentatively and we develop more powerful and more integrated theories as we progress you end you end up with a unified god so it's a monotheism there's a god within then the question is well what exactly is that god within does it correspond to something that's real or is it just a figure of the imagination but then you say well if it's just a figure of the imagination what exact correspond to a god who's real what does real mean in that phrase see again i think it's a function of we have to imagine it as a story sort of a physically imagined story i don't think we can do any other thing and think of it as real actually is that god within does it correspond to something that's real or is it just a figure of the imagination but then you say well if it's just a figure of the imagination what exactly is the imagination see christian i think partly christianity insists that this integrated god figure also had a real existence that's that's how christianity tries to to had or has solved this particular problem yes and and people like c.s lewis and jung to some degree as well would say well once in history someone acted out that unified god so completely that something happened that gets into the power of acting out and and this is in many ways the the assumption of the modern world that if i take metal and i put it in a blast furnace and i take the ore and i put it in a blast furnace and we have all of these processes that are again i look at drew johnson this video that that he had where they looked at if all you have is the bible you won't quite know how to be a an iron age priest there are a lot of prescriptions about the tabernacle and the temple but they're insufficient to actually act it out what you really need is sort of a an oral tradition that runs alongside and i know when you get to the new testament period that oral tradition yada yada yada that goes a whole different place i'm not intended to go but but we we have all of these specialized actions that yield in technology things okay and so the thought that we can act out things in our world that engage with that with being it's god number one and god number two with with the god that is arenic and also agentic that produces changes in the world on through history to the degree that stephen fry atheist though he is is somehow embarrassed for being rude to people and so he won't he will shrink back when jordan peterson tells a personal story of suffering from imagining that well the last thing he wants to do is be morally culpable by being by adding suffering to a suffering person and jesus acting things out change the world so dramatically that stephen fry though he thinks jesus if he existed at all was nothing more than just the nihilist surf no the nihilist surf is like chaff jesus is like this massive tree that keeps changing the world that's unified well would say well once in history someone acted out that unified god so completely that something happened that's the proposition okay well that's the limit of the proposition and then the question is well how real is this moral striving it's how real what does that mean how deeply can this impact the world in the future the surf asks the religious surf how real is the moral striving that keeps the surf tilling the soil feeding his children at his knees tithing in prayer to build up a civilization how real how much does it govern how much does it does it pursue and create a future like a tree planted like a river not like the chaff real enough as well how real is this moral striving it's real enough so you torture yourself when you don't engage in it properly it's real enough so you can't avoid its call it's real enough so that you can make moral errors that are so severe that you can doubt the validity of your own existence it's real enough for that oh there's the meaning crisis hmm and and but this is an honest question it's like i i don't know but it's i certainly see that how much good is done when people are good and how much evil is done when they're evil yes but it's and how much that becomes like a tree planted by the river this whole idea of flourishing which we somehow know but can't fully describe you know good well we use these words they're dead reckoning but how they scale we don't know very hard i think empirically to be really boring and use the word again it's quite you know to build up a list and show that there is more morality on the side of those who followed a particular faith a particular systematic religion than than those who didn't i mean you know that it's that's what statisticians do oh amazon lets me know when i bought my book you last purchased this book in november 18 1997 i've been buying from amazon for a while george gallop the saints among us this this point that fry makes well we wouldn't know well george gallop decided to find out what we could know and couldn't know and so he wrote about it in this book the saints among us and it gets into this question and i have a copy around here somewhere that i can't seem to lay my hands on but i know it's in this room but you can get a used copy for a buck 96 at amazon can you have morality that's the question you can certainly have morality without religion that that is okay okay let's let's take that for a second move back to the political yeah okay because that's the key issue yes so let's say we're going to defend the values of the west so let's say we're going to defend the values of the west to the degree that they're worth defending then let's go back to morality without religion now what he means by that is a person who is not religious and the way that in the secular world we tag religion may outperform someone who is religious absolutely common see it all the time some of my most moral friends they don't go to church they don't believe in god they don't do anything they're highly moral people does that mean they have their their morality without religion that their morality somehow came about in a religious clean room a room devoid of religion the way a manufacturer of sensitive electronics keeps a room devoid of dust or contamination of any kind uh no and again back to this book it's just so hard to argue that the reason fry feels guilty if he's not kind to someone is because even though he can't personally connect his morality to religion there is no clean room history abhors a clean room so we are making a claim that the inherent issue yes so let's say we're going to defend the values of the west to the degree that they're worth defending then we are making a claim that the inheritors of a particular tradition have something valued valid morally on their side or we cannot defend that position and and we can't defend the position i mean look i know this is bothering you what's happening in the broader public landscape yeah you got tangled up for example with jk rolling right well with what's happening around her yeah she's a friend and will remain a friend but i'm also sorry that people are upset you know the two things are not incompatible i don't have to break links with jk rolling to say that i i have huge sympathy and and i endorse the efforts of trans people everywhere to to live the lives that they they feel they want to leave it lead and and i hate how they they are often you know treated and and i recognize the courage it takes to to to yes and you've put your money where your mouth is on that front over the course of your whole life i've tried to yes yeah so it's not just a claim you can look at your biography and see that but he's a deeply moral christian sorry he's a deeply moral man in a way that christians recognize as moral he might not be in a moral man it might not be a moral man in the way vikings recognize as moral but but but you're disturbed nonetheless at what's let's say there's something that's happening in our culture that's not sitting right with you okay how do you defend the damn culture against it without making the claim that we do have something of let's say higher value that is the consequence of following a particular tradition yes because without that you lost you lose the argument instantly i i mean i think a lot of it is to do with the the the necessity that we we all have of redefining it we have to remember that morality is is a question of manners it is literally what morality means that our parents and grandparents had a very very different and very firm sense of what was immoral if the word immoral was used in a newspaper or by a person then that person's immoral it would have a sexual meaning it would mean that they lived with someone with whom they weren't married or they lived with someone of the same sex or that in some way they they were philanderers or loose in their morals meant entirely to do with the bedroom these were the not entirely because it would also have to do with what they did with their money and would have to do with whether they went to church it in fact although sexual behavior was a main focus of it i would argue that part of that focus is because if you're going to maintain a community there's nothing that can destroy that community faster than unregulated sex and i think that's true uh i think a murderer would be defined as immoral i think an alcoholic would be defined as immoral i think someone who in fact um spent their money frivolously would be defined as immoral there are great many things that morality was defined as but now he's about to say something that i don't sim i don't believe he actually knows what he's saying or believes in their sex or that in some way they they were philanderers or loose in their morals meant entirely to do with the bedroom these were the unforgivable behaviors of a generation that close to us we can still hug them if we're allowed to in the garden in covid times that that's how quickly morality changes so the idea of the culture is a false one there is no the culture um there you know it's not like a human version of a biosphere even i don't think really really because why would we go about putting out videos like this now rightfully so there are multiple competing cultures but these cultures are powerful and they do hold sway which is why we're interested in them and why we care there is the state of things that now exist but like when when you were talking about religion and saying this you know uh the other thing is there is the state of things that now exist okay so you've got your empiricism you have a rationality you have your data you have your narrative there is the state of things that now exists you can't you can't deal with the right without the right and left hemisphere you have to in order to make your argument you need to throw things up into the heavens and for them to stick and for them to stay there and to say this is this is what's becoming and and so we're constantly in the midst of these of these two um of these of these two world mythologies is and ought and now and becoming and we're just always in the middle and we use those to function it's it's it's how world work words work it's how we work there's going to be no way around any of this this god that what religion has been brilliant at and it's needed to be but so has science is redefining what god is what god was in 1400 it was kept god was capable of being remarkable things he was answerable for everything sort of like i don't know laws of physics are today god was this arena that we acted within in him we live and move our hand have our being even the stoics thought that god was all around us and and god brought fat years and lean years and god brought good things and bad things and god brought and god brought and god brought we used agentic language and related to that that god in an agentic way even when we understood he was a reenac and so what and then what eventually happened was we sort of became pagans and that's kind of where we're becoming because well god is now a being that is an agent within a meta divine realm and we worshiped him for it a couple of hundred years later a few things have been taken away from him and we could answer for traveling the world and knowing it and discovering how the stars actually were not holes in a black cloth but maybe were celestial objects with you know and then a few hundred years later and similarly discovering that well there were we used to think god was shining through the stars now they're just balls of burning gas you mean god can't shine through something spherical as he could something that's two-dimensional because again that's where we're at with this it's you know god number one god number two i'm always asked to define these things god number one is so john vervecky talks about the agent arena relationship god number one is a reenac he's like the arena in which we live and move and have our being god number two is he's an agent we relate to him personally and the christian god is both inherited from the jewish god who was both and in this way the jews were not taken up into marduk because marduk was always only one agent the jews believed in other gods because there's well the sons of god's angel i mean those categories we can't help but use after 2000 years of christianity but over the last 500 years god became increasingly like zeus when beforehand he wasn't like zeus and that's well again this book which you can't buy used because i mentioned it too much and there weren't that many out there and so they all got bought up and now they're like 700 which is ridiculous the science we use the word cosmos well cosmos used to mean a very small sphere of the you know look at lewis it wasn't small ancients understood this was a section of the of the of the solar system and now it's some infinite thing and there may indeed be dozens it's not infinite millions of them millions of them now oh now we're getting into multiverses oh now we're back in religion aren't we because we're making this stuff up without evidence right isn't that the definition who knows according to string theory and quantum theory and all kinds of shredding as number and all the rest of it everything is redefined in each generation so what is left that is absolute and this is where religion has an argument with intellectual progress because it wants to hang on to some you don't have intellectual progress without religion because progress implies this static rational thing that doesn't change by which you can measure change you can't measure change unless you imagine something some perspective or some place or something against which change is measured otherwise you won't notice change something that it believes is eternal and and permanent and utterly always true but there is no such thing the morality you know i mean i did a debate with christopher hitchings actually about the catholic church and and the people defending it when we attacked the their attitude towards child sex scandal said well but in the 1960s it wasn't such a big sin and what that is actually true but but you can't live this way so was it or wasn't it right because once you use that word right you're up there in the heavenlies right to discriminate against gay people no that's always wrong because if it's not always wrong then it wasn't wrong back then and it won't be wrong in the future it's only wrong now you're cutting off the branch you're sitting on it's not true coming from a catholic whose whole point is that they are eternally true that their morality is as true now as it was when saint peter founded the church that their enemy is people like me who are relativists who say that there is no absolute morality but that things change according to situation circumstance and knowledge and so knowledge what realm does knowledge come from does knowledge change see this this this can't hold together that is true of god god alters every day he adds a little bit of a quality here or she does and takes away another bit now no longer responsible for disease and no longer responsible for earthquakes but maybe god number one responsible for something else but it's a shrinking kingdom and so the idea of there being an absolute and an eternal it just doesn't seem to square with the way we have developed over the certainly the idea just doesn't seem to square and that idea is true but this itself referentially doesn't work the history which is to say over the last 5 000 years since we've been able to how many histories write things down before that we can only judge how and who we were according to objects and artifacts and architecture but and that was better when before we were conscious or self-conscious before we were even great apes and couldn't swim since we've been able to write it's pretty clear that that the instability of and i'm not saying this in a derrida way of instability of meaning although i do think we've misunderstood derrida i hope you've read peter salmon's biography by the way it might change your mind about him but that's a whole other subject but yeah so i'm okay so let's go back okay so let's go let's let's go after the eternal verities idea yeah clearly religious conception shift although there is there's a core tradition that remains intact well a tradition by definition stays intact there's something that identifies it as the same entity across time yes right maybe that's even mutable but i've looked for what might be regarded as eternal verities in the moral domain so let me put a few forward the beautiful is more valuable than the ugly yeah truth truth is to be sought after in opposition to falsehood yeah um that's particularly true in relationship to the spoken word the spoken word brings about remarkable transformations of reality itself and it's for that reason that verbal truth is constitutive but also of vital ethic ethical significance doesn't that make it all the more important to look at the discourse beneath verbal speech to unto i hesitate to use the word but to deconstruct it to or at least to attempt to look at the currents that run through speech to see and they're not all derrida or you know lacanian or fucotian whatever the adjective of fukos they're not all about power they're all necessarily marxist the project you know the socerean project and the others of looking at where language comes from not just in a philological sense of derivation but in the sense of where the discourses come from is is paramount therefore and so to say verbal you know it's not just an utterance is in and of itself transformative or if it is transformative it might be wickedly so or it might be negatively so at least you're not going to get you're not going to get out of relativism using words like wicked or negative well with regards to your point about the analysis of the of the narratives and even the deconstruction i would say it depends on the motive and it's the motive and this is i suppose to some degree why i well and louis of course you deconstruct you see through something in order to see to something to look at something you you move away you move away knowledge that's in the way to see truer more foundational more reliable knowledge that endures i'm skeptical let's say of the atheist skepticism it it's it's destructive there's a destructive element to it there's not a there's there's no archaeological redemption but that's that because it's like chaff it blows away you said it was all about the that's not necessarily the case that it has nothing to do with motive motive motive's a tough one yeah it is i mean if my motive is to make money and i make a great discovery it's as valuable as if my motive was to make a great discovery and i made a great discovery the great discovery is made but the implementation of that discovery might impact what all of us would consider to be the value and the glory that that discovery would yield and we would very quickly use a very christian metric to evaluate it such as does it do the most good for the most number of people for the most amount of time i regularly hear atheists use arguments like this most most most and i think it's a good argument but where does that argument come from it's a very democratic argument that believes that individuals are image bearers of god and therefore something that belongs to god like a great discovery well what is that is it an invention or did in fact i discover you get the idea that it was out there and i brought it either into being from potentiality or from i uncovered it and it's discovered because it belongs to everyone which well now we're back in god's territory how is the motive relevant well because your motives determine the decisions you make along the way yeah if i'm fundamentally motivated by the belief that being is worth preserving let's say because you know we have this this this conversation with respect to vaccines well once they discovered a vaccine shouldn't they share it with everyone and that's actually a very interesting conversation when i've you know my initial thought was yes absolutely make it put it in the public's mind and then let the vaccine manufacturers reproduce it and then i heard some arguments on the other side which said yeah but you know will and then i thought maybe that's not the way to go but that is our instinctive answer because of christ because well because your motives determine the decisions you make along the way yeah if i'm fundamentally motivated by the belief that being is worth preserving let's say because on the whole it's a good and i think that's a good i'm going to react and think much differently than if i'm ambivalent about that or if i feel at the bottom of my soul that the whole bloody project is of questionable utility and might as well be shelved in other words the nihilist is in trouble the person on their knees believes being is good and is leaning into it suffering notwithstanding and that that that dichotomy that characterizes us you know we have cain enable inhabiting us there's no doubt about that that's that's a fundamental truth and if cain has the upper hand even if it's in the scientific endeavor the consequences of that manifest themselves and they manifest themselves destructively and we see this all the time in academia academia can be cutthroat academia is seldom about well is does the truth come out or is it more important that i capture the intellectual property so that i may be glorified and it gets back to the cake maker which is the best cake maker the one who makes the cake and puts it out there and watches the people enjoy it oh my who made this this is delicious this is delightful who made this i want to know who made this i want to have the recipe it's jesus story about take the back seat the cake maker that says i well if i put this out there people might taste it there's a little bit of this a little bit of that they might deconstruct my cake and then they might make my cake and then well i need i need an entire legal framework to protect the intellectual property that is the recipe for my cake yeah there's a world of difference yeah there's a world of difference that's why that's why it's interesting you have to say cain and abel because i think this brings us back to the very beginning is is the importance of myth and and also of parable i'd and i'd like to end because we're getting towards a bit where i have to move away but oscar wilde is known as an you know a master of epigrams and wit and people mistakenly think of him as shallow or trivial or facetious or vain or peacocky or something but i don't know why people would think that if they've ever read anything by the man he was very profound in fact and of course he could be peacocky too but um there's a story that isn't necessarily at odds with no they don't rule each other out but here's an example of a great parable um which is which is why again it's why i love literature and and and the art of of wit because it it zooms to the truth so much more quickly it seems to me than the truth that would be something that doesn't change right that would be something that that we look at the the enormous diversity of this world and can take something out of it and say there we can see much via the one thing we can see the world via one story the multiplicity in one insight so many other attempts to describe or rationalize truth and here's one where uh wild was at a at a dinner and uh someone was being rather kind of uh envious of someone and being rather unpleasant and wild suddenly said the devil was walking one day in the libyan desert and he saw a monk being tormented by some of his demons and he approached and the demons bowed in front of him and said master and he said what what goes on here they said master for 39 days and 39 nights we have tried to tempt this holy monk away from his god and his religion but he has stayed steadfast and holy to his god and his religion we have offered him powers and principalities we've had offered him the joys of the flesh we have offered him wine and food and riches but he has turned us down there's nothing that we can do to win this holy man to our cause and the devil said out of my way and he whispered in the monk's ear and instantly the monk took the petrel cross around his neck and snapped it and filled the air with hideous curses against his god and his church and his religion and swore he would never follow christ again and the demons fell down and in front of the the devil and said master what can you have said in one second that we could not what did you say to him and the devil said oh it was very simple i just told him his brother had been made bishop of alexandria now that seems to me a it's very funny but b it is profoundly truthful and it is this this is it takes so much of our experience and lifts it up and says there there you want to know human beings there right there is the way we show people how envy and resentment are so much a part of who we are that that if you know i mean it's it's it seems like a trivial example but it just it's a model to me that if you want to say something and you want to change minds and you want to out of the motivation of the kindness of your heart improve people's lives i'm with you now to burn people with the the flame of love and hope and connection that we all secretly believe in them that that you know that makes us gasp when we read poetry or makes us feel what love is and joy and all the things that we're mostly too embarrassed to talk about because they're a bit soppy but truly they matter more you brits and your embarrassment you're such a such a what's with your culture we americans we're out there more than anything else we displace them on kittens and so on but we really really we care about these things and and the way i think to to bond people to it is not to talk abstractly about ideas necessarily unless you're talking to someone who has the same reading as you and that sounds a snobbish point but unless you're talking to someone who's also read the same books or at least has the same ideas as you or is open to them it just becomes a bit lectury whereas if you can tell a story instead or a parable that's especially if it's funny or it's sexy or it's you know got some quality that just tickles you know that strokes us then then you bring people to a connection to it and unfortunately most of the most of the world who use the art of rhetoric and persuasion and do it for nefarious purposes and maybe that's the key is to try and to try if only we knew what nefarious was because nefarious just seems to change what's nefarious today wasn't nefarious a hundred years ago and what was nefarious a hundred years ago wasn't nefarious today you know there's a certain amnesia that that that takes hold when we have a conversation we forget what was uttered the last few minutes ago and we don't bring it in and say now wait a minute i thought this whole nefariousness was something that is relative to a time and place and and the whole observation that sometimes the devil has all the good storytellers the thing that every preacher will tell you is that most of the people fry is exactly right here most of the people won't remember these fine theological points that you make they will they will deflect your admonitions they will accept them or and they will they will deflect them by either saying oh yes you're right and not think that your admonition requires anything of them or they'll deflect them in defensiveness but the stories get through which brings me to this quote that i those of you who listen to my rough drafts for sunday know i use this slide a lot imagine you've got to write a story in which for the first time someone who suffers the excruciating death of a slave is going to be cast as being in some way part of the creator god who's fashioned everything and he's got to be convincing not just to people now but for 2 000 years and across the whole span of the world it's really an astonishing thing to have pulled off as a literary feat and that four people did so is amazing and of course what those four people had in common is the person they wrote about who by acting in that way has so colonized stephen fry that he can't even see the jesus that is moving through him even as he's in many ways a much more effective atheist apologist than these four horsemen and build up as you are doing and i hope i'm doing in my own way the the value of story and um uh and looking deeply into the nature of characters within stories that even though it's just a story it might actually be a portal to something really profound that will touch you and change your life and maybe even change the world that's just exactly the right place to stop good i'm sorry it has to stop but it's been one of us three quarters i knew that we would i was primarily worried about this conversation because there were so many things that i wanted to talk to you about i didn't know what i would talk to you about well we may have to have a we may have to have a second one in a few months if yes well after we digest this one yeah i hope they do it was delightful so i hope my commentary was productive for you i know some of you wrote to me and said are you going to do this one are you going to do this one and some of you wrote to me and said you have to do this one okay have to do but it was a delight it was a good conversation and i hope you liked it uh leave me a comment let me know what you think