https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=corO9nfb6vE

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to make a broader video on my Jordan Peterson Kavanaugh tweet but I wanted to wait until after I had my Sacramento meetup because often find a lot of wisdom in that group and learn a lot of things and get some other perspectives and this morning I the number of people on Facebook and some people sent me emails and said you should really talk about this in terms of the politics and religion politics and religion Tough things to talk about but let's talk about some things. So yeah, the the Kavanaugh tweet is really kind of roiled the Jordan Peterson following and Caused a lot of turmoil now in my opinion there are two takes on this I had one and then I went to the meetup and got you know, basically a number of people said now I think about it this way. So here are the two main takes that I see at this point number one Jordan Peterson is undisciplined and impulsive also Expressive and transparent. Those are kind of the opposite sides of those two things, especially when it comes to Twitter This is Jordan Peterson being Jordan Peterson That was pretty much my take when I came to the meetup and put that one forward and then really the other one Was pushed pretty hard back at me This is a calculated move to recalibrate his persona on the American political spectrum to make him more mainstream for major media and Let's run through these two takes first the Jordan Peterson will be Jordan Peterson. This guy wears his heart on his sleeve This is why we love him this is part of what makes him not just smart but fun and when we watch those rant crazy rambling biblical videos or his Evangelistic roadshow that he's on right now. This is this is what this is who he is He gets on stage and he rambles at stream of consciousness He he does what what gets immediate response from the audience if the audience is quiet He continues to follow that through when he talks about how he does counseling He doesn't sit there and calculate what he's going to say he he basically speaks off the cuff and speaks from his heart and and more often than not he's right and and worth listening to and insightful and fun and Engaging and all those things this is part of what makes him him and part of what we love about him But another way of seeing this is undisciplined especially in a political sense because it's one thing if you're just sitting having a conversation with someone or even just You know kind of spitballing with friends, but when you when you deal with institutions Discipline becomes important because you're not just speaking for yourself You're speaking on behalf of a community and Now I remember when Bernie Sanders was you know taking on Hillary Clinton. I remember Mark Shields on the Shields and Brooks that's the that's the news hour thing that they do every Friday on PBS NewsHour I remember Mark Shields commenting about Bernie Sanders I've never seen such a disciplined politician and I thought what does he mean by that and I thought through that well the meaning was Bernie Sanders sticks to his message and you know how much did each how much was the average? Monetary donation to Bernie Sanders and bang bang bang bang bang every time Bernie Sanders got on stage He said the same thing. This is what it means to be a disciplined politician This is not Jordan Peterson. This is not Jordan Peterson at all. In fact, you can find Jordan Peterson Changing his mind about things mid-interview and changing them back another interview very early on in the process You know and a few people Connected with me who knew him personally because I was making videos and and and one of the comments I got was he's he's very apt at Changing himself depending on the audience. He's speaking to now now this might sound to some of you two-faced But it's also a very powerful rhetorical and Relational skill and where you mirror back at people who they are and as a pastor I do this The Apostle Paul says, you know to the Jews is a Jew to the Greek is the Greek This is this is this is part of how we connect with each other and but but the difficulty of this Especially when you get into an institutional frame is the community requires you requires you to have a disciplined line And it's a lot of these tensions actually that that are under the surface as we talk about People's complaints about churches churches hold a particular line. Well, they do that because of a community It's not just politicians that do that pastors do that and part of the reason you do that is You know if I decide one day to stand up and say I'm not gonna be a Christian today I'm gonna be a Muslim well my congregation would have a problem with this and they would fire me and This is because not only do I speak to a community but at times I speak for a community and and this is This is a reality about institutions and communities and for the most part Jordan Peterson has been Jordan Peterson It's been a it's been a one-man show. It's been a one-man band and the beauty and flexibility of that is you can get up and you can say whatever it is you want to say because it's Just you and so Jordan doesn't stay on script Unscripted and you know people who are surprised by that are like I've ever watched his videos. There's nothing scripted about him I've tried to outline some of his talks and it's it's nearly impossible because it's a rabbit trail over here and a rabbit trail Over there and I do the same thing now again If if it's just you talking who cares? But if you are the president of the United States if you are the leader of a political party if you are a Spokesperson for a cause that a whole group of people have associated with and identified with and staked reputation on and given money to and given time towards well, suddenly your words matter in a different way and Now obviously in the Trump era this has been I mean Trump has undercut so much Not only not only political correctness, but political conventional wisdom that but you know at the same time a lot of these things Trump has paid a price for and But this is this is Jordan Peterson Now I often find people Not facing a reality about Jordan Peterson to in politics when it comes to policy Okay, when it comes to policy Jordan Peterson appeased appears to be a Canadian moderate Which puts him kind of middle left on the American scene and and remember Jordan Peterson on Bill Maher now Now everyone on the show was over to the left and so then Peterson spoke up, you know What about all those people that voted for Trump you you know, this is a reconciliation move But it also was in alignment with the right. So as we get in a little bit later part of his rise You can attribute to the anti-left Coalition out there. Let's call it a coalition He's also a pragmatist which is in tension with his temperamental habit of expressive hyperbole a number of people commented on Owen Benjamin's lies and I agree with the comments when a lot of these things that Owen Benjamin calls lies I don't see these as lies. They're hyperbole. This is how Peterson talks. He's he's bombastic. He's dynamic He's expressive. This is what's fun about him And so he's gonna say everyone in the world now, do you mean everyone in the world? No, it's a hyperbole and so I haven't slept for a month people often say that say those kinds of things to me and More often than not they they actually were sleeping They didn't sleep as much as they'd want but they said I haven't slept for a month. I don't take them literally It's kind of that internet literalism that gets going now Jordan Peterson on Twitter if you look at so he he posted a he posted a blog post and Where he kind of walks through it and this was in many ways Quintessential Peterson and he and he talked about the fact which he's spoken about before that He has trouble with Twitter and his son called him out on that and said, you know dad You've really got a you know clean up your act on Twitter because you know before about six months ago Jordan Peterson on Twitter was you know one offing, you know snide comments his moodiness was apparent now again you're if If you're you the moodiness that I'm having a bad day. So I'm gonna crab at this person I'm gonna get in those little Twitter spat with this person I mean a number of months ago He tried to sort of beg that off and he had these little rules about Twitter where you know He wasn't gonna use Twitter for that way now Twitter is a den of temptation For many of our bad impulses when it comes to social media. It's just so easy to Type out a snarky tweet and I've done it and if anyone else is on Twitter They've done it and so in many ways this blog post was again in a lot of ways Peterson being Peterson he has a mea culpa in there and he apologizes and But does he you know as some commenters and some Facebook groups that I've I was reading this morning now This just makes it worse So and this is often the case if you If you do something that offends someone and One rhetorical thing is well, I don't know what that means, which is usually not really the straightforward question It's I'm angry and One of the phrases that we've used for being upset is I can't understand it Don't take that phrase literally because often if you do something wrong and you try to explain you just dig your hole deeper And I think for some people the blog post was reassurance and for other people No, he just dug his hole deeper and And this is again Peterson on Twitter and he says well, you know, I've got almost a million followers on Twitter I don't know if I should give Twitter up This is this is the this is the This is the challenge of Success now you've got something of value now you have to weigh the value of having a mouthpiece with you know eight hundred some thousand followers versus Giving it up because well and this is this is the this is the bigger Challenge that Peterson is now facing and it's the challenge of the power of the world If someone offers you fifty million dollars to have your own daytime talk show as the new dr Phil, how do you turn that down? How do you turn that audience down? Can I mean and this is always the question? Can you walk away from as as Christians call it the world and what we mean by the world is this? Conglomeration of power and status and attention and And this in in terms of Christianity, there's in a sense three enemies to the person. There's our sinful human nature there's principalities and powers the devil and his minions and then there's the world and Peterson right now because of his rocket up the status hierarchy The world is a real big question for Peterson and the higher you go up this hierarchy The higher the stakes the higher the corruption the higher your ability to be bought the greater The crowd of naysayers. This is how crowds work Now politics in the IDW is an interesting thing too because this thing was cobbled together fast and loose basically by a little bit of branding by Eric Weinstein who's you know, he was undoubtedly a brilliant guy, but This this weird coalition, what is it really about? We're an alternate meaning You know, we're creating alternate meaning. Okay, and we're about nuance That's in some sense what Eric has been tweeting about with respect to this thing But when it comes to meaning and nuance, well, yeah, they are compatible. But here's part of the reality there's You always there's a lot of both ands in life you always live with nuance but you always need to know what you believe and And both have to go all the way down both have to scale all the way up. And so it's what you get at is is you need both a a solid core Where you have solid beliefs on things that you don't nuance? And you also have to be able to use nuance with the world okay, and and and that's why nuance and and groundedness actually go together properly and can manifest themselves in tolerance and Generosity but but at the same time there are points where you stand and you don't Nuance and you don't equivocate and figuring out how to manage those two Dynamics in the course of a life and this gets harder when it comes to institutions is tremendously tremendously difficult now When Eric Weinstein was on Rubin all by himself I haven't I haven't I should really rewatch it and look for this clip because when he said it It grabbed me and I've never forgotten it because basically what he said to Dave Rubin because this is the dynamic of our moment Eric Weinstein basically says well, you know, you need to know at a very deep level that things will be okay And I thought yeah, that's right What's the basis for Knowing at a deep level things will be okay. This is exactly one of the things that religion offers Because what the the depths and the foundational nature of religion give its adherence an Ability and and again, this is an advantage that religion has over let's say materialist naturalism Which is you can say okay you can take my life. I can die This is one of the powers of the resurrection what energized the early Christian community so that when the plague hit a town Everyone in their right mind fled to get away from the illness But Christian stayed and cared for the poor why because Christian said This is I I'm going to be raised with my Lord and I will reign in a new heavens and a new earth And so I can spend my life in Caring for the sick and the needy and I can give my life For a cause because it transcends me That's the kind of security that religion offers or can offer and so when I heard Weinstein say this who goes to synagogue because there might be some good pragmatic things for it, but distances himself from being a believer I Think okay, Eric. What's your deep level? Is it the and then he and Joe Rogan will talk about fu money? You know is it is it the FF you money that you have is it the fact that you have? status and power and wealth to the degree that you know if If Peter Thiel gets ticked off at you or upset by something that you said and he fires you you've got enough money that you'll Be okay is that where your security lies? What about the rest of us who don't have FU money? What do we got well Many of them have security based on other things than FU money and And so you have to ask the question What is the basis of your faith and so that the IDW is always you know if you have if you have? Ben Shapiro on there, and then you have the Weinstein brothers and and Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson And you know we're all getting along blah blah blah blah But you know this this is the thing about a loose configuration always has rough edges and And who is Jordan Peterson? This is my take on him. He's episodic You know we the biblical and and you know I'm the same way. I mean I think Part of the reason I think I can understand Jordan Peterson as I see a lot of I Quite frankly a lot of the flaws that I see in myself He's got some of them, and I'm not trying to compare my nowhere near as smart as he is and you know I'm not trying to play that game all I'm saying is he's episodic He starts things and he doesn't finish them you know the biblical series. This was the this was the big thing well now He's kind of doing his traveling Roadshow evangelistic crusade You know That's cool That's who he is he's episodic and again when you're an individual when it's just something you're doing if you're Making it up as you go along. That's really cool Well the higher status you go the more risk there is the more especially if you don't have an institution that you know if the leader of the NRA comes comes out one day and says Yeah, I think there needs to be more gun legislation boom He might even think this himself, but he can't say it because he's there within an institution So he's episodic and and again one of the again someone who knows him personally People I've talked to know him personally one of the questions. I asked them about him is do you think he has a plan? And the answer I always get is no he's not a planner. He's he's a I'd take one thing after the next and I think for the most part everything we've seen about him This is who he's been it's one thing after the next and you know He's not quite sure what he's gonna do and He was gonna restart the the biblical series in November of 2018 and now he's gonna restart it in November of 2019 and you know this this is who he is it's and I'm not saying It's good and bad. It's it's just the way it is Speak the truth do what is meaningful don't manage outcomes and opportunities will arise and take them This is his advice. He gives this is exactly what he's doing. He's following a personal path now He's following a personal path not building a coalition or an institution Now this is option two that this is calculated and I don't think these things are necessarily contradictory or exclusive Because the more I think about this the more I think well first of all Almost all of us are double-minded in one way or another today We're going to be disciplined and we're going to do everything we're supposed to and we're going to hold to the diet And we're only going to eat beef or we're only going to eat vegetables or i'm not going to eat that ice cream Sandwich that I love to end the day with And then the next day I do it This is how we are we are human beings where we are not transparent to ourselves the control we have over ourselves and and in some ways Peterson One side of him can be tremendously Controlled and then you see boom it just you just see it fly apart And that's always been my read of him and looking at him and in some ways he can be incredibly disciplined and in other ways, I would imagine the discipline just Just just just falls apart and and I always I often have the sense of watching him that he's There's a fragility about him. He's fragile in some ways and that's part of the way that he's so He's so forceful. He has to be forceful because he's fragile and you hear this with his His issues about health his issues with his struggle with depression I'm not saying anything bad about him. We're all fragile. We're human beings for peace sake This is how we are but with again peterson wears this on his sleeve. He's transparent about it He talks about his family life. He talks about his kids. He talks about his relationship with his wife I mean just who the guy is and part of what makes him the truman show in in some ways for us So these two options aren't necessarily contradictory But I think the way to follow this is follow the major media breadcrumbs in this, okay? Don't I mean those of us who are watching him on youtube and becoming jordan peterson nerds and you know Watching every last thing he does out there Bear in mind. We're a tiny little nerdy community Nerding out on this stuff the vast majority of normal people. Well, what is the jordan peterson they see? and it's at this level that the handlers have access and define the narrative because remember this was this was first just the youtube is garage works and it used to be just the jordan peterson show and you know, he's He's feeling grumbly about c16 and his wife is out of town and he usually gets up and he writes but you know He's been playing with youtube so he gets on youtube and he says, you know He has a screed about enforced speech And then you know he goes to school and there's a protest and the protest about him and the woman comes up with the Video camera and says how do you feel that there are nazis at your rally? And he says I don't like nazis and he talks to her off the cuff and someone in a in one of my comments section you know, I I miss the jordan peterson with boots and and and the you know the Back when jordan was just a was just a nobody like the rest of us and on one hand we vicariously Cheer his rise up the hierarchy and we want more and more people to hear about him and he's bringing our message to the world And it's the glorious romantic revolution until it arrives And suddenly he has handlers and suddenly he so so there's a class. There's an elitist. There's a populist There's another strain in this thing And and now he has handlers and and here's the thing jordan peterson will go on his little His his patreon page and do his q a with his youtubers and and all of this kind of stuff But most of the normals will never ever see that They are going to be watching major media. And so if you don't look at jordan peterson beneath The major media line, what would you see? Well Jordan peterson can thank the anti-left coalition for his rise I mean few things c16 and then no nobody helped his career more in some ways than kathy newman Well, that's not true. He his performance on kathy newman But I mean this video was a transformative moment in his rise and it put him on the radar screen He became a regular on fox news in fact he was on fox news fairly frequently and and now that plays into People's you know, so if you're kind of on the left and you're a jordan peterson fan, you're like, oh he's on fox news again Oh, it's you know, how am I gonna? You know, what's my what's he gonna do to my reputation when he goes on fox news with all my friends on the left? All right, and and so it's like oh does he have to go on fox news again? Oh does he you know? and then But but if you're on the right you're like he's our champion he's on fox news. He's arrived He's on fox and friends. This is wonderful. Jordan peterson is our hero and he's he's tearing down bloody Postmodern neo-marxism and he's he's challenging political correctness and he's he's doing all this and and this is you know Again, look at the media major media news and above And then This video came out of of bill not bought and he's commenting on this This what this is now again, if you understand politics, you know that the democratic party is an umbrella organization and there are sub factions within it and they're all vying for power for the message and you know in the next um in the 2020 campaign the democrats are going to look like the republicans because yeah, they tried the The republican method of coronating their champion who was hillary and how that turned out and so you know you're going to have a million democratic flowers blooming all vying for supremacy in the party and so the the democratic primary for the 2020 american election is going to be a fight for the soul of the democratic party and Well one of jordan and I didn't put this together right away until actually the peugeot interview, but Why is he critiquing this video? I thought this is What's what's this doing on his channel? And again part of me in terms of option one thought this is peterson being peterson. He takes you know It and then I thought oh, that's right. His friend put this together This is his friend greg hurwitz and All right, so this is just jordan peterson with his youtube garage works And this is his friend and peterson does this peterson like I do Uses his youtube channel to talk about talk who he's interested in what he's interested about put your friends on let anybody else There's the airplane I got the airplane and the mockingbird Do whatever you want to with it great that's that's a youtube channel it's what it's for But then when peugeot talked to hurwitz. I thought How did this come now now again for jonathan hurwitz? Writes comics and this is and he's an author and he you know This is this is something very much in line with with what jonathan is doing but from hurwitz side of it What's this about? Well, it's a little bit of a different story And again, i'm not speaking ill of him because yeah, go for it This is this is what you do if you're Trying to move an agenda forward you get on medium and if you can have if you can get on On jordan peterson's big channel and and jordan peterson's friend jonathan his channel well And and for me, I mean I personally am exactly the audience that hurwitz is trying to Is trying to persuade because you know many of the values that hurwitz espouses in this This old democratic party is is you know where I came from politically So i'm exactly the audience and so now yeah Well, it's you know working on me. I'd far rather see the democratic party that hurwitz is Is is promoting win the day for the democrats instead of a lot of what we've been seeing And then Owen benjamin mentions on his back patio screed the handlers and I thought Okay, this is this is this is taking shape And and then you'll remember the the hit job that had been done on jordan peterson jordan peterson new york times Custodian of the the patriarchy and this you know for someone like me who has My world is incredibly politically diverse if you haven't been able to figure that out You know my my own political History lies with the african-american vote. That's that's where I grew up I've almost always if you look at my voting record I've I've voted like a black man my whole life And I don't apologize for that that's these are the people I grew up with these were my tribe This is this is how I voted But I've also I also grew up in the christian reform church, which is probably 75 80 percent republican at least in the united states It's a it's a deeply conservative religious tradition and you know my little you know stan and barb vanderclay in paterson And we voted for democrats with all the black folks in paterson all of my cousins and relatives and grandparents always voted for republicans So, you know, I got family on both sides of this thing I'm not going to cut people out of my life because of politics my own little local congregation Has has people who are part of the democratic party work for the democratic party have run on democratic platforms and also People who are died in the wool? Republicans who would never vote for a democrat and we're all in one church together and we're brothers and sisters in christ And we all live together across the political divide and in fact anybody who knows the the black community at more than a facile surface level knows that you know, the the black community is socially really quite conservative and when when proposition eight which was the um, The gay marriage back in 2008 a lot of people blamed black women for You know the defeat of gay marriage in california in 2008 the black community is is a fairly conservative community They've just never voted for the republicans because of a particular political history So, you know politics is like that And politics is an aspect of our lives. And so all of us are going to have political ideas And we're going to talk about that a little bit later in this so let's not Let's not kill each other over politics. Let's not divorce each other over politics. Let's not alienate over politics Let's relativize politics to a place that it should be Okay And then the dr. Oz show which which many people have said this was this was one of peterson's best interviews if you instead of listening to Dozens of hours of youtube videos of jordan peterson if you wanted to kind of get the whole jordan peterson on solada Refined well spoken, you know Sharpened articulated Calibrated for a popular audience. He hit it out of the park on this interview. He was You know he he It was terrific this is this is peterson he was sharp he was articulate he was nuanced He he wasn't facing cathy newman in this but but dr. Oz obviously a sympathetic host Someone who knew his positions someone who was interested in giving jordan peterson a fair hearing and and this was and that's when um, that's when adam of think of think club said, you know, this is a this is a tryout for his For his new show and it was like, oh No Take me back to the garage works. Take me back to the garage band days jordan Let's do our biblical series and and let's It's not what happens. It's not what happens in the world What in this moment is the quickest way to remake jordan peterson's political image in the united states You ride a wave This is what peterson has been doing all along He rode the anti-left wave up this cavanaugh hearing. This was a defining moment Oh, we'll see five ten years from now if it will be because it seems like every month We have a new defining moment But you know, this was cavanaugh was a huge deal And it was so polarized and so divisive and so painful and the reason is because You've got you've got me too and you've got the anti-left and this is just one of these moments where everything kind of comes into alignment and bang You're gonna let this wave go by if you if you need If you need to do a big job, you need the kind of power And mass and momentum that a really huge wave can offer You need something this big to undo the hit job that was done to jordan peterson Over the last last year and a half by the left And peterson can keep doing his evangelistic show because that's the that's the garage band peterson versus the the major media peterson But if you're his major meteor handler and you don't see this cavanaugh thing as an opportunity To rebrand your client for for popular consumption in the united states To say okay jordan no more fox news We want you on abc. We want you on nbc. We want you on cnn. We want you in the mainstream. All right Probably not msnbc So actually I made a video earlier this week that I didn't post And I didn't post it again because I wanted to hear from the meetup and I wanted to hear what people thought First thing I thought when I saw that tweet, especially with my take on peterson the the garage band off the cuff hard on your sleeve peterson is james 3 Not many of you should become teachers my fellow believers because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly Yeah, that's I I think about this We all stumble in many ways all of us anyone who is never at fault in what they say is perfect Able to keep their whole body in check And and the force of that is that's none of us When we put bits in the mouth of horses to make them obey us we can turn the whole animal Or take ships as an example, although they are so large and are driven by strong winds They are steered by a very small rudder wherever the pilot wants to go Likewise the tongue is a small part of the body, but it makes great boasts Consider what a great forest is set on fire by a small spark The tongue is also a fire a world of evil among the parts of the body It corrupts the whole body sets the whole course of one's life on fire and it and is itself set on fire by hell There's an archetypal statement for you All kinds of animals birds reptiles on sea creatures are being tamed and have been tamed by mankind But no human being can tame the tongue It is a restless evil full of deadly poison And that's what makes twitter so dangerous your friend group matters a lot and We are always influenced by our friends and and we are social creatures and Elephants are herd animals and we believe in groups and so over time the people you hang out with will be the people that Influence you and make you We are built up from below Read neil postman's amusing ourselves to death again. This is what got me on the whole jordan peterson youtube thing This is what launched my channel in many ways Information technology always changes information Plato was pondering what will writing do to politics? the telegraph and newspaper postman writes articulately about those They changed american politics it used to be that american president could walk down the street in a place other than his hometown And nobody would know who he was now Look at the way media has is reshaping the world and and postman's big point was that you probably can't do Education with television because of the medium you can't do things with twitter because of the medium And now social media I mean what what postman saw in infancy we are now feeling in mass and and and we don't know How far or how deep this will go? Oh Democracy isn't the same as it was in face-to-face athens. I was watching a little bit of owen benjamin again He was making the point. Yeah, athens was a democracy and most of the people were slaves Same with rome slaves couldn't vote slaves were non-people. They were property So, you know america plus social media is different and we don't know how To be consequential is to be controversial Perseal How did socrates die and why and look at the christian story jesus according to according to christians jesus is the son of god He's the perfect man But i'll tell you in many ways jesus is way more popular now than he was then and the reason is because we Mold jesus And oh jesus was kind There's a reason that all political sides wanted jesus dead Because the in the in the great first century culture war those who sided with empire and rome and the herodians and those the Factions that wanted them out who were all divided all of those factions couldn't agree on hardly anything But they could agree that the world would be better without jesus And and today when you look at The the kind of reputation that jesus has jesus was a wise man jesus was a nice teacher Jesus jesus was kind jesus was tolerant. Yes. He was all those things and he also was He would also tell things people things that they did not want to hear And and for a for a while in the galley huge mobs huge crowds were following him and you know what? Most of them left him and and and even jesus inner core that they left him Why because he looked at him said you're all about the bread and circuses You follow me because I feed you you follow me because I heal you But you don't understand why i'm feeding you and why i'm healing you and and when it comes right down to it You want me to be a kind of messiah that I am not okay with And so I will not be that messiah for you And the mobs left him read john 6 And and jesus says something crazy like unless you eat my body and drink my blood you can have no part of me And everyone's like cannibalism This guy's a nut And as this turns to his disciples and are you gonna leave me? And they're like, well, who else do we have? But then on the way back down to jerusalem, they follow him and and peter wants to be his handler and he says, you know Don't go to jerusalem. That's a bad move And and and jesus says i'm gonna go down there i'm gonna be turned over into the hands of gentiles. I'm gonna be killed And peter says never i'll never let that happen and jesus says get behind me satan And then peter says i'll never leave you and he denies him three times And they all leave him and the only ones at the cross are women and probably young john who is who's too young and too small for For those who are killing jesus to imagine that this is a threat that they need to be concerned of all the older male apostles are hiding They abandon him in his hour of need and and peter peter denies him This is how we are and again, we shouldn't listen to this story just like peterson says about ashvitz. We shouldn't listen to this story and say Well, I wouldn't do what peter did no we should listen to the story and say I do exactly what peter does I'm a coward I do what is expedient not what is more than meaningful what is right? This is how we are In a secular world Your politics becomes your religion heaven and hell both get pulled into this frame And if you don't have a bigger narrative to live within then politics will be your narrative But let me tell you something something about politics It is not shaky ground to stand on it changes all the time And again when you get back to eric weinstein's argument you need You need something deeper That says it'll be okay for you to actually moderate and modulate politics to not let politics become your life Politics comes and goes Your life comes and goes you want to stand on something more firm Weinstein was right about a security base everything will be okay, but what if you don't have fu money Like the poor we will always have politics with us and sometimes we need to act and see this is This is where again my Christian tradition comes into being because There are some christians Lately, especially Some christians over on the left have made politics their religion And if you go to certain kinds of churches both on the left and the right all you'll hear about is politics In my mind, that's a betrayal of the gospel because If you look at jesus he he alienated all sides in his culture war during his day because The one side said you have to be against the romans and jesus says no i'm not going to be against the romans And the other side said well, you know you you have to be you have to be You know, it's the romans that killed him And well they work they they killed him in their corruption, you know, they Peter You know not peter but pilate was He was Pilate was being a coward. He was doing what was expedient and that's why they that's why he killed jesus You need something deeper than politics but at the same time You have to deal with politics and there are moments and times to make a stand and and so Some political traditions say we're going to stay out of politics completely. I don't think that's right I think that's right As peterson rightly says we have our ideas we have our minds But what this world calls us to do sometimes is act sometimes we're we get it right Sometimes we get it wrong. I think about bodhoffer and his participation in the plot to kill hitler was bodhoffer, right? other germans were you know Boltman was you know, oh christians should stay out of politics and and right now in the church it's like The left is like oh We have to take down donald trump and the right is like we have to support donald trump And and and and in many ways both sides have lost credibility on the religious frame because of it Now if you're going to be a christian in america You should probably be involved in politics, but it should be Be Relativized because politics is not your life and the democratic party cannot be your life and the republican party cannot be your life and You're going to have your vote You might vote one way you might vote another way. You might be right. You might be wrong You're going to have your ideas. There'll be moments to take a stand and so What life calls us to do sometimes is to speak and to act according to what we think we should do But if in fact you have a secure foundation if in fact your life itself is Relativized because this is not the only life you're having I think that actually i'm going to get into this probably in my sermon today to a degree and i'll be posting it friday, but It's not written yet But but the point is christian how can christians on one hand? Not make politics their life and be the best kind of citizens That was augustin's challenge in the city of god to figure out That was daniel's challenge when when he's taken as a slave to babalon and and basically now being They're attempted to be brainwashed to become nebuchadnezzar's boy Christians have to negotiate this And the way you negotiate that is this is by not letting it become Ultimate you need to have your core values. You need to be able to do nuance But politics can't be your life Jesus was killed unjustly as a political act Crucifixion was a voice for political criminals as an example He was framed by his people and executed by their enemies Christians will probably never have the option to be apolitical Christians are going to be on different sides of political conversations Christians ought to be able to have those conversations both with conviction and with nuance Partly because their christianity relatively is a political act Partly because their christianity relativizes the politics of the moment Christians finally are judged by an audience of one And as i've mentioned a number of times the new testament keeps saying we are judged according to what we do Politics is a sphere in which we have to act And and I can post I can point to Amazing christians on both sides of the political aisle who have radically different political views And i'm okay with that because we're human beings and we have to act in politics and we will get things wrong Back to what this video is about Well, what is this video about? What's the reality of jordan peterson? And his tweet is he undisciplined and impulsive also expressive and transparent, especially on twitter. Yep This is a calculated move calibrated to redeem his persona from the political left for for mainstream consumption I don't have knowledge of that. This is reading behind between the lines. This is this is looking at patterns that could be too but The person who wrote me and said you need to do a video on politics. Well I've also laid out for you my view on politics That I think as a christian Christians ought to both be the best citizens of the empire but also with a capacity to critique and and to find the way to be in their citizenship Also bearing witness to their citizenship of another kingdom so there are my thoughts