https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=W-DeN7GXmnM

 Hi, this is Paul, and this is round two on the conversations around Jordan Peterson and his tweets at the Pope. To the best of our knowledge, the Pope did not respond and didn't appear to let his staff respond either because it's quite likely his staff manages the papal Twitter account. But Nate was, responded to it on Twitter quite a bit, and I talked to Zeld, I talked to Cale Zeldin last week about this, and Nate has continued to bring it up, so I wanted to kind of hear Nate out on it and talk with you about it, Nate. So what grabbed you so much about Jordan Peterson's little papal tweets? So it wasn't the initial, the initial tweet was just kind of like I shrugged at, right? I mean, I'm like, okay, like, I think you're not understanding what Catholics mean when they talk about social. I just assumed at first that Peterson just misunderstood what Catholics mean when they talk about social justice. Okay, so this was the initial tweet, right? The, yes, correct. And that, like everything that Pope Francis says in that tweet can be found in Rerum Novarum. It's standard Catholic social teaching. There's nothing, it has nothing to do with social justice TM, which is neither social nor just, and that I understand Peterson's objections to. So I just figured it was a misunderstanding. But then there was a very reasonable conservative Catholic take on it that appeared in the Washington Examiner, and Peterson, like, retweeted or quote tweeted that article, rejecting the idea of authentic social justice entirely. Okay. As far as I'm concerned, like the idea of rejecting the concept of social justice as such is just simply not on the table for Christians. And for Peterson to presume to tell Christians that they ought to reject the concept of social justice as such is pretty rich. So when you say Peterson rejected social justice as such, what do you mean by that? Because in denying the possibility of authentic social justice, that's precisely what you're doing. If you're saying there can be no authentic social justice, that means you're rejecting the category of social justice. But justice is inherently social. I can remember like the first time I heard about, like, a lot of my friends are way more people of the internet than I am. I am more now, but that's not, but not naturally. And I can remember in about 2008 or so hearing the term social justice warrior for the first time, and my initial reaction to that was, okay, what's wrong with that? And it's like, so I had no conception of the way in which the notion of social justice had been like subverted. So the problem is the subversion of social justice. Right. But we can't, like, conservatives can't make the move that social justice itself is a bad idea. They have to give a better version of it because social justice is just part of human life, hopefully. So I listened to Karen and Gavin Ashenden, their conversation. Did you hear that conversation too? I didn't get a chance to listen to it yet. I read part of Gavin's article. Like I read about three paragraphs of Gavin's article and then I was like, it was just too, like, you can't, there's this reaction that's like, I understand. It's like, I like Jordan Peterson. I don't think Jordan Peterson is a bad person, but we have to, when he gets something really wrong, we can't be afraid to say, you're getting this really wrong. Well, I don't think you should be afraid to say that. In fact, I think. That's what I feel like. I feel like I'm just like in our world, I feel like I'm one of the few voices saying, I was actually refreshed by, I actually invited Hank. Hank asked to come on my Catholic panel that I'm putting together on Saturday. And I was actually really refreshed. And I wanted conservative voices on that panel. I did not want it to be like some kind of like a left leaning only Catholic. So I have, I have quite a diverse group of Catholics that are coming to talk about that. I've got Jordan Daniel Wood and I've got Hank and I've got Laura and I've got Dominic D'Souza from Smart Catholics. I'll come along and I'm going to, I'm going to try to not say anything. I'm going to try to just let them talk because as an Anglican, it's like, I'm kind of an outsider, although I'm a very Catholic leaning Anglican. Well that sounds like a terrific panel that's coming on when? That's Saturday. Saturday. Okay. Yeah. That does sound like a terrific panel. Hank, of course, is interesting. And part of what's, I mean, part of what's happening here is there's not only with this, with this term social justice, which, you know, I have this, I think you and I probably have similar political evolutionary stories in that I, you know, social justice was never problematic for me for years. Tim, you know, Tim, although Tim Keller's been sort of painted with a big red brush. I would think it's like, you're kind of informed by Kuiper, right? So I think like the idea of someone who's informed by Kuiper, the idea of rejecting social justice as such has to be just like, as anathema as I find it. Right. I've always been annoyed at sort of the capturing of certain words into a certain political valence and I saw that as, you know, as just sort of a naked grab after this is what social justice means and you have all of these things and it's like, and, you know, part of, I really But those things though, the thing is, Paul, is all of those things that he put in that, like, have been part of Catholic social teaching for a very long time. You can find every single idea he expressed in that in 1891 in the encyclical Rerum Novarum, every single principle he expresses there is right there in Rerum Novarum. Yeah. But the Catholics have also been very interesting on their, part of the difficulty with talking about Catholic teaching is that it is also enormously broad. Yes. And, you know, there's of course, you know, papal, encyclicals, and, but then there's also all of these other Catholics out there who have been teaching things far and wide and it's part of the, part of the difficulty of when I think about the Catholic Church is, okay, what, what, what exactly am I supposed to think of because it's just simply so massive and it's so old. Well, even like, let's say like suspicion about liberation theology, even liberation theology is not, it has more than one school. Yep. I think the school of liberation theology that most conservatives find objectionable is the German school, which has a tendency to naturalize the supernatural. But there's a French strain of liberation theology that does the opposite and it's super, it supernaturalizes the natural, which I think is completely valid Catholic theology. So let's, let's talk a little bit about Twitter and the purpose of Twitter. One of the things that this whole thing sort of, you know, we, we, for a long time, I don't think either you and I are really creatures of the internet so much. I get a lot of my internet stuff now from my audience, from Rick. I mean, Rick will always set me down and say, have you seen this? And it's like, I've never seen that. Yeah. We're not native. We're not native habitat, shall we say? Neither one of us. No, that's true. Yeah. But part of, you know, there's the literal, there's the literal, literal internet where it's people, there's just sort of one surface. And I think that one surface begets this idea that everyone on the internet should only play things in a very straightforward way. And from what I, I'm not going to, I'm not even going to speculate what on earth Jordan Peterson does on Twitter because I'm never quite sure because he's, you know, we've, we've talked about this before. Jordan Peterson on Twitter seems often, not always like a very different person than Jordan Peterson on stage or on YouTube. It brings out a certain aspect of his personality is what I think, because there's a certain aspect of Jordan that is hotheaded and reactive. Yep. And, and, and you can see that in other places, too. And Twitter just amplifies that portion of his personality. Right. It, yeah, it facilitates it. It brings it out. And then, but then there's also this sense of always, because you have such a flat world on the internet where any speech is supposed to be, but this isn't even true because the internet is broad and vast, too. People take any speech as simply a, a pushing of one side of a binary or the other. Yeah. And so right away people are, I'm for it, I'm again it. I mean, it's, the internet just gets super flat. Peterson already has a tendency to kind of, to see in it, particularly on these kinds of issues, to see in a, in a set of binaries that is not Catholic. Because, because Catholic, because Catholic doesn't see in terms of either the individual collective binary that is so important to him, because Catholic theology isn't, is inherently personalist, which is, which is, which is, which is neither. Right. So he misses that. And then it's also like, if you look at Catholic social teaching, it's not, it's not in favor of unfettered capitalism or Marxism. Right. Right. It's just, it thinks that both fail on Christian terms. Right. And it also, although I sometimes have the sense in listening to some Catholics that they are, they are trying, well maybe this is just inevitable, that they are trying to instantiate a unique, a unique vision of blessedness in the world. But it's almost impossible to not sort of just trigger images of various instantiations, especially at particular times when the Catholic Church seemed to experience more hegemony than it does now. Mm-hmm. And, and I think that part of that is inevitable because we can't help but think in pictures I agree, because when we see something was like, okay, that's, that's sort of what I'm getting at. That's what sort of what I'm getting at. You see that with some of this distributism that goes around integralism. I mean, all of these, all of these things are getting stronger because everybody, because everyone seems, almost everyone, maybe Jordan doesn't, but almost everyone seems to be realizing that liberalism is failing. Yes. And I think Jordan wants to save it. Yes. And I don't think that the Catholic Church is necessarily invested in saving liberalism in the same way that Jordan is. So there's going to be some conflict there. No, I think that's, I think that's very true. I think part of the anxiety, part of why this is watching you and this is very interesting is because of, of course you identify as a Christian anarchist and you were, you were about the first, first or second person that I ever saw identify in that way. And when I heard that, I thought, oh, and then of course read a little bit of Ivan Illich and began. And so, and, and that, you know, especially as I was talking to Cale and as I continue to think about this impending end of liberalism and modernity and this, this deep anxiety about, you know, where to go or what to do your, you know, and actually when I was listening to Karen and Gavin's conversation, I thought in some ways, even though Gavin can sometimes just sort of sound like a conservative reactionary who has sort of been through the whole trajectory of his life, because he's had a very interesting life and to just kind of get old and cranky and angry at all of these ideas that he's sort of been disillusioned by, there, there is a certain anarchism in his conversation with Karen, which I found very interesting. And I have to listen to it. Yeah. And it isn't, I don't think he's in any way self consciously that way. I think when you just hear, you know, he really, I guess, according to Karen told me, she, she had a lot of ambivalence about posting that conversation because it sounded like he had come into that conversation just off of a rather antagonistic invitation into another space. So, you know, biologically, he, he was already right. Because that's the thing is like this, the groups of people that are upset by this is really diverse and weird, right? Yes. Because, because there are conservative post liberal Catholic integralists that are going to be enraged by this just as much as progressive Catholics are enraged by this. So that means that like it's a huge group of people. And the funny thing about Jordan, some of them very much identify as conservatives. Yes. Yes. And that's where, you know, whenever Jordan Peterson comes out as like a conservative, you know, he's always talking about conservatism. Now I always listen to him and I think, what are you really? I mean, what on earth does that term really mean? Is there any functionality to it? It means he's a, he's a, he's using it with, I mean, it's perfectly appropriate. For him to call himself a conservative within the North American Malo where conservative just means that you're right liberal because we only have liberals, but there's no, there are no viable post liberal political movements or leftist political movements within the United States. Sorry to break it to you. Right liberals. Bernie Sanders is not a socialist. He's just a liberal who favors a welfare state. It's still liberalism. I remember the, I remember, I think it was what Ralph Nader said during the Al Gore, George W. Bush election. He's like, you know, really? This is the, and of course the media plays it like some, some huge chasm between them, but Right. But there's massive consensus on almost everything and there has been for 50 years in both the UK and the United States. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The UK does have a stronger post-liberal presence. Like DC Schindler is about the only major American post-liberal thinker I can come up with off the top of my head. Maybe Connor Cunningham, although he's not, he's not American. So nevermind. Yeah. So DC Schindler is pretty much it. So I know what you're talking about. Tucker Carlson amongst conservatives has like this, like just like the sort of like the barest beginnings of post-liberal instincts, I would say, but still not quite. But I want to get at your anarchism a little bit because one of the things too that I thought of when I was, I mean, I know for a lot of people on the internet, these conversations that we do are sort of shows, but I have, I, I suspect that for us, they are not shows as much as we are just trying to work things out. That's exactly right. And, and we found that it's better to work them out often, not always with the camera on and the comment section up. And because there are a lot of smart people who aren't going to show up on these cameras and they're putting in good comments. And also I, in my personal experience, I do my best thinking when I have someone pushing back at me. Yep. Yep. Because that's the only way you can discover what you're like the axioms that you have that you haven't recognized. Yep. Right. Yep. Yep. Yep. So it's like, and to be perfectly honest with you, like this whole Peterson thing has kind of like forced me to like reconsider. I had an exchange with John Milbank about Christian anarchism recently and Milbank is more of a, of a, of a left post liberal, Christian socialist type. And he, like some of the points that he made to me, like I suddenly had more resonance when I realized how much I was not willing to let go of the concept of social justice as such. It's like, Oh, okay. So that, so I would say that, that I would say that I would, I'm kind of leaning like slightly more toward like an anarcho, an anarcho monarchism than an Well, and this is, this is what fascinates me because, and I've always wrestled, I've always wrestled with good post-liberal thought because it's, it has important things to say. Like, and it's worth wrestling with. And I want to question, and I, and I want to question those axioms that, that I might have that are unexamined and the things that I might be getting wrong. So this is sort of like, I would say that like, I would, I kind of understand where Pajot is coming from a little bit more now than I did, like say three months ago. Hmm. How so? Flesh that out a little better. I think, so it's complicated. It's this is, I just, I read this article recently. Actually it was from Michael Martin's blog. It was a really good interview with Owen Barfield and traditionalists. And there is this, there's this constant, I mean, it has to do with, ultimately it comes down to what the proper role of tradition is. Right? And so I think that it's, we can't dispense with it entirely, but neither can we have, nor neither can we have a notion of tradition that merely looks back to the past and romanticizes the past. Right. Which is what I kind of thought Pajot was doing. And I thought was the root of like why he calls himself a monarchist and why I call myself a Christian anarchist. But I would say that my tendency is to view tradition as related more to final causality. Because we're, because of the fact that we're still in the process, we're still, whatever we are going to be, we're still in the process of becoming. Right. So tradition also calls to us from the future because of the pull of that final cause. Right. But, but until we're, but we still need some sort of continuity of where I think I was kind of getting things wrong is that you can't only have that idea. Right. Of tradition calling to you from the future. Right. You also, it has to be doing it in such a way that you have continuity with the past. Yeah. So you need to look in both directions. And so. In order to have the best possible decision making in the present. And so you don't see Pajot as just wanting to just go back. Correct. Correct. That was like, that was me. I would go back, like sometimes I would hear and say things that like was like, okay, I would both strongly agree and strongly disagree with him at various times, just depending on what exactly he was saying. And I think that some of the disagreements I now can see were because of me having some axioms that were unexamined. And there was, and the picture was more complicated than what I was seeing. Okay. Okay. I do want to get into this anarchism, especially with respect to, and now he threw you through a, what did you say? Anarcho-monarchism. Anarcho-monarchism. That's like, that's like black-white-ism. You know, what on earth do you mean? So when I was having my conversation with, with, with Kale, Zeldin, Kale Zeldin. Well, here's the thing. Monarchy is not, okay. So here's, I think, I think I now believe the traditionalist argument that monarchy is not a political institution, but it is actually, but, but monarchy is in fact a sacred symbolic institution. Okay. So you can have a monarch that is not political. Yes. Well, in fact, that has been what's happened to the English monarchy. Correct. They've decided to have a non-political monarchy. Correct. And part of what happens in the American system is you have presidents that have certain monarchical aspects and political aspects. And because it's all in one person in one office, it's always sort of, you know, mixed up together sometimes. Sometimes you're good and sometimes you're bad. My orientation still remains fundamentally like localist. Well, and that's, and that's where sort of, it was listening, interesting listening to Gavin Ashenden in this, where that's, there's definitely a strain of that in some American evangelicals too. And so that's sort of where it's interesting where Karen and Gavin sort of, sort of found each other's, they're working their way through. But again, when I was talking to Cale and I was thinking about, you know, the idea that the Pope sits on the throne of Christ and the basically what, so Gavin Ashenden, of course, he's been all sorts of things throughout his life. He was an Anglican. He was then, you know, one of the little cluster of priests. He's kind of ruling in absentia, though. He's not like it's not so it's not really it's like he's like a viceroy more than he is. You know what I'm saying? So it's like he is. It's not that he it's not that he it's not it's not that he is. It's that he he operates in lieu of. Yeah, within within within within the earthly realm. Yes. But is he political? And what on earth do we mean by that question? Right. Because in some ways, that's also whatever's in Jordan's brain when he's going after that. That's also, I think, an implicit reading of his attack on the pope. And what was so interesting about Gavin's conversation with Karen is that on one hand, Gavin can be known for a someone who gets all upset about he's one of these clergy that gets political because he wants to talk about transgender stuff and wokeism and all of that. And then at the same time, when he's talking about Karen, he's basically saying that the pope shouldn't be political. And so when I hear that, I think we've got we've really got to talk about these definitions and what we're meaning by these words such as political. Right. And that very much gets into this idea of very much what Gavin is reacting to with Karen is and I know I've got you at a disadvantage because you haven't heard it, but he doesn't say anything in there you haven't heard before. Except for the question is, is what do we mean when we say political? Right. So this is the thing. And I would say that I in the past, I operated under a definition of political that would be that politics is the science of power. That's what I think it really that's what I think it really is or what's what I thought it really is. But I would say that I would say that people, people who would argue for a Christian notion of social justice or political theology are operating under the assumption under a definition of the political that is far broader, which would render the political something that is inevitable and inevitable human concern. And if that's the case, then we have no choice but to concern ourselves with things like social justice and political theology. So I, I work as a communicator, as a pastor, I spend an inordinate amount of time asking myself, you would never know this from my channel, before the words leave my mouth, how are they going to be heard? In many ways, that's what preachers are really concerned with, because in terms of at least a good amount of our job, you know, the pastoral job, there's certainly an aspect of that. But in terms of preaching, that makes words and the choice of words a very big part of our focus. And when I listen to the sentences you just made, I just heard them being understood by many different people in many different ways, which brings me to the question, OK, what, what? Well, because we mean different things when we use that term political. Yes, we do. We really do. We do. And so I had previously been a person who held to a more narrow definition of the political. Because I don't think it's fair to call any form of human social. I did not think it was fair to call. I actually got in an argument with David Bentley Hart about this through email. I did, because I essentially I saw him using a definition of political as like any form of human social organization whatsoever as political. And to me, that seems like overbroad. Yeah. But I'm not sure that it is. And I'm especially not sure. And it does bear it does bear mentioning that the image that we have of the eschaton is a city. But at the same time, the church is something other than the polis, I would say. Yes, yes. So and that's this is what this is what that was the primary thing that informed my Christian It's like the church, whatever the church is, is something it's an it's an alternative to the polis. So for us to as Christians be overly concerned with the affairs of secular government and politics is a is a distraction from the mission of the church. A la Act six in some ways. Correct. Yeah, right. But it turns out that things are way more complicated. Yes. Well, and this and this this question is, you know, it runs through the Bible in the sense that in the Old Testament, you have a I mean, the the focus of concern is sometimes on, let's say, individual clans. Let's think of the patriarchs in Genesis. But but very quickly, the focus of of concern is on what today I mean, even even grasping at these, you know, talking about how on earth we would categorize today the Old Testament nation of Israel. Is it a family? Is it a clan? Is it a kin group? I mean, and right away, those tensions come out in the Book of Exodus, where you have the next multitude. They come up and they sort of are gathered into Israel. But the focus is, of course, on, you know, much of the Old Testament, you follow, you have the kings and the prophets. And right there, you have this tension in some ways, this proto tension between what will eventually be the church and state. And and even though those alignments aren't right, these tensions just remain within Christianity. And you see them, you know, Tom Holland, of course, in Dominion writes about them a lot in terms of, you know, showdowns between popes and emperors. Of course, in Protestantism, you know, one of the one one of the lenses through which to view Protestantism and hence its child liberalism is the attempt to navigate this tension that you just described between church and polis. And of course, Calvin in Geneva is is is working on that and some of the ways he comes to to relate. I would say that liberalism's roots are not exclusive. This is where it gets OK, I'm going to make it even more complicated. This is where when it comes from people who come out of like the Anglo or the Anglosphere of the West. For English speaking peoples, liberalism is actually far older than the Protestant Reformation. True, because like, Germanic peoples have had democratic localist governments as long as there have been Germanic peoples. So this is this would be true of like most most of us who are of Northern European ancestry in North America, like some sort of liberal democratic principles go as far back as you can go. And and it was the norm for Germanic tribes was elected kingship. Interesting. So there's a way in which for for the Anglosphere, liberalism is not completely disconnected from tradition. Because its roots are so deep, there's like so, for example, Thomas Thomas Jeffers, like the before 1920 in America, the the American the American view of the American was as more English than the English. Yes. And Thomas Jefferson wanted to put Hengist and Horsa on the seal for the United States of America. But that's that's so simple. Symbolism happens. Yes. So this is a clear indication that there's something about the democratic experiment here that is related to very ancient traditions, in fact, of the ancestors of the English speaking people. And it's hard not to see. I mean, George Washington is a king in all but name. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And effectively an elected king. Yeah, who, who yet at least via tradition, a very reluctant king. But that's part of the I think this is this comes in that yeah, that idea of reluctant kingship. Kingships. This is this is this is part of the this is part of the pattern. Right. This is the this is a repeated pattern in in our culture that it has biblical roots and sort of the Davidic model because David doesn't want to be king. He's chosen by God to be king. Yeah. Right. And you can see this also like in well, I mean, I'm real country. So I have to bring up that this is also part of a theory and legend. Right. Arthur doesn't know that he is the rightful king, has no desire to be king, and is chosen by God to be king by pulling the sword from the stone. Right. So like this is what this is actually the ideal, our cultural ideal of kingship is someone who has no desire to be king, but is chosen by God to be king anyway. Right. See what so another thing that happened when I was talking to Kale was I was I was thinking about you before I set it up with Kale, but I thought I first want to talk to Kale and I do want to talk to Nate. And part of it is great. I enjoyed that conversation. And I like Kale. Part of and your ideas of anarchy, or at least this sort of because anarchy itself, anarchy can just mean sort of pure chaos, but that's certainly not what you mean. No, I'm not. I'm talking more like the kind of anarchist Christian anarchism I'm talking about is best reflected historically by the Anabaptist communities, which are and if anyone wants to say that anarchism is not stable or viable, I would submit to you that these communities have been going strong for over 500 years. Yeah. Well, that's that's a really helpful definition. Because I think part of so when I when I think about post liberalism, what comes after liberalism and why in the United States, for example, I think people don't appreciate how radical an experiment the United States was in the sense of there were at least initially state churches in the states. Massachusetts was the last state to give up its state church. The American system is, I think, to some degree, has a degree of anarchy within. I think all democratic models do. And that they there isn't you don't hold at the center. Let's say a pope or a monarch or a church. You have a you have a bit more chaotic. You have a bit you have more of a chaotic center. And that's what makes the American. Yeah, there is this final desire not to be arbitrarily ruled by people who are far away. It's the simplest way I can put it. You can kind of like and you can see this like in the history like this is kind of what's going on. I mean, yeah, obviously it's about slavery, but that's also kind of what's going on with the Civil War. Yep. Oh, yeah. It's like, oh, like you can't arbitrarily rule us from far away. You're not here. You don't know what's going on with us. You don't have the right to tell us what to do in our land. Yep. But the challenge, of course, in the world, especially world the world when these great empires would emerge is that even in the even in the Book of Daniel, the beasts that arise out of the sea are these empires. And what they do is they gobble up little kingdoms. Yeah. And so once you have once you have that tension, the question is how right in the Book of Revelation, the precondition for again, like I said, it's complicated. Yeah. Like the precondition for the arrival of the New Jerusalem, which is like, like maybe the potential of the polis restore, we can say it's the destruction of all that. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So I don't know. I'm not pretending to have all the answers. But I was just I was just really this is what I will take a stand when it is something I know. And I know something as fundamental as the concept of social justice itself is not something we want to let go of. Even if there are people that have really bad ideas about what social justice is, we better hold on to that. And when you and when you say social justice, you mean a basically a con, you mean just basically justice. I mean, putting part of the difficulty. Because there's no there's no in-so's. I mean, right. There's no justice is inherently social. Right. Right. Because it's well, again, I'm a preacher. I'm thinking about how these words are heard. We could say justice is fundamentally relational. It's between. Yes. Relation was persons and it's between bodies. Yes. You know, when we're talking bodies, we're talking about, you know, assembled, you know, we're talking about groups that have spiritual centers that have organization that have that have body basically. And I know in the those who are who have followed the conversation with John Ravakin, Peugeot about body should be able to understand that. We use that language when you talk about the body politic. We use that language when we talk about an ecclesiastical body. And so justice has everything to do with relationships between persons and between groups of persons. And also those bodies are also historical. And, you know, you can have you can have unjust relationships. You can have injustice between bodies that are historical. And then the conversation has to deal with. And that's part of why I sort of. So when you talked about bodies, that made me think about like the concept of the modern state, which like one of the things that you'll find with post liberals is actually they don't like the idea of the modern state anywhere than anarchists do, which is one of the reasons I read post liberals. Right. So they they actually believe in the nation as a people. Right. Which is a different thing from what the modern state is. And you can actually see, like, if you look at like something like Hobbes Leviathan, it's like that's it's an antichrist kind of. Yes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Like, and, you know, even again, language is difficult because when we talk about a nation or state, you can say use Greek like ethne, which of course is is the term in the New Testament for for a nation, the ethne. But of course, once you use that term ethne, immediately we think about if we say talk about ethno nationalism. Yeah, right. Exactly. Versus, let's say, credo nationalism and what you have in the United States is one of the most, you know, arguably one of the most successful credo nationalist bodies that at least we've seen. I've watched the body language. No, no, no. It just made me think of something. So it made me think of something. So on the ethno nationalism, I would like I actually think that Malcolm X was an ethno nationalist for African-Americans within the United States. I wrote a paper about this in college. No, he definitely was. I had wrote an anti multicultural studies op ed for my college newspaper. And one of my friends like came to me and is like, you know, the professor who teaches that is like really awesome and inspires a lot of people. And she was really hurt by your article. You should take one of her classes and get to know her as a person. And I liked this. It was a female who I liked. So I listened to what she told me and I took one of her classes and I got to be friends with her and I didn't stop being a neo con. I was and my final paper was on how that how Malcolm X was a traditional conservative. Like that was what my paper was and she agreed. She agreed that my argument was good and gave me an A on the paper. So well, I want to I, you know, Grim Grim said this and, you know, I, my fear with a conversation like this is that it again, I'm a preacher, so I'm concerned about how things are heard. Pretend you're looking at Hobbs Leviathan and describe it, please, Nate. I as a monstrosity, like like a mockery of it and it has like sort of like a humanish looking structure, but it looks like a mockery of a man. That's what I mean. It's easily linked to Antichrist, honestly. Eric wades in to help Grim Grizz. I don't know if Hobbs Leviathan is incoherent screaming and gunfire. I don't know if Hobbs Leviathan is that incoherent. I think it's more diabolical, perhaps. I agree. We agree entirely on that. Yeah, it is. For one thing, I mean, it's really it kind of I mean, it is you can see its connection to this concept of the machine. Because Hobbs is counting on the automation of it, right? Yeah. And like, you know what? When we run on the automatic, we do evil. Yeah. So Aaron, I know Aaron, he was these really sharp philosophy teacher in the Netherlands. Hobbs Leviathan is made entirely out of people, only people. Yeah, it's a monstrous body. Yes. It is, in fact, a body. And it's interesting with the rise of the non-player character meme. We are looking at the turning people into machines. And also when I look at Twitter and this very flat internet of people that the only filter through which they can see things and then react to things. And then you see like the reduction of agency and everything is for or against. That's all. That's all. It's just one or the other. And I see that as, you know, again, turning things into a mechanistic body. You know, an engine historically is something that just goes round and round and round and round perpetually. And we use that to wash our clothes and to drive our cars and to generate electricity. Back with the steam engine and the water wheel, it's just about around and around and around. And it's losing your agency. It's the dehumanization. It's people being devoured by machine and becoming machine. And I think in that sense, I know Anselman always sort of does not like the term NRP. One of the primary functions of the machine is it makes it impossible for us to talk to each other. Yes. And not only because it just it gets us more and more isolated and only talking to people that are part of like our group. Yeah, that's the way we do. And we just you can't function with like no one knows what they don't know. And this is where I would say Peterson like kind of this is another where the area where Peterson failed in this in this Twitter thing, because it's like one of his principles is that assume that you have that the person that you're talking to has something we're saying. He doesn't give Francis that courtesy. Yes. He doesn't bother to read any of the any of the traditional Catholic social teaching to figure out what he might what what Pope Francis might mean by social justice. He just like assumes it based on a culture war framing and goes on the attack. Yeah. Yeah. Which, you know, part of the irony of the Peterson story is that on one hand, you know, his rules, I mean, his his 12 rules, a lot of good rules in that, which he himself struggles to keep. Of course, of course he does. I don't want to act like he's really uniquely bad for not being able to adhere to his own principles. We all do that. No, absolutely. But one of the one of the interesting one of the interesting facts about the Jordan Peterson story, I really do think someday biographers are just going to have I mean, the Jordan Peterson biography is going to be a fascinating thing when you think about his wife and his daughter and and everything that's happened. Yeah, there's this on one hand, there's this Jordan that is of the 12 rules where you choose your words carefully. You put your own house in order before you go out into the world. And, you know, so there are many rules in which you could you could turn around that tweet and say, Jordan, there's this rule about your own house in order. There's this rule about thinking that maybe the pope and the Catholic Church, which is arguably a church that he's of any of the churches, you know, maybe drawing close to, I don't know. So you could very easily tag him. But that this tension has always been in the rise of Jordan Peterson. I remember Poe, the person said to me, you know, came for the culture war, stayed for the religion. And part of what we've seen with Jordan is always sort of this back and forth between these. We would. I think Pope Francis is a similarly misunderstood figure to Jordan. Interestingly enough, I think that the conservative Catholics misrepresent and misframe Pope Francis as badly as progressive left opponents of Jordan Peterson misrepresent and misframe him. Get that one. Read that one there, Grizz. Get that. Get that clip right there, because I think it's. And I and I can see why it happens. I think Hank was right when he said that Pope Francis isn't the best communicator. I think Hank had that fundamentally right. But the bottom line is, is that at the end of the day, what Pope Francis is above anything else is a Christian. And when you're when you are consistently Christian in your positions, you are going to say things that are going to make people mad on both sides of the culture war. Period. Crucify Jesus. I mean, that's that's a deep part of the faith. I mean, you wouldn't think that the the Pharisees and the and the Hellenists could agree on anything except they both wanted Jesus dead. Well, so so Pope Francis is going to criticize the extremes of unfettered capitalism. Yes, but he's also going to be unambiguously pro-life. I mean, you can. And both he can find support for both things. Yeah, within Christianity. Like, yeah, they're just Christian positions. And I think it's also true that. I agree with you, Eric. I don't understand, like his his his I think so. I think it's really weird because he's doing it because he's doing it for ecumenical motivations. And he's actually like he's actually deliberately trying to reduce the power of the papacy. But if you want to be in favor of of allowing for different for for a diversity of forms of worship, then why are you not allowing for the traditional forms of your own tradition? It's like it makes no sense. He should back off from that. You're entirely right. The traditional Latin Mass is beautiful. I'm with you on that. Well, and part of what I often see, too, is that Jordan B. Cooper made a comment about Protestants and celebrity. And I put a picture of the pope up because celebrity has, I think, long been an aspect that the church fathers were celebrities within their own certain celebrity arena. It might be argued that our our current arenas also the arenas, the agent and the arena always impact each other. Yeah, it's very interesting because often you'll see if if the pope says something on an airplane, like, who am I to judge? But then if you read enough of what the pope is saying, like, yeah, the news aren't going to the news isn't going to pick up that pope for him. Right, exactly. So yes, exactly. It's just an overreaction to the headlines that never runs. But what if you look at what the pope says in full context, they're almost always just Christian things that he's saying. And like someone grabs a headline and misrepresents it and tries to read into it what they want to hear. So so W3 Wrong says, could you say Jordan had his own enlightenment and is now living in his own Protestant Reformation? Well, he certainly certainly picked a very interesting day to start his little AC. Well, I don't think Jordan I think Jordan is I mean, he's very much still invested in enlightenment principles and economic liberalism. Like those are like those are more important to him than any form of Christianity, which he is not fully committed to at all. Like, so that's where he's coming from. He's coming. He's coming against the pope on the basis of the way that a right liberal would object to the things that Francis said, because he thinks that Francis is not understanding right liberalism. The Christian stuff is just like he's wielding it as a political he's rolling Christianity as a political weapon in the case of these tweets, which he really has no he really has no right to do. As a non Christian. Now, you say in the case of these tweets, do you mean that you mean that for the rest of them too, because I very much see him as a religious seeker. I agree with that. I I'm not saying he's very much a religious seeker. And also, I want to point out that people on the other side of the culture were wield Christianity for their political purposes, too. He's not the only person playing that game. I'm just saying I have I have enough respect for Jordan to think that he knows better than some people who up some other people that I hold them to a higher I hold them to a higher standard. Yeah, I'm surprised when he would resort to using Christianity as a political weapon instead of trying to actually understand it on its own terms. That's what I'm saying. Yeah. And part of the problem is none of us are always our best selves. No, I think I think Twitter, Twitter tempts all of us into doing things that upon further reflection and a little bit more slow contemplation, we might say, I probably shouldn't have written that, you know, that you just sit there and let the thing fly. I had a rule for a long time that I just wouldn't talk about anything political at all or anything that was trending. Yeah. And I regret it every time I break that rule. But sometimes you feel strongly about something that you can't you can't shut up. Okay, I don't know if there's I'm trying to keep an eye here on the comment stream. I don't know if there's any questions in the comments or something you wanted to bring up, Nate. But I very much wanted to because I was hearing you mostly on Twitter and via what we had said about Twitter, Twitter, part of my rule about Twitter is once I feel things getting contentious, I don't do back and forth with people on Twitter. Yeah, that's I had. Yeah, that's that's why I like I had it when I said that like was it today or last night, I had a recent interaction with Jacob and I was just like, let's not talk about this on Twitter. Do it face to face or not at all, because it won't be. Yeah, you can't. The problem with Twitter is it's too hard. It's too hard to make yourself understood. Yes. And the fact that and the fact that you can't just have a one on one conversation, there are other people jumping in and putting their thoughts in it too. And and sidetracking things even more and basically creating chaos. It automatically feeds the world well against all. Yes. Yes. Yes. So Hobbs is Hobbs is stalking us. Rename this. All right. Questions, questions from the comments. Anybody anybody got any anybody got any questions there in the comments or should I just drop the link and let let some people come in? Yeah, James Lindsay is out there doing his thing. James Lindsay has thoroughly documented how Francis is a student of of Paulo Fieri, the Marxist pedagogue who who defined the methods and terminology that became what was commonly known as wokeism. You know, part of the part of the difficulty and a certain approach to I call it I call it political theoretical taxonomy is these aren't discrete groups. I mean, I love the rest of history early on one of the early podcasts they did about Marxism. And and I thought Tom Holland was exactly right. You're not going to have Marxism without Christianity. No. And so correct. So much entered and and Christian socialism is far older than Marxism. Yes. Yes. Far older than Marxism. Yes. So and the idea that wokeism is a Marxist phenomenon is based on circumstantial nonsense and Lindsay's analysis is wrong. All right. Jacob has a question. If social justice is only justice, why call it social justice? Because it operates in the social sphere. I'd say I'd tend to say again, because of my focus on being misunderstood, I would probably I've not used the term much just because at some points things get too hot where certain names and certain terms just trigger people and it's like, all right, oh, you know, you know, this is a marital spat. I just refuse to surrender. I refuse to surrender perfectly good songs concepts to bad operators. So I'm just stubbornly persistent in using social justice as I always have. All right. Let's see. Next question. How do we take back the term social justice as Christians? Right. By doing it better. By doing it better. I think it's a good answer. Why does the authority of a king look like? What does the authority of a king look like in Christian anarchist monarchism? I don't like it. So that's a very good question. And I would say that it doesn't he doesn't he wouldn't really have any authority. It just be symbolic. He's there for he's there as a unifying as a unifying figure. So that to provide like a cultural unity, but he doesn't have any real power. In fact, that's the entire point for him to have like almost no power. It's basically Tolkien actually suggest Tolkien was kind of an anarcho monarchist, too. And Tolkien actually suggested the idea that it should be he should be as incompetent and inbred as possible. Although isn't that what happened to the stewards and at Gondor? All right. Grimgris has a question. If Jordan Peterson's Twitter strategy is calculated and not natural, is this stream an indication of strategic efficacy? I would say if you're saying that that that his objective was to spark a debate about what social justice is, that would be true, except for his second his follow up tweet in response to a perfectly sensible conservative Catholic article from a conservative source was to deny that authentic social justice is a thing. So that can be it. Yeah, it's it's I. And that's where I want to hesitate to simply assume that all actors on Twitter are. Are unidimensional, yet I think we've seen enough from Jordan and he's even even he's even been explained enough and open enough that, yeah, I get done with everything in the day and I sit down with my phone. And if you look at his Twitter stream, there's so. Yeah, it's pretty obvious from what he said that like he is not the kind of person who should be on Twitter. And I think he knows this about himself, too, right? And that's like. And before he was with daily wire when he would, you know, I got to tell people that change the password on my Twitter account. Right. Keep me from it. You know, so it's like God bless you, Jordan. You know, you got a problem. We still love you. It's OK. All right. Freedom's lunch. Paul, are you witnessing to the wolf or giving him victims? I think about this guy. Because I. We and I've, you know, especially learned this now being on YouTube and talking to more people than my my little local church afforded me before. You never quite know when you when you sort of help people down a road, you never quite know where that goes. You never know where that goes. You never know where that goes. You never know where that goes. You never know where that goes for them. So it's a it's a good question. Let's see. Bingo. Look at his Twitter suit. Question from David Williams. All right. Question for both Paul and Nate. Beyond Jordan Peterson's obvious current cultural relevance, what religious impact do you think he'll have 200 years from now, if any? Wow. Wow. I just have a hard time imagining when we look at everything that's changed in the last 200 years. I mean, think about think about people who have had deep. Impact that lasts longer than decades. Any Augustin, Plato. I mean, those are huge names. It's pretty unlikely. The washing machine. Go ahead. Statistically unlikely, I would say. Yeah. No, that's certainly true. But I think, you know, this is something that people I think Jordan has had. It's always difficult to talk about scale, too, because when I talk when I talk about Jordan Peterson and Jordan Peterson revival, people sometimes make it think that this is a blip overall in the world church. No, the world church is so massive that to actually move the needle in terms of all kinds of things in the church in the world, even Jordan is a very small fish. YouTube, a YouTube channel of five million and maybe two plus million on Twitter is really not a lot not enough to move a lot of needles. But relatively speaking, you know, this is where also the Jordan Pope thing gets interesting. Like when I asked Kale, would Jordan get a papal audience? No. And I think almost certainly not. Almost certainly not. He's a fish. Here is the thing that we are not probably maybe that we were discounting is that there is you have to do calculate the ripple effect. Right. So we don't know what who Jordan may have impacted that might end up having an impact even greater than what he said. YouTube user. Okay. Peterson and Lindsay are dangerous to the future of our planet. Maybe being used by the dark side, the mother of mothers of individual and so-called freedom. Wow. From a YouTube user. I think there's some truth to the suspicions there, but I think that both of them are probably But I think that both of them are probably more complicated than that. Yeah. Yeah. And Lindsay's actually a bigger problem than Peterson. The Cromwell kill the king is not Christ King, priest and prophet. That's part of the challenge. Well, that's the that's the thing though. Here's the that's the debate, right? It's like, can't can anyone can't? Yes, we all acknowledge that Christ is the King of Kings. But the question is, is that our other location, our other kings have submitted to the authority of Christ legitimate or not? And the for most of Christian history, the answer to that is yes, they are legitimate. Our resident, our resident father says orthodox couples and babies is probably the biggest impact that could very well be. Amen. So here's a question. It's a good question. Is Christian anarchism the ideal? Wouldn't Gerard say that this is impossible? Some violence is needed law to prevent much more violence. Well, I would think that's an inverse of what Gerard is saying. I think Gerard is saying that all it all human social structures have a foundational murder and violence at their core, which is what Christ came to repudiate. Gerard is about as Christian anarchist friendly a thinker as you could possibly find. That sounds that sounds right. Okay. Anymore. Oh, here's another question. Oh, question from Sevilla. What novelty has Jordan Peterson introduced a culture that he might be remembered long term for? I don't look at Jordan as someone who brought novelty. I look at Jordan as someone who brought to the surface the tensions in decaying liberalism that had to be brought forward. I remember when I was talking to Dr. Jim, the cardiologist from Idaho, and he basically said he knew modernity and liberalism and atheism were dying because of the new atheists, because you often don't see really clear expressions of things until the body feels... It's sort of like old people rallying when they're in their 80s or 90s. I see this often. They're getting sicker and sicker and sicker, and then they rally. I see Jordan as sort of very late stage liberalism, and via his... Part of why I think it's Jordan, he also has a very strong sense of what it is and he also needed to have this mystical, mythological aspect, which is sort of probably a bridge more into... That's the perennial bridge, as it's said. So I see Jordan as what erupted given the decay of liberalism and modernity. This particular blend of evolutionary biology and Jungian psychology is pretty different. I don't think there's anybody that quite has that unique blend. That combination is somewhat novel and kind of unexpected. It's also very weird to see a conservative Jungian, because historically, most Jungians have not been conservative. Joseph Campbell is much more representative of Jungians of the past. Again, I think conservatism is a relatively... And Peterson says this. It's a relatively recent thing for him. I think that's partly because now we're seeing modernity and liberalism as conservatism, whereas just because of how things move so slowly. Yeah, I would say... And I can actually identify with and understand that too, because it's like I started as a young 18, 19-year-old progressive at Evergreen State College and I had to be exposed to progressivism gone awry, even at that early stage, by the way, in order to say, hey, wait a minute, maybe the progressives aren't right about everything. And then I was in Neocon for the next 25 years. Well, and I think part of what I see rolling out in my denomination is it's often people like me who have, in my denomination, I've been a progressive. I've always been sort of on the left end of the Christian Reformed Church. Then I come out to California and people then in Michigan don't quite understand me, because I look around at where things are going and they're like, well, why aren't you more excited? Because I'm looking around and saying, this isn't working out the way y'all think it's supposed to. And so I'm just a little bit sober, but it hardly makes me, in a sense, a traditionalist in the Christian Reformed Church sense. So right, right. What is Nate's animating spirit? I don't know. I'd rather have someone else answer that than trying to say that about myself. All right. What's Nate's animating spirit? I don't know. I'll see. I, well, what did you say the other day to me about a professor? Oh, yeah. He said, this was when I was a freshman at Evergreen, and I was still hair suit even then, and a pretty big guy. And so my professor, Richard Alexander, who was one of the founders of Evergreen State Church, he described me in his evaluation of me as sitting in seminar like an affable bear at a picnic table. That seemed exactly right. So yeah, if you were to force me to it, I would say that I am pretty joyful. I mean, I'm very low in negative emotion. Even when I'm mad, I don't stay mad very long. And I just let it out and let it go. Me too. That's a good thing to be. What would happen if Jordan Peterson came to Christ, told the destruction of his audience? This is something that comes up a lot. And look at, well, again, I'd recommend, depending on how much time I have today, I want to do, definitely want to do something with the Tom Holland, Paul Kingsnorth conversation because it's really fascinating. It's a beautiful conversation. That is a beautiful conversation. Beautiful is the right word for it. Yes. Yes. And Marcus was so brilliant in just keeping his mouth shut and letting it go. Yeah, because Tom gets into interrogation mode and that's where it got really good. Yeah. But, you know, I think a lot of people think that if Jordan Peterson joined a church, he would become Dennis Prager, you know, something like this. And I don't think that's true. He will still be Jordan Peterson. And I don't see Jordan, you know, for as much as Jordan might go into an Orthodox church and, you know, oh, look at the symbolism and the icons and the Catholic church and, oh, look at the brilliance of Bishop Barron and the great tradition, or I think he's just deeply, deeply Protestant. And Jordan, in that sense, will always worship in a church of his own making. But almost all people in North America are, regardless of whether they're Orthodox or Catholic or, I mean, unless they're, the exception would be like recent immigrants. But the rest of us are, we have Protestant cultural sensibilities because America is fundamentally Protestant. That's just the reality we have to live with. Yeah. Okay. Aaron has a question. Will the Pope ever acknowledge Peterson's existence and is Peterson hoping for that when he's punching up? I think, I mean, Jordan, as someone said, you know, he was basically pleading on Elon Musk to pay attention to him. I don't know if they've had any back channel conversations. Jordan likes celebrity and numbers. We've seen that. So the video, I haven't watched it today. He's talking to some guy who's running for, I don't know, presidency from the Republicans. I don't know. So Jordan likes the limelight. He does. And I think he would like nothing better than to have a Papal audience. I don't think he's going to get it because I don't think Jordan, I mean, it's hard for people to understand the world is massive and the Catholic church is massive. And so, you know, Papal, I would imagine that Papal politics, Jordan is not a big player in that world, I don't think. I don't know. No, generally there's like, there's a main difference for North American politics in general. Yeah. I mean, that's just true. And also there are, I would say that there are people that are around Francis that are perhaps as bad as conservative Catholics in America fear. But I don't think it's necessarily true of Francis himself. All right. Us Protestants don't take the call to evangelize. It depends what you mean by evangelize. If we did, perhaps we could move the needle on what social justice means. I'm not so sure. I mean, it's like everyone knew what it meant. The confusion is new, right? The confusion is novel. Everyone knew what it meant. So to be fair, Jung was a bit of a conservative Jungian. Yes, that's true. That's true. For whatever reason, most Jungians, most of the Jungians analysts I've known have been very progressive people. Yeah. Yeah. Question. Do you think Jordan Peterson's tweet to the Pope and how it's been received will or should cause a change, a course change for Jordan? If so, what will change? I don't think so. I don't think so. I think what has changed? Well, I think having his colleagues turn on him at University of Toronto changed him. Yep. Having the media establishment in North America attack him changed him. Well, it's normal to evolve in a direction that is indicated by the people who are supportive of you, right? Yep. So it's like if the people that are supporting you are right liberal daily wire types and you already have some inclinations that are headed in that direction anyway, then you're going to move more and more in that direction. And that's just like, that's just human. Yep. Like if progressives want Jordan to, I would say this, if progressives want Jordan to be more balanced and more progressive should reach out to Jordan and try to talk to him. Yes, absolutely. It's on them. Yep. They, you know, I look at University of Toronto and think if you really didn't want Jordan doing what he's doing now, you should not have pushed him out. You should have tried to keep him because that would have tempered him. Here's a question. How does Nate view the difference between Babylon and Zion in relation to hierarchy? Oh, I would say that that it's not just like Babylon and all prototypes of Babylon represent a hierarchy that is based on power. And I would say Zion or at least true Zion is a is a hierarchy based on authority. And that they're not the same thing. And actually, this is a distinction that Jordan seems to see. I've caught him recently, like making that distinction incorrectly. Yeah. And I would say that when you dig down to it, authority ultimately discloses itself as simply being love. I'm sorry, Jacob, but that's what authority ends up disclosing itself to be. I agree. I agree. I'm team love on this, Jacob. That's why Jacob. I think if it now you have to understand here with this word political again, if some for some reason, the pope saw that it was in his interest to have a public audience with Jordan Peterson. Yeah, I think Jordan would change his tune on some ways. And I think but the pope would have to see. Pope would like those the slight the slight inklings of distributist thinking that have cropped up to him where it's like suddenly it's just dawn on Jordan recently that big government and big business are in collusion, which is something that Chesterton wrote about a long time ago. If these like little inklings of distributist thought that are starting to occur to him, those would get watered. That's one thing I want to say is that during this entire thing, I really have Miss Mary Cohen's presence. Yes. Because she would have given she would have given such a correct and faithful representation of the Catholic view. Yeah. And she would have done it beautifully. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Can anyone explain the Jordan Peterson tweet Catholic is something that you are not something you believe orthodoxy to Protestant question mark a harder question. It depends on the I think they're thinking of evangelical Protestantism Protestantism there mostly. I think that's that that gets a little bit blurry when you start talking about like older Protestant traditions like your tradition, Paul or the Anglican tradition. Like I think those are just a bunch of something you are as something you believe. I think that the extreme like emphasis on belief ism is an evangelical phenomenon. Yeah, I think so too. And it's it's just there are there are I've said this before there are these things that happen in history that you can sort of no longer avoid. Jesus was certainly one of those Protestantism. I think was one of those once I mean the Catholic Church had to respond to the Protestant Reformation and had no choice and in Trent it sort of tries to take some of the learnings and integrate it and not lose too much. But you know that's the same thing in America. This did the partially form thought I had from earlier I was talking about this essay about Barfield and I was talking about how we think about tradition and I would say this is what the Protestant Reformation I have to concede gets right is that as tradition moves towards its final cause what is happening is that it becomes more and more interiorized and the exoteric structure becomes less important. This is Hezzi and I actually had an exchange on the live stream the other day where Hezzi was talking about how the temple has to be or the tabernacle had to be built and like the outside of the tabernacle was supposed to be built first and then the inside of the tabernacle. So we have to have both exoteric and esoteric understandings and the move is from one to the other both as an individual believer evolves in their faith and as the church collectively moves through history and I think that's what Protestantism got right. Yeah yeah all right Aaron wants to know Nate you tweeted this Peterson versus Pope thing is making me want to divorce from the TLC do you still think that we like you? That was me being reactive. That was you because I'm capable of it too that was me being reactive and just expressing my feelings in the moment. I wasn't and I wasn't mad at anyone in particular I want to be very clear about that it's just like it made me just feel like you know I was seeing something other people weren't seeing that was really clear to me and it was frustrating that no one else was seeing what I was seeing. Yeah so that's it. Or you couldn't see other people seeing what you were saying. Correct correct that's an even better way of putting it. Which is a huge problem in Twitter because again we're only seeing each other through a very limited number of characters. 280 characters. You can't see much through there. Could you point out a regenerate king? Charles the third huh? Yeah Charles the third it's like it's interesting Charles the third I had actually talked about Charles with off camera before my conversation with I talked to Martin Shaw on the day the queen died. Oh really? And so yes and we talked before we started recording we talked about the queen and then we talked about King Charles and he was talking about how he had a lot of hope for King Charles as a monarch because they have several mutual friends and Charles is a very like interesting and sophisticated thinker which is it's really weird when I see Americans like like talking about what an idiot Charles is it's like they really don't know what they're talking about. He's a very alerted man who has some very interesting friends and he's definitely an ally of Christianity. And I think there's just it's so funny anytime I look at a David Brooks book on what people put on a David Brooks book on Amazon people keep mentioning his divorce. I think for many people in the world they can't see past the Diana however they view the Diana and especially through maybe the crown or through other media they that's all they see is Diana and seeing that point it's very important again to think about how history works because it could very well be that 100 or 200 years from now Charles III will be viewed in a different way from how everyone views Charles through the tragedy that happened with his wife. So and human beings are complex like that and we just we just view each other through these narrow lenses. Aaron, Sola Scriptura proscentism is more cognitive than embodied. That's what he's referring to right? I don't know who the he refers to there. Yeah I'm not sure who he means. I would say that it depends. You know it depends on how it depends it really depends on it depends on how you approach the text. Do you approach the text as it's purely analytically or do you approach the text with an intent to commune with the text or to commune with the authors the author of the text? And speaking as a Protestant one of the chief forms of let's say heresies coming out of 19th century America was a certain approach to Sola Scriptura where you have the Mormons, the Jehovah's Witness, everybody sitting down with the text and say I'm going to read it as it is which means that just whole realms of things just smuggle on through and then you get these you get these churches shaped like they do coming out of 19th century. And because it's infinitely complex what happens is is everybody has their pet little thing that they decide to emphasize and misses the big picture. Right right um would a conversation between Baron and Jordan Peterson be great at this moment? Yes but it probably won't happen at this moment because you got to let a little time go by maybe you know who knows maybe uh maybe Baron could do it. I Baron is definitely going to stand up for the Catholic social teaching in that conversation. Yeah yeah and he'll do it I think because I think he'll do it lovingly and I hope that conversation happens because Jordan really did get this one wrong. Karen says I haven't listened to the Vivec conversation Vivec Convo is not about limelight it brings to the fore all the issues that Jordan Peterson's concerned about and gives him an opportunity to help his listeners be aware of these issues. And that may very well be Karen but Jordan does like the limelight um I think he really does. And that's not a criticism it's just a factor of who he is and the difficulty is that there's danger in the limelight and um and I think Jordan has you know paid for a lot of things um with his fame and his wealth now. And I know um uh Nate you reacted to my um to my tweet about who's wealthier the pope or Jordan Peterson but for me that was a provocative tweet because right once you start once you ask that question you very very quickly have to wrestle with well what on earth do you mean? Yeah I just it's like a category here because the technically because the pope is technically as under about poverty he doesn't own anything. Yes. So so and then also there's I think someone else brought up the issue of like you know spiritual riches too. Yes. So it's like yeah what do you mean? Yeah. What level of analysis? Yes I got this I got this great quote Gavin Ashenden on his on his conversation with um with Karen. I have to watch this conversation. You do it. It's really. Well Karen emailed me earlier today too so I definitely have to watch it. It's a terrific conversation even if and this this another is another one of my point is that and I I really want to push people beyond the the binary flat filter of Twitter and this current cultural context because you should be able to listen to a conversation where you disagree ferociously with a person or their persona or their political posture and still be able to find a lot of great things in it and I thought I loved I loved that conversation with Karen and and and Gavin. I thought it was tremendous so. Jess who we all love. Hey Jess. He is a wonderful wonderful man. Um as we move from exoteric to esoteric what do we do about the lack of beautiful architecture? Seems like that's been an unfortunate side effect loss of beauty in some way. So I would say that that is I would I would put the loss of beauty up Jess and I know Jess is an artist and he just was on a trip to Europe and saw lots of beautiful architecture so I'm sure this is on the forefront of his mind. I would say that the cause of the loss of beauty is and I know this is going to make people mad to say this but it is it is capitalism and it and specifically this aspect of capitalism capitalism because it because it prioritizes efficiency above all else and is so much based on quantitative analysis there's an automatic loss of quality that comes with it. I am not talking I am not against markets. I am not against fair and just exchange but capitalism is different thing from that and specifically what it hasn't like this horrible bug that it has in it is that efficiency is it's and and it this has to do and it's not just capitalism it's just the reign of quantity in modernity in general. Yeah. Causes loss of quality so I don't think it's like it's not the move from the exoteric to the esoteric that causes that. I would say that we we are we can be we can be esoterically motivated to create expressions of beauty too and I think this is like the good part of romanticism. You can see the seeds of that. So this is this is this is this is kind of what Barfield is pointing toward and romanticism comes of age. So yep. I when I went to Europe you know I'd never been to Europe before and of course one of the things that just strikes you very quickly is are all the beautiful buildings. A lot of ugly buildings in Europe too and then just the thought that occurred to me was if you want something to last build it beautiful because there the people will just be like even though even if you see this with churches often even if you from a from a preacher's point of view that old church is just like oh gosh how we're going to maintain this thing but you don't dare take it down because there it is. I just wanted to say this really quickly because it makes me think of it validating what validating Jacob's vision. I really like his picking up with the language of cathedral because the language of cathedral you're talking about something where the people that are building it don't even don't even have the chance of seeing its realization right. Yeah and cathedral building is motivated it's it's motivated by love. Yeah. Like it's it's not done it has it is not practical. It is not efficient. It is it is precisely a subversion of both of those things. Yeah. And I think that's a good concept and in as much as what he is trying to do is something to try to be something like a cathedral I am fully supportive of that. I just want to note here that when when people who are common adversaries in the comments section agree I love it. I love it. Call me Lex Friedman but when Anselman agrees with Jacob I like it. All right. Let's see. We got to give Vivian B a comment or two. King Charles is an ally of Christianity. Okay. How do the Northern Ireland Catholics feel about the monarchy? Yeah. Yeah. I understand. Yeah. I'm not saying that he's perfect and I would say that's a that's a that's probably something I'm too ignorant about to discuss but my natural inclination would be that I would want to see Ireland independent. Well it was interesting when I was in Ireland. So there's no border between Northern Ireland and and the rest of the country and so you know there it's it's a complex situation. Ireland. Yeah. It's like basically quasi-autonomous but not fully independent and yeah I get it. It's a very interesting situation. It's complicated by the fact that you have these traditional maybe people that have been there for a long time that that that are not Catholic. Yeah. Yeah. Aren't Pentecostal acts Protestant sola scriptura. I you know there's there's a there's a Biblis and sola scriptura are not the same thing and there's a lot of Biblis in certain Pentecostal groups like I've been doing some reading recently of you know some of the Jesus people movement. That was a very Biblisist movement and one of the interesting things about Biblisism is that there are different kinds of Biblisism. Anabaptists tend to Calvinists tend to have a Biblis a rationalist Biblisism sort of a doctrinalist Biblisism. Anabaptists tend to have much more of an activity Biblisism so they'll take a look at the you know the commands of Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount like the pacifism and turn the other cheek and they'll say you know we're not going to have a rationalist analysis of this. We're going to actually live this out and see where that changes us and so it's yeah it's the world is big and complex. Okay um just Aaron capitalism doesn't just prioritize efficiency also short-termism. Yeah also it appeals to our lower instincts. Look how popular TikTok and sugar are. That's very true. Oh question with a K from what up what up is a very regular needy commenter on my channel. When Andrew Tate flew Michaela from Germany to Romania to talk business um is it okay to ask might Jordan have traveled with her being the business top guy? You know the whole I don't know if you know anything about this whole business of Michaela and Andrew Tate. Only because of you but that sounds pretty salacious. Oh I there's yeah yeah yeah I don't know Andrew Tate um I don't know what to say about him. Now this apparently is someone you know. I noticed yeah that's my brother-in-law. Oh it's your brother-in-law. Yeah. Why to make a pay to make a beautiful building when it when it'll reduce the return on investment for the speculative landowner that just wants to throw up 100 units of housing and ride with them. Yet another reason to build Cathedral Slack. Yep your brother-in-law that's fun. Let's see any more questions. Bryce and Cole would our social institutions stand without capitalism? Oh I would say that the the modern nation states is is is the great enemy of all social institutions. I don't think that socialists like capitalism doesn't really I mean there were social institutions before capitalism. Actually most of the social institutions before capitalism like say like let's take a look at the medieval period like before capitalism was was an idea and it was the church that built the social institutions. So I think we'll have social institutions without capitalism for sure. We probably will have more. Oh come on I want to get the get this into the into the into the stream here before we get the most important question by Dave Williams which is entertaining brother-in-law. Definitely not. All right. So there is the link. Now again my rule in terms of coming on to the stream is you have to have your camera you have to have your camera on. I won't take I won't take people coming in without their camera on. So Nate, bingo. I'm going to go ahead and say that I'm on. I won't take I won't take people coming in without their camera on. So Nate, bingo on the issue of quality. No I think that's exactly right. I think that's exactly right and I just I just I want to say maybe nobody will join us. I don't know if anybody wants to come in but I the conversations like this are exactly. This is the first time we've talked without a buffer by the way. It really is. It is. So there's always been at least one more person in the conversation every time we talked in the past. Yeah yeah but this is this is the kind of thing I don't think I was smart enough to know that this is what I wanted but this is exactly the kind of thing I want from this little corner is for us to have better conversations. Speaking of better conversations my favorite guys around here and um are you guys thank god I've been enjoying the on my camera seems very strange right now like it's zoomed in. Oh I can put you I can put you in something like this too. All right um so just to dive into the topic first of all I guess I hope I not I guess I hope both are well. I'm looking at Jordan Peterson. I think we all know that he's trying in a certain way to affect both religion and politics but more specifically I mean and I discussed with the Jacob I see religion and politics you know they're both combined and I see politics being used as a divine tool. The Israelites are being given an option to look around them and see if they want to put a king on top of them or not or have a a monarchy. I don't even see that as a monarchy but I think the Bible is giving an option for using king as placeholder for political structure and this relates also to the justice he's fighting about. I mean we have in the Bible that we are supposed to pursue justice and that that is to be embodied in the land. So the Bible is talking about a political arena and we see that because we could have a kumbaya moment of different of different of a rabbi and a pastor and a and a Buddhist but they don't move the needle and politics on the ground and policy on the ground moves the needle. So I look at Jordan and he's going up to the pope who's occupying said throne and saying I need to talk to you about social justice like look at the world look what's happening around you. You're coming out with a tweet that has a hashtag on it that is that's a symbol that means something. But has the every single thing that the pope pointed to in that original tweet you can find in the Hebrew Bible. I'm sorry can you repeat that? Every single thing that the that the pope pointed to as social justice in that tweet you can point to and has a basis in the Hebrew Bible. Every single thing. No no doubt. How is it being heard though by all these people? They're seeing social social justice right? So Jordan Peterson is hashtag social justice hashtag social justice. So he's responding in kind and we look at it like the limelight which I don't want to say like I could deny but isn't that what we're we're as a collective asking from him like push go do. He's building an arc you know like it doesn't get more symbolic than that like he's calling this so and and then I'll stop this rant how about him being you know remembered 200 years from now. If this is a kairos moment which is a meaning crisis and removing post postmodern so he might be remembered because he seems to be currently in this and also due to social media and how it exacerbates and highlights certain characters. I think he might be someone that's remembered. It could be it could be that it will be a it won't be too kind but he might he might end up moving the needle. I think I think you know Hezzi's bringing in the illustration of Israel in terms of this question of religion and politics and religion to me just is completely fascinating partly because it's it's not Protestant. It's to me that's that's sort of what just continues to fascinate me and in here. I'm going to pull in a new phone. I don't know but wouldn't you say that wouldn't you say Paul that like political theology is what Kiper is doing to us. Yes yes yes. But it's what's what's interesting to me is that so I going to Calvin College of course got all of this talk about Kiper and principled pluralism and all of this stuff. I don't think at Calvin it was very very much distinguished from it differentiated from kind of a moderate democratic application and nobody at Calvin College would say okay it was you know at least when I went to Calvin 80 years since Kiper was prime minister and they had polarization how did that work out in the tiny little nation of the Netherlands because when I started my channel and started talking to hollanders and they'd talk about polarization they'd kind of be like you know that was a failed experiment. So well you know so all you Calvin profs who kept talking about principled pluralism and Abraham Kiper where's the beef you know. Did it did it work out even in a I mean part of the strange things is we keep looking to little countries like the Netherlands or Sweden as these models but these are the whitest smallest they're very different animals from a 330 million person nation as diverse as the United States. So well which begs the question is it natural or right for a nation to be that big and ungainly. Yeah good question. I'd like to get back to that fireball that has he called a hashtag. I think that's a really important aspect that that is most people are blind to. Is it like is it okay for the pope to do a hashtag blunder because he's a boomer. Does he not does he not understand that that's a fireball on the ball on the ball network of the word the ball bird. I like that that it's it's like a snowball rolling downhill and he's weighing he's adding pope gravity to that snowball when he uses that hashtag. It's not nothing that he did it so somebody probably should have called him out on it's use but you know he's the pope or the staffer doesn't have an doesn't having a different concept introduced to a hashtag help because I guarantee you what what the pope meant by social justice does not does not align with most most of the people who would use hashtag social justice think of social justice not not even remotely. The other the other question I was asked was like does anyone think that pope Francis actually wrote that himself. I don't seems highly unlikely which which makes it all more interesting. I think it makes it more like you're going to be sending you're you're going to have your your your minions or your whoever is in charge of your social sending this out and even if that person knows he's like listen I'm just going to I'm going to piggyback on social justice. Obviously all the things I mentioned over here are all legit and they find they find their their their origins in the bible. I think Jordan's sort of saying to the pope you are the one that's supposed to be speaking up about what justice is because it seemingly there's confusion around the world so how about you person on the throne get up because again please point has he point to anything that the pope listed in that tweet that's actually a problem from the point of view of the Hebrew Bible. There is no problem with the tweet I think again so then why then what are we the why are we feel the need to call it out then the hashtag. There's a problem with multiple languages going on at the same time and people are talking cross-purposes the issues of social justice and if you get off down the rabbit hole of James Lindsay that's a very particular view of what's going on where Peterson's also seeing from a similar view oh it's this Marxism it's this problem whereas there's an entirely different historical tradition in the Catholic Church of social justice and it's it's a completely different language meeting in the middle and causing issues where they're not quite speaking the same language here. I was gonna say because I was one that stirred the pot a little bit on Twitter because you know and I would say like coming from the evangelical perspective like I'm very much in favor of social justice like that is why I started this project I've been working on which is live now there's some videos out there it's called tectonic school so if anybody wants to check it out but I'm gonna link in the comments so you know but it but it's just I think the thing is you know we get so distracted like to me it's like the idea that there's a pope like it's living in the internet age it's just weird because like people get to have global opinions and they waste a lot of time having global opinions instead of focusing on local influence that they could actually do and put into practice and so you know and and that's why to me what I see is most beneficial about Peterson is that he did this kind of weird thing you know he's like you know there's no rules against me renting a theater and talking about the bible let's see what happened and he sort of started a weird internet church by doing that you know that we're all we're all kind of part of his weird internet church because we're you know contributing to that kind of project that he started and that's it Jordan Peterson started a church and married somebody it's called the church of not following stupid rules and he's the metropolitan of it I don't everyone's all when will Jordan Peterson go to church he's he's made his own church already you have to pay attention to what they pretend are jokes oh sorry thank you you do see oh he's got he says that that he matches that's probably a good phrase isn't it oh my gosh that's the only professing Protestant around here this is so has he like I like I said I don't know if you heard the the beginning of our conversation it actually what the initial if you want it like the initial tweet if it's like he's he's taking an objection with a hatch hashtag or whatever that's fine when I it was actually the one that I had a serious serious problem with was the follow-up quote tweet of the Washington Examiner article which was it's a it's a conservative source it was written by a conservative Catholic from a very conservative point of view just pointing out to Peterson this is what Catholics mean when we talk about social justice and Peterson's response to that that was to deny that authentic social justice even exists and that's what I had a problem with and I would I would expect like I would expect like I would expect a Jewish person to have that a problem with that too because the idea of social justice is certainly important to the Jewish tradition as well My focus was more on the former less on the latter and I'll agree with you that I think once once Jordan is in his once his eyes is focused his lens as you know as he's he's found a a a a target it's very hard for him to let go and I think that's Jordan being Jordan so like I have no problem with criticizing him my general point is you know punching up even at the pope even at the pope I know that that to me isn't that as long as you're coming you know as long as you're coming from a true place and you could argue that he wasn't coming from that second tweet he was already he was already going at from a more personal point of view but again I think it was a very big mistake to have that hashtag Sam you're muted you're muted Sam you're not you're not muted by this you're you're muted by something else ah no still can't hear you we're we're waiting we're not talking now we're gonna wait in the meantime I do want to briefly address Lance's point about Pope Francis sometimes supporting politicized versions of social justice and I think that's a good point because I think that Pope Francis sometimes supporting politicized versions of social justice and the answer that yes of course because not all not everything that politicized social justice stands for is contrary to the Catholic notion of social justice and in as much as those things are in the line with Catholic social teaching yes of course Pope Francis is going to to support them as he ought to. I thought that can you guys hear me now? Yep we can hear you. All right I thought that one of the things that was most interesting is what it revealed about the current state of Jordan Peterson's own theology right because like the pub's gonna ignore it is he gonna get a papal audience no should he probably not even but it his own theological instincts you know what he's saying in the main tweet redemptive salvation is a matter of the individual soul right and that I think that that's interesting in that you know Jordan Peterson talks about well what can I do to improve society I see all of these problems right how can I improve society well I can go around and strengthen the individual right and that that's sort of his one of his crusades is giving people resources to strengthen the individual with self-authoring and room cleaning and other forms of individualized encouragement delivered at mass scale and I think that that is still kind of what he views Christianity as what it should be doing too and I think he's just really kind of Protestant almost Billy Graham-ish at heart that you know Billy Graham went around trying to save a bunch of individual souls and then also get them into churches and have institutions come in line behind that but you know get yourself exposed to as many individuals as you can give them a gospel presentation and hope for as many conversion experiences as you can get out of that and I think that Jordan Peterson still views things Christianity basically that way right with us which is half the gospel because that's the gospel about Jesus but there's also Christianity also has the gospel of Jesus which is the gospel of the kingdom and social justice is about the church in as much as it can living in accordance with the with the principles of the kingdom while it's here on this earth so you can't you can't it's it's not you can't just have one of those things without the other they go together but I agree with you that's exactly what his analysis is he's it's like which is interesting because it's interesting that he chooses to focus on the about the gospel about Jesus is the point of emphasis because as far as I can tell that's the one thing he is least ready to accept that's a good point that's because in many ways Jordan's part of Jordan's motivation even as you've constructed it Sam is western civilization continues to need this approach to Christianity yet in a very real sense he sort of stands outside that entire thing that and my question with this with this for you Nate is to what degree is this sort of a Christian anarchism that and Gavin Ashenden makes the same point in his good point to Carol that that Sam just made American evangelicals have made this point too that what the church's real job is is to change the individuals and then the individuals go out there and construct a society but isn't that sort of an anarchical way to approach it that's right precisely right which is why I found myself having to challenge my own political axioms and presuppositions because I realized that like no my objection to Peterson dismissing social justice as such was really strong and and the more I examined like why that was the way I felt about it the more I realized is that I was operating under some unexamined axioms of my own and which is which is why I find myself in kind of like okay maybe I need to go back and read the post liberals even more closely again if you look back to when Peterson was uploading his lecture series to youtube and he put maps of meaning up there he talks about his how he was traumatized during the cold war how his kind of philosophical journey came from this existential dread that he felt growing up feeling the threat of a nuclear annihilation and this is where a lot of his focus on Marxism as the root of the problem is from and I kind of wonder how deep Peterson's knowledge of the catholic kind of theology the catholic history the catholic approaches and that that basis that reaction to the cold war existential dread is where he's so based in liberalism classical liberalism and that then leads into the very protestant perspective I don't know if that helped in any sense no and it also raises an interesting question because it actually if you look at like a lot of times he defends his defense liberalism primarily from this sort of quantitative analysis but if you look at like czarist Russia compared to say Stalinist Russia and your only measure is like quantitative like how is the standard of living like things objectively improved under communism like that's just the truth it did so maybe not as much as they improved in the west maybe not but they still improve so at which which which leads to the question like well was it really just capitalism that caused the improvement or were there other things going on like may say increases in technology for example that contributed to that to that increase in the standard of living across the board as well because it seems to have also impacted communism you could say the same thing of like of like you know China China before and after the revolution same thing so which is not a defense of communism I know I hate communism as much as much as he does but or Marxism as much as he does but not all socialism is Marxist and unfettered capitalism is just as bad did America invent the internet because it's capitalist or did we invent the internet because we needed a lot more battleships during World War Two than Russia did and we built them in Silicon Valley right right and battleships are a lot more electronically complicated than tanks and infantry yeah so uh yeah yeah I'm sort of backing up your point no yeah I just I just yeah that's why it's a little simplistic to just like reduce it to you know capitalism versus Marxism it's just it's about that's my certainly certainly from a Catholic perspective it's because it's capitalism capitalism Catholicism doesn't like either and for good Christian reasons well that this is this is my um uh thoughts on this the simplistic nature of the tweet or the hashtag is probably what bothers Peterson as maybe as much as the actual you know ruffling his so-called pseudo conservative feathers but it's like you're the pope you are supposed to be somebody who is dignified and well spoken and you're going to give something as simple as this well if you're going to do that I'm going to do something as simple as this you know it's like the whole thing about Twitter is like you can't get any high resolution stuff and so you know maybe that's maybe that's his kind of his point like you're the pope you shouldn't be playing in a low resolution arena uh this the pope was merely simply restating things that are Christian truisms of course I don't know I understand all of that I'm just saying like the whole point of it is to point out that we can't the point of the tweet is to point out that we cannot allow the culture war to have us abandon the concept of social justice that's the that's actually the point of the tweet and it points toward things that are just simple Christian principles that I have yet to hear anyone actually object to anything he said well I here's what here's what I would say Nate I think you have a problem with Jordan Peterson it's obvious following your tweeting a number of a number of different things also it's like you mentioned a conservative paper the things that really touch your button right now are things that are conservative now I would say this I went to a Catholic college and we had to take three religion courses and one of the religion courses I took was social justice I literally on my transcript have a social justice class I took and the point would be like when I talked with my Catholic friends and I even saw like um um uh Wayne and others just talking about this that Pope Francis has absolutely taken on some of the not just biblical social justice by the way Paul's Paul's a social justice guy he's a Christian social justice guy a lot of evangelicals are Christians so biblical Christian social justice people they their time their talent their money are placed behind them and so I get what you're saying and I was a debate or two and so I see the fact like you're pointing out well yes no one's disagreeing that social justice isn't supported in the Bible and isn't supported by Peterson explicitly did though he said there is no such thing as authentic social justice that's what he said and we get there but when we get to the hashtag and you see some of the things around that I think what we also would have to say with Pope Francis that's why all the treads are there there is more to it than just that there's context there's actions that this pope has taken that a lot of people who who are on the other side of this I think it got into that now I would I so I just want to say you're framing this in a specific way to say these things there's more to it there's more context to it than that I actually have referenced some of those things myself in this conversation Lance and I entirely agree with you that there is a lot more nuance here and my objection is very very specific what I said is that if we're going to play the game of rejecting social justice as such as conservatives then we're playing the wrong game that's do you think and that is precisely the move that Peterson so I would ask you this with context and you see the passion and the care that he thinks about the mark he cares about the marginalized people you can see the pain when he starts telling real stories in his practice in clinicians when you see him actually thinking about the effects that some of these policies are going to have he's thinking about people down here how it's going to crush those people who are truly just trying to get the truly impoverished people do you think it's fair to say that Jordan he might go about it differently but do you think it's fair to say that he rejects all no yeah he's it's in a tweet it's everything else we we all can't put full context in the tweet but I think are you asking me if I think that but the context of Jordan Peterson is the person I don't think he rejects all claims of social justice okay so the way you're describing it is your claim is is that he didn't mean what he said no I think what he was doing was much like what Grimm pointed out here is the whole hashtag social justice crowd and that has a whole myriad of problems with it you can't get away from it he's he's speaking against that I also think he sees the pope aligning himself with the more militant elements of those things I think there's I just think there's more did you look at his death in his little document as conservative manifesto did you notice that the way that he defines justice is exclusively a libertarian definition of justice notice how you said the conservative manifesto you are a leftist Christian and no no that's that's what Peterson called it right and so but but did the arc thing the the arc website his definition of justice was super libertarian and super focused on economics that's just the fact because he thinks that that's the way you get to human flourishing and I know you have a difference with that but that does he actually that's how the bible has a difference with it that's how he wants that's how he wants to try but that's how he wants to try and solve this issue that we see here all right I think both of you have I think both of you have made your points by the way I love I love Nate and I know I won't last you yeah yeah no I know he's coming at this from a good place and we just see we are standing in two different places the two movies on one screen is playing out when Nate and I see things like I don't like Nate I don't comment on Twitter about that stuff I just just for me personally well I got myself in it this time Lance but just really quickly I would say that I would not describe myself as a leftist I know you you wouldn't describe yourself like that I would not describe myself as a leftist and I would say that in many ways my outlook is fundamentally conservative and I would say more conservative than Jordans I have a question for Nate and Lance Jordan Peterson when directly asked if he's Christian refuses to give a yes or no answer and he and I love that he points to this thing of don't don't ask me what I am look at how I act but so I want to ask Nate and Lance's opinion do you think he's a Christian from how he acts do I absolutely I agree I and I hope that he doesn't I I I I agree with Chad on this I hope he never declares his allegiance or states it because that creates a whole bag of worms I hope he just does it individually and personally with between he and Tammy does I mean that would matter how he sees Jesus right because the way he acts I think going all the way back going all the way back to when he talked to Paul Banger Clay he Paul Banger Clay asked me a question something about this he gave a very you have to listen very carefully to his words and if you listen very carefully to anytime that he ever touches closer to the mind he's clearly Christian I mean it's totally obvious but he's also doing something that's very wise I think he's he's trying it's something that we try to do in 12 step programs we don't I don't want to give you the answer I want you to find it and I don't care what the answer is I have my beliefs and I don't want to pollute or lead you know leave the witness so to speak so I think that's what he's doing I think very specifically that's what he's doing and he might and if you like our like the rest of us Christians you probably have a very um uh an understanding that is ever evolving and so I think yes he's very Christian and I think he also is Christian in a very mystical way uh and that's my opinion comes to it hashtag social justice that's just one thing I would say that he's that he's culturally Christian in a typically North American way well and I think that he's wrestling and I think that on a personal level that he's wrestling with Christ and we'll see I would also want to point out on the economic front like I did go to college in Minnesota and there's a lot of social justice democrat like social democrats up there and they come from your part of the where you came from Paul over there in Europe and it in the in the day that had an economic element to it just because it has an economic element to it doesn't mean because in the class when I took that class a lot of it was talking about um trying to provide and to provide um uh a way for people to move out of poverty into a life where they could flourish because there is an element like unless you don't know what it's like to pay your next bill but how you're how you're going to pay rent or how you're going to feed your family like that's a level of pressure that if you can't get out of that it's hard to do the other things of life and I can remember like Lance like I spent like I told Paul early in this conversation I spent 25 years of my life as a neocon like one of the angriest conversations I've ever had was I had an aunt I had an aunt who was very progressive and uh I was you know a standard neocon in those days and what made me enraged is the the assumption that the assumption that I did not care about the poor because of my political beliefs so I think that everyone needs to give the people that they disagree with the courtesy of having good intentions which would include Jordan Peterson right which I absolutely absolutely yeah 100% so yeah here's what I think he's actually up to I'm worried about the danger I'm not I'm worried about the danger of of of the idea that authentic social justice does not exist memetically catching on that's why I said something that's bad I think what he's actually doing is he's um doing this uh thing where he kind of goes in with the pry bar to all of these uh pre-subpositions that people have whether they're on the left or the right he just wants to pry things up a little bit and and like just shake things up enough to where uh each of us should be bothered by some of these questions and I think like in the way that he kind of detests uh affirmation therapy I think this way is kind of doing with this with all these strange things you know I don't think you're getting any real uh any real like very deep and personal opinions from Jordan uh not not often I think you're getting if you're getting some but not a lot and I noticed like when when I went to see him last year um it's really strange so he could do this thing he he would meet everybody at the end of the show and what he would do is he'd have a very stoic face in between shaking hands with people just very plain face uh so he'd take the picture and he he'd have like this plain face and then he'd like turn around a smile and he'd shake your hand and then like like 150 times he did this and I thought I don't know if we've ever seen anything really personal and genuine from Peterson except for maybe when he's crying I think that's very genuine but mostly I think he's just going in there he's trying to punch us up a little bit to in the axioms just to shake things up if that means uh uh kind of tipping over the barrel of social justice so that we can pick it up and sort it out I think it's fair enough I don't know if that's a good assessment this to me sounds and this is one of the questions that came in uh the first version of this when you were talking to Kale uh Paul but you know someone asked is is uh is Jordan Peterson a prophet in one of the questions right so I'm not saying he's a prophet but hearing also Chad's explanation over here uh you know the the Bible the prophets tell the kings that God never asked for these um sacrifices ultimately that's not what he what he asked for so I I agreed that Nate that we should be steel manning the other person's position and he should be looking at the pope in his good faith but again the way it came out I think he's looking at that and saying that's not what's being uh that's not what's being required from us like these are all fake versions of what we're calling social justice and that's not what's requiring us from a society however I do think Nate that you articulated that very nicely at the end that your your fear if I understand correctly was due to his prominence right someone's going to look at him sort of challenging the social justice from a biblical sense and that's going to become mimetic and I think that is a fair concern to have and I think once you articulated that way I think a lot of people would have less issues with that specific criticism because it's yeah the pope shouldn't be shouldn't be saying that but Jordan you should have a lot more care with your words with regards and Hesie I do I have that concern specifically because of the way Jordan ought to know this right because Jordan Jordan talks about how how the right goes wrong when when it goes wrong and I'm telling you saying something like there is no authentic social justice it's precisely the way to push the right in it into its worst version of itself if that actually becomes a common way of thinking is just f social justice altogether it was never real we don't need to pay attention to it and we can just silence our enemies that's a problem because yeah but in reality that's feeds into the demons that the right is already such a caricature no one on listen that would that would seem to think if you would think this there's such a small percentage of people on both sides when you go and upon one side and where you might have the hood wearers on the other side those are just these little fringe elements the massive amount of people you know who they are they're they're still the people that are going to church and maybe not doing it very well but you know what they absolutely believe in those elements and so and if you would look at who actually beyond who funds and actually puts their dollars behind contributions and giving portions of their money the conservatives out have always crushed me on the left that is not what I said so the point that he he's somehow you think he's mobilizing us to get rid of ideas of social justice don't misunderstand me that's not what i'm saying i okay i want to get i want to get some more voices in here here i'll leave all leaves you can get more voices by the way i made and paul great conversation oh thanks lads um erin and anthony so um it was interesting what gris said earlier about jordan peterson and the church of the internet something like that and interesting change that happens when a new means of communication comes along so before the printing press arrives the way that the church is structured and the christian faith happens in a very particular form after the printing press comes a lot you have these religious wars across europe now that we're in the era with and i wasn't around but i assume when the radio comes along when tv comes along all of a sudden there's weird or different forms of christianity come along through these mediums and now that we're on the internet the way that communication happens and the language that people use is very particular and very different and if you were and i empathize with nate that there's this very long tradition in the catholic church of social justice but if you google the word social justice if you look on wikipedia which is kind of the internet's encyclopedia it says social justice is terms of the distribution of wealth and peterson just kind of immediately goes to this marxist thing and he's not looking at that there is this long history and you said a really interesting thing about that social just the idea that social justice isn't a thing or shouldn't be a thing catching on mimetically but whatever this progressivism wokeism whatever you want to call it has already co-opted the word social justice absolutely if i hear that word at all these days i don't think sides in this very specific context it's never a catholic thing i don't think 99 percent of the people who use the word social justice these days know it has a catholic history and that's that's where i'm seeing this mismatching communication yep and if that would have been if that would have been where peterson went was just the initial reaction to the initial hashtag social justice with the initial things i would have been okay with that i wouldn't have i mean it raised my eyebrows a little bit but i wouldn't have i wouldn't have said anything on twitter it was second the second follow-up where he's reacting to a conservative catholic saying authentic social justice does not exist that's the one i have a problem with yeah and unfortunately twitter is quite dementing and deranging for it seems for anyone who uses it right so yeah absolutely true and also like you could beyond your intent like this is this is exactly what i fear is that that particular tweet that authentic social justice does not exist can have a life cycle far beyond what peterson ever intended and an intent far beyond what peterson didn't intend because let me tell you something the right is angry and for good reason yeah so maybe the best thing to do is not to feed the rights rage oh oh yeah oh yeah because if that happens then we're in for dark times and i'm not understand i it's not that i can't understand it i understand how it's human identify with it but it could go bad places that peterson does not intend and that's my concern i think that comment is downstream from the term social justice having already changed its meaning in the popular culture that is absolutely correct so what i would hope is that the conversation that could happen would be how can we have a real conversation about authentic social justice so rather than denying that authentic social justice exists let's talk about the ways that the progressive version of social justice is neither social nor just and how it fails on both tests this is wonderful i'm gonna take my leave thank you very much okay thank you anthony great seeing you again erin i want to hear from erin uh yeah i was just listening in the background uh thanks for the great talk um no i was curious because you were you were talking about whether or not you know like if peterson is a christian in his actions and i she thought it's kind of strange and paradoxical because obviously he's been saying in the past that he wants to help as many individuals as he as he can that's kind of his his goal it seems in some ways um and yeah just thinking about that like it's interesting that maybe he's considering that even like that public image when he is discussing whether or not he is a christian that in actually admitting he'd be a christian you know you get that strange um dynamic which we sort of discussed earlier that you'd lose maybe half his audience or something like that so i'm curious what you like so that kind of brought a question to mind and i'm curious how you see that so maybe like what if sort of professing the fact that you're a christian will actually lead to you potentially doing less good in the world and that's a strange paradox at this time and maybe that's something he's thinking about so that's just something that went went through my mind while i was listening to you guys so i'm curious what you have to say i have a thought because this will be my last thing um i think it is very evident from peterson's communication that he has a high value for that spirit of voluntary play you know the piaget talks about and that that's the way that he approaches these things and so he's very very opposed to any sort of coercion and you know like um i i kind of had this uh this little meme kind of idea about a guy like i called him saint couch potato which kind of is that this guy this guy who we would say he has the the correct propositional understanding of salvation through the gospel and he just sits there and does nothing and and and i would say you know even me would be tempted a lot of times when i sat in my past to say is that guy really a christian but then him just sitting there really drives a lot of self-righteous people nuts and is kind of accomplishing something for the kingdom but but to contrast that too you know i think that you know and this is what i say so that's the fear that's the fear is that we're going to get a bunch of saint couch potatoes if we preach that gospel that easy way but there's this really great uh clip out there um it's a conversation between tim keller and john piper and um and uh tim killer is talking about this woman in his church who's come to this knowledge of her salvation and realizing it's nothing that she's done she is no effort of her own it's totally a gift from god and then she and she comes to this realization of saying you know if i really understand that if i really believe that there's nothing that god can't ask me to do whereas if it's if it's my merits of fulfilling some parameter of meeting my quota of social justice in the world that's my effort and i've done it and i earn my spot but if if it's if it's something that's totally undeserved the reciprocal voluntary loving outpouring um of of works of you know grace is exponentially greater and i think you know that's what we see in the lives of the great saints protestant and catholic is that that these people have grasped a hold of the love of god in such a way and it transforms them that it just overwhelms them and and creating a system where you're requiring or possibly could be seen as as coercing behavior out of a people makes it more difficult for that rare beautiful kind of conversion to happen so that's my last nice thank you michael well the principle of non-coercion certainly appeals to the christian anarchist side of my brain but but but but they're oh too bad but but i've realizing that lately that that it might be more complicated than that um i your point your point erin i really like um i remember when i was last time i was going through the the sermon on the mount and i was i was thinking about chapter six where jesus keeps telling people don't do your righteousness before men and i was thinking about how one of the real one of the real ironies about jesus and this isn't uncommon with saints through the history of the church is that they don't necessarily have a good reputation with their contemporaries um and i think there's i i think part of the cruciform way is that we are willing to sacrifice even our reputations and and i think for for many of us our reputations are we value our reputations more than we value our money we value our reputations more than we value truth i mean that's the whole idea behind a lie is that we've tried to prop up our reputations at the expense of the truth and so there is there is very much something i think in jesus that leads us into i remember there was a there was a time in my life i was really trying to get a handle on my defensiveness and um i i i saw some things in jesus and his teaching that led me to think that i i should not i should not justify myself and you can find texts like that too where let others justify you um you know let your yes be yes let your no be no peterson has an element of that with sort of when he talks about kind of this radical approach to truth telling which you know there's pitfalls and all these kinds of things always but you know speak the truth and let the chips fall where they may i mean that they can that can fail the test of love sometimes as well speak the truth and love is also something but i you know i think there really is something in in jesus about um because he had again he was he was crucified people people around could basically mortal enemies mortal political rivals could agree that the world is better without jesus and they had the political will to do it and they didn't fear you know there there's this tension towards the end of the gospels where they're they're trying to figure out exactly how they're going to arrest him because they are a bit afraid of the mob in jerusalem but once they overcome that it's like all right now we got him now we can kill him and i think that's part of the christian life yeah yeah yeah exactly yeah i'm curious like because he also he wants to keep talking to he wants to keep talking to muslims who want him to convert to islam you know like he wants to do that he doesn't just want to be this sort of i don't know close down for them so yeah the one point i was also going to make about twitter is yeah when we're talking about ai and i think nate you were participating in an ai conversation the other day too on one of these channels yeah we're not talking to the pope in a sense there's a there's a body that has a twitter account yeah that is not the pope tweeting in the name of the pope yeah and in that sense it's almost an ai it's not exactly an a it's not artificial in the sense that it's it's sort of further downstream like these natural language engines but you know the one conversation that peterson had with that with andrew shulls that comedian where people are looking at you know the atmosphere in the room and and sam brought this pot brought this point up in my conversation with kale too i think that's an issue in this too where i think if elon wanted to do something with twitter it could be you know only real people get to tweet not um not bodies and surrogates and and these sorts of things that could in fact perhaps improve twitter i don't know so i thought that was a that was a point i wanted to make in this yeah yeah yeah yeah good point all right have we beat this horse to death i think i think so time to land the plane that's good yeah yeah all right thanks thanks for jumping in erin thank all the rest of you who jumped on thank you so much nate for giving us your time it was it was it was good to get a chance to talk to you without a without a intermediary for a while no me too i loved it so all right thank you all all right have a nice day bye bye yeah bye bye