https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Gv9ZJPlM-gU

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to pick up where I left off on the Vancouver 1 Sam Harris Jordan Peterson Conversation with Brett Weinstein what's been happening as I've been looking at the last videos is Peterson has been building something. He's been using blocks to build something and Sam Harris keeps kicking them away That's kind of the pattern of this this entire thing. I was talking to Adam yesterday from Think Club and We talked about the fact that this this is sort of Sam Harris's pattern. He does that I really appreciate the Sam Harris podcast I enjoy a lot of the interviews with a lot of interested people but in this conversation Peterson is definitely trying to construct something and build something constructive and Whereas within the process of building something constructive it is often helpful to offer critique, but the Hopefully the critique is there to to further an outcome and to achieve a goal and so often it seems in these conversations Harris is simply reacting against religion as he normally does and it gets It gets dull after a while because it's almost repetitive you can it is repetitive You can predict when Harris is going to do this So Peterson has been Peterson has been going along building a system trying to figure out Okay, where this is this is Peterson's life work? How can we understand? How we orient ourselves in the world is their moral knowledge? Where does this moral knowledge come from? How can we assess this moral knowledge and what form does it take? How can we evaluate it? This is this is Peterson's this is Peterson's lifelong project and then he He and Weinstein have basically gotten Harris to concede that dogmas in other in other forms Are just as if not more dangerous than religious dogmas and and Harris makes that concession. It's a big concession It's a concession that he seems to backpedal on Repeatedly because he just keeps coming back to all religious dogmas are the worst religious dogmas are the enemy. That's his schtick. That's his career Adam and I were debating is he a career atheist or a celebrity atheist? Well, he's both this is this is his career This is what he does for a living is he complains about religion? That's his job You might say well, that's the counterpart to me who promotes religion as a pastor. Okay, fair enough So then Peterson says well but then there's the apes and we know from the chimps that chimps are violent they're tribal and and that is built into us and then Harris picks up from there and he's going to talk about what is the topic of this video which is conversion or World. Well, I'll call it worldview collapse and reappropriation. So let's listen to a little bit of Sam here So I mean we have we have these primate Capacities that we have to correct for and we're busily trying to correct for almost everything that we've been evolved to do now in Video coming soon. That was actually gonna be the video I made today, but this one came about instead Where does where do our ideas of correcting come from that's Jordan Peterson's quest Where do ideas of correcting come from they we in all of our language? We're saying and this again is directly from CS Lewis's book miracles and of all of our langurds We betray the idea that These are the ways in which we attempt to correct nature are coming from another source And if you jump to the prayer part of Vancouver one when Jordan Peterson Imagine someone sits out there at the edge of their prayer their bed and praise a prayer and we ask well, where does that answer come from? Nobody on the panel can answer that question And actually I was listening to the the London recording the recording of the London talks and And I noticed again how often Sam Harris says well, that's a fiction Well fiction might become a word that fudge fudges because the point of that prayer conversation in Vancouver one is We don't know where fiction comes from and and we like to dismiss things by saying it's a fiction That's not a fiction. It's a fiction. It's a fiction And and we like to dismiss things by saying it's a fiction and that's not a bad turn of phrase It's not a bad critique. But if we pull back a little bit, we'd have to ask well, where does fiction come from? And what's the relationship between fiction and truth and this gets into the metaphorical versus objective truth and Adam and I talked about that Quite a bit yesterday. So, okay keep going Sam. We're not you know, we don't like the state of nature for good reason and virtually everything that's good about human life is born of our I Would argue culture based and you know highly intelligent and necessary have now again You've got Sam has Harris is a real problem here because just about all of our cultures are are founded in religion and based on religion now Sam wants to get rid of that and he of course yelled generic fallacy just genetic fallacy just because it was Just because we inherited from the past doesn't make it good. Well, that's that's very true. That's a good observation But just because it's religious the debate is does it make it bad? for to To mitigate what is in fact natural for us and naturally there's nothing more natural than tribal violence Would you love the sword that you're and now in these sections? I think Harris just kind of he doesn't quite know what to say The the chattering rider on the elephant just starts talking and this is common this is what I do in my videos this is what we do, but If we're going to use rationality as a tool we ought to evaluate what the chattering rider has to say with respect to Rationality we're going to talk about what reason is a little bit later in this video Okay, so so then it also seems like we agree that the core element of tribal alliance Which would have its roots say in the chimpanzee Proclivity to or its analog in the chimpanzee proclivity to identify with the dominance hierarchy of the troop is something That's a source of the proclivity for human social aggression. That's independent of its at least in Independent of any obvious religious substrate So there are other reasons for group belief and the commission of atrocity that can't be directly attributed to to religious dogma Yeah, and what most worried see now here remember they had already gotten Harris to concede a little bit earlier that There's lots of dogmas apart from religious dogma and lots of these dogmas are problematic and now here Peterson is using a pattern of argumentation. He uses very often which is Older this is older. This is before this is further that this is down deeper than religion in us that which is built into us by evolution and therefore you can't attribute this to religion because To the best of our degrees the monkeys don't practice religion. Praise me about religion. I would say obviously religion can channel see now Watch this is this is what Sam Harris does in these talks. He redirects Peterson is building an argument now pay attention here Harris is supposed to be the He is supposed to be the priest of rationality in this Well, what is rationality and what is the process of reason? It's careful constructing of an argument and one step at a time and you'll notice that Harris is in many ways the chaos factor in these conversations because Peterson is is building a chain and if it slow it down and pay attention you can follow his line of Argumentation and Harris keeps coming in with chaos and boom push the blocks boom move the chess pieces, you know He okay, you're making this argument but religion and and it's almost like squirrel And you know, okay, look over here, you know Jordan Peterson is trying to lead us on a trail but look over here and this is exactly the move that Harris makes here and in a sense he touches the water in Mirkwood and we're about to Go down a lot of different rabbit trails now I Intend to follow him on a lot of these rabbit trails because I think these rabbit trails come within Sam Harris's mind from a rather stock list of objections and Nobody in this room in this conversation is really able to talk about these Objections very well nor are they interested in but these are rather stock objections to Christianity and religion And I think a lot of them are worth treating so not in this video, but we will get there There's what I'm going to specifically deal with in this video is conversion rapid worldview change these primate urges in Unhappy ways so you can get tribal violence that gets amplified by religious dogmatism and that should trouble everyone But it's not unique to religion. It's also nationalism and it's racism and it's all other kinds of dogma, too Okay, so he's reiterating his concession that he made a little bit earlier but What most worries me are those see now we're gonna talk about his feelings. Okay, and and this from the supposed king of rationality He's appealing to it what most worries me. Okay, Sam Tell us about your feelings Are your feelings of fiction? Where do they come from? That's the conversation we're having where do your feelings come from? How should we think about your feelings? cases where clearly good people Who are not necessarily captured by? tribalism per se Are doing the unthinkable based purely on religious Doctrines that they believe wholeheartedly with without good evidence so I'm sitting here on this stage with Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein and Jordan Peterson is trying to lead us down a track so that we can have a Conversation that's coherent and we're all together and now we're gonna hear about Sam Harris's fears and dreams and it's almost like I'm reading You know Jung's autobiography because when Jung starts going off on his dreams, it's like, okay We're going into dreamland. Well now we're going into Sam Harris fear land so he's talking about people converting to Islam being radicalized via YouTube and going to Syria to fight Isis now, this is a little bit over now because the things in Iraq and Syria have changed over the last couple of years But this is his fear and and listen how he talks about it So you have the person who joins Isis who wasn't even Muslim before they converted, you know 16 months ago and they go all the way down the rabbit hole to the the most doctrinaire most committed most uncompromising view of just how you have to live in this world if you're going to be Muslim and They join Isis Based on the idea that salvation only goes one way and the dying and defense of the one true faith is the best thing That can happen to you. There's no question that there are individuals who have made that journey in fact, there are individuals by the thousands who have made that journey and There are far more benign versions of that. They're people who just waste their lives I would argue converting to whatever the belief system is and just wasting a lot of time worrying about hell or worrying about the fact that their Child is gay and you know the creator of the universe doesn't approve of that And so there are all kinds of suffering that strike me as truly unnecessary born not of again ape like urges but ideas that any rational person Would if believed would follow to that same terminus Okay. Now this is a really important Point in the conversation And let's take it apart a little bit Now this is again as a typical Sam Harris Redirection for these conversations Jordan Peterson says human beings have a capacity for tribal violence not premised upon religious thinking Sam Harris says yes Sometimes religious people will appropriate this capacity and use it for religious ends to which I certainly agree Jordan Peterson's point is that religion can't be reduced to the source of all human malady Which is Sam Harris's well if we'd only get rid of religion then you know Rationality would reign and we would have utopia and so on and so forth Now Sam Harris says religion has the capacity to take what would be what would otherwise be considered good people Which is a very interesting phrase very common phrase It's a cliche one that is well worth unpacking whenever you hear someone use this phrase Try to figure out what they mean by it and send them to Isis and Syria to do horrible things Now what's interesting is that this is a definition of rationality Because they believe the Isis premise and then they follow it to its logical conclusion Okay, so let's pause here and one of the things we've been paying attention to us We've been listening carefully to these conversations is what in Sam Harris's mind is rationality And you will begin to immediately see that rationality is a multitude of things sometimes rationality is a synonym for good in This case rationality is a synonym for his means a a process of deduction and careful analysis a chain as it will that will derot that you will yield a rational outcome or action based on this chain back to a premise a premise which may or may not be well-founded and here's argument is that they have drawn rational conclusions to a bad premise, which is phrase it how you want the infallibility of the Quran the truth of Islam the truth of a particular strain of Islam and Therefore they have done the rational thing they have picked up and gone to Syria and will fight for Isis This is his argument now at this moment. I think Sam Harris is using his most reliable definition for rationality and many of the other ways that Sam Harris uses rational is just word substitution for the good or In Sam Harris's Sam Harris's religion. Okay, so keep your eye on the ball Let's ask this question. Well, what kind of thing is rationality is rationality simply a synonym for the good Well, if we if it were why would we use these two and most of us just in this definition that Sam Harris has himself used has shown that to do what is rational if you believe the premises of Isis Islam What is rational is to go to Syria and fight against the infidels and so on and so forth That is a rational thing to do now You can't keep using rationality in both ways you really have to choose between is rationality simply a synonym for good or true or is rationality Something that ties us with premises and I would argue that This second definition is in fact the better definition because if you use the other definition then we have this important category of living that we don't have a word for and we have too many words words that are in fact fudging about questions of the good or the truth The rational in a sense when you say when you use rational in that way You're kind of like saying using code words like Christians do when they say well this thing is biblical it Corresponds to something Christians say it's biblical. It corresponds to the Bible. Sam Harris says it's rational It corresponds to rationality, but even that term rationality in that sense is Fundamentally a religious term and Sarah had Sam Harris uses it in a religious way is Is rationality as Sam Harris is using it the foundation of our beliefs and I would argue no in this illustration Presuppositions such as the religious ones regarding the Quran on the Quran as held by Isis are the Pre-rational this is what people are believing But this is the project that we're working on in these conversations and this is Jordan Peterson's life project How do we derive these? Presuppositions where do they come from? This is Jordan Peterson's great quest. This is his holy grail Rationality then guides normally good people in Sam Harris's opinion to do terrible things Now what's interesting is that? Again, I've listened to these the two Vancouver lectures probably 20 times What's interesting is that in the second lecture? Lecture Sam Harris is about to make an illustration of exactly the opposite point which is fascinating Right, but that's not the same thing as a a dogma subscribed to by some some Subset of humanity that is antithetical to another dogma Subscribed to by another set of humanity that has nothing to do with underlying biology. There's something that's that's changeable But it's changeable in real time Based on just conversations like this, you know, we could have you know I get emails from people who can point to these the paragraph where they lost their faith And when folks make their little trek to Syria they can point to the video where they gained their faith Well, what is happening in this process? right where you're reading somebody reading Richard Dawkins or or hearing a debate between between me and some theologian where it's just a collision against Rationality which is so useful in every other context Now what are we talking about here? Did you hear what he just said suddenly? rationality theologian where it's just a collision against Rationality which is so useful in every other context suddenly proves its utility in this context where they think well, okay clearly I know the Muslims are wrong about the status of the Quran Let me let me take that that that spirit of criticism in the internal space of my own culture And what what moves well a dogmatic attachment to Christianity has to move by that same standard So what are we talking about here on one hand? Sam Harris in the first lecture redirects the lecture because he's got fears and worries about people Radicalizing being you via YouTube and converting to Isis and going to Syria and fighting in this in this talk in this talk He's happy about the same thing happening but in a different direction well and and he's this What's funny is about in the first example? This is an example of evil that people are going off into the pit of delusion by going to Syria and throwing away their life or the might the less the lesser example of just wasting their life because they're They're they're snookered by religion, but in the other example Well, it's just the blazing obviousness of rationality that Wins them over to the pure and bright path. Well here it is Is religion a devouring lie and or a house of cards? Religion is such a powerful force for evil that normally good people become Isis terrorists because they begin believing on the basis of a video or a sentence a Certain reading of the Quran and they go off to do the rational thing of becoming sex slave Taking terrorists in Syria the sex slave thing will be coming up in a few minutes in the talk This validates his condemnation of religion as one of the greatest sources of evil in the world today Yet religion is so flimsy that after just reading Sam Harris or Dawkins the irrational beliefs will dissolve in a moment because it is a house of cards because they see that oh my Christianity is just like Islam and Therefore listening to Sam Harris. I have to get a bit up just because I don't want to be in a I don't want to be some slave Sex slave taking terrorists and Isis and if I stick to my Christian road, that's where it's gonna lead me to Probably not but so What is it Sam? What is religion? it just caves in one circumstance or it, you know converts in another and Both of his stories are true. Both of these stories happen Well, I would assert that what is rational to do at this point is to look for This is the process we use all the time some kind of underlying Some kind of underlying Thing that ties both things together. Well, how might we find such a thing? How might we understand such a thing? I would assert that we're probably gonna look for a metaphor Because once we see a metaphor that that seems to correlate to this dynamic Maybe that metaphor will help us inform or it will just at least shape our minds to figure out what's going on because I There are multiple Idiosyncratic factors at work Multiple layers of things going on probably more than we can comprehend So what we do is we simplify it down into a metaphor that seems to work for us Well, let's apply some reason to Sam's anthropology My argument here is that Sam doesn't seem to have a very accurate or sophisticated view of how human beings work With respect to presuppositions Rationality or religion and that what in fact Jordan Peterson is doing in his project is offering a far more systematic view of human beings and how we work rather than this simplistic religion bad and good religion strong and house of cards because With Sam Harris, he just keeps throwing these words up but slow down Follow the steps see what you can find So here's a metaphor for southern sudden conversions and I think this This in a picture now now pay attention to what i'm doing because i'm not Waving my hands and trying to do things i'm trying to say use a metaphor here We're trying we're going to look at sinkholes as a metaphor for religious conversion now I'm paying attention to what i'm doing. I hope you are too because Is religious for is religious conversion like a sinkhole Well, not into the degree that we have sand underneath us and leaky pipes But in the degree of the dynamic that we have going So let's take a look at this. This is kind of fun video I added the gap in my pipe to simulate pipes takes is a little bit of settlement or shifting to create My pipe to simulate pipes takes is a little bit of settlement or shifting to how do we get a sinkhole? That's the question to create an opening in one of these pipes and allow internal erosion to start I added the gap in my pipe to simulate this effect Water moving through this pipe is able to dislodge the adjacent soil and carry it away Notice there's no signal on the surface that anything is awry As more soils washed away the subsurface void grows Now I would assert that something like this obviously this is simplified. This is a metaphor All right. This is a story. This is a story about sand and water and a toy truck on a piece of paper In a little plexiglass box. All right But I would assert that the dynamic of religious conversion Is often something like this and the dynamic and this isn't true just of individuals But in fact of whole communities And when we look at the ups and downs of the christian church or the ups and downs of islam Or the ups and downs of probably many religious communities The dynamics often look something like this now, let's keep watching because we know what's gonna happen and it'll be fun Depending on all those soil properties we talked about earlier this process can take days to years before anyone notices Many of our subsurface utilities are placed directly below roadways and the paving often acts as a final bridge above the sinkhole Hiding the void below It's only a matter of time before everything above is swallowed up Sinkholes aren't the only problem caused by internal erosion A specific type of internal erosion called piping is the most common cause of failure for earthen levees and dams Including teetown dam in idaho which killed 11 people and caused billions of dollars of damage when it failed in 1970 Wow We in california out here in the west we pay attention to levees and dams, especially if you live in a place like sacramento Well, let's look at layers of a person, okay Now let's let's talk about pre-suppositions These are these things that we don't construct ourselves and then and now When I began by talking about the question about where does fiction come from? Well, we don't know now bear in mind what we've been talking about in terms of the mind This one part of the mind is our conscious self. This is the rider on the elephant. This is the This is this is the part of our mind that we experience as a story that we experience as me But we know that there's way more of our mind that Doesn't allow this conscious self the keys to the car and that the rest of my mind is it's keeping my heart beating and it's back Not just in my head. It's all throughout my body. It's keeping my heart beating It's keeping an eye out for flying objects and i'll duck It's not going to say it's not going to try and get the attention of the rational mind and say hey Hey, wait a minute you're going to have to move your head because this rock is coming for it because Because robert mitchell gave jordan peterson a box of rocks and they're labeled and so he's going to throw them at sam so inside sam harris's head Other parts of the brain are not going to give the conscious sam A chance to duck they're just going to tell the the they're just going to tell the muscles in the body duck That's what they're going to do. You're going to duck right away and you see a snake you jump back These are these things are built into us. This is this is part of jordan peterson's argument that All of this stuff is built into us And and when we say us we mean us as a group so we can pay attention to that so loves needs desires Commitments that we are not very conscious of these are our presuppositions. Okay, and there's rationality and evidence And rationality is a consistency tool and this is in a sense why sam harris notes that people looking at islam and what? You know what's happening in islam. They look at that and they say, ooh That doesn't look good. Well, what about my christianity Christianity? Well, that doesn't look right So something on the basis of islam you give up your christianity and you do that because of rationality It's a consistency tool, but let's not divinize Sam The consistency tool because I think actually a lot of what sam does is in fact divinize and when I say divinize I mean It's taking the function of a god in his system. Okay Let's not divinize rationality, let's understand our employment of this tool as it is now Cs lewis in a sense almost divinizes rationality because cs lewis says that rationality Seems to be for us a witness to the supernatural But pay attention to the words the supernatural. What is the supernatural? The supernatural is that which colonizes nature. It's The same argument that sam harris has just used earlier when he says yeah, you know those chimps We're trying to get beyond these natural impulses Oh, what realm would that be? You're saying it's above the natural Okay, um What what if we were to like take another english word to say above the natural say This is greater than the natural. It's more moral than the natural. It's truer than the natural It's above the natural Natural What if it starts with an s su play a little wheel of fortune here Supernatural it's Supernatural See, I would argue that earlier when sam says every time he says we have to transcend the natural you might say You mean we have to get supernatural here sam because that's what the words mean Now you say no, it's not supernatural Okay, so you want to be you want to transcend the natural you want to get above the natural? You don't want to be captive to the natural What are you going to call that space Civilization That's a good word It's a very good word That's in fact is the conversation that we've been having for thousands of years. What is civilization? What is civilization when jordan peterson said city of god the kiwitas that's latin The city of god. Well, what is a city? well when we get into Plato's republic it's really Plato's politea What is playdo doing he's describing the city and he's saying An individual human being is too small to look at we really have to design a city Oh and if we can design if we can recognize justice in the city because it's bigger and easier to see Maybe we'll recognize justice in the individual so justice in the age of an individual is a function of the justice of his city Oh You might also call it supernatural So rationality and evidence rationality is a consistency tool. We use it to evaluate evidence and outcomes We use it to build community. This is civilization with others form alliances tribes unnatural tribes tribes built on other things than bloodline Marriage one of our most foundational institutions marriage is a foundation of civilization Why because marriage is the capacity to make family members in a way other than biological reproduction That's what marriage does that's how you create family These are all the tools and building blocks of civilization This is what we're doing and there's a relationship with rationality here What another layer of the person the rider on the elephant? Well, what do I mean by that the conscious self? Well, let's keep going Formation this is the process by which we become civilized Pay attention to jordan peterson's assertion that no human being is formed in their short lifespan That is that is a critical thing that peterson says and it comes up only now and then but it's Foundational to his argument. It's one of his presuppositions. Okay, and I think it's true our ability to productively engage in an orderly world, which is part of what science does trying the ability to see the order in the world and to engage with it productively Is dependent upon many generations of hard and soft structures What are these hard structures hard structures are the things built into us like the physical biology? and when you go into jordan peterson's biblical series in a sense what he's doing in those early things is making the argument that What we find revealed in the bible is built into our hard structures. That's the kind of petersonian concordism that Not so much the conscious mind but the rest of our brains when jordan peterson started doing it in the biblical series We're like oh Now I see Well, what was he doing? He was basically making the assertion that You can read the formation of our hard structures In genesis in a poetic account What What did that mean that meant that the old way that genesis served the world before darwin and and The erosion that happened underneath the old way Genesis told us our world Darwin and and others at that time wasn't just darwin Produced skepticism that says genesis isn't showing us our world jordan peterson comes along and says We are seeing the development of our hard structures Told to us In metaphor in genesis. Why is it a serpent in the garden? Why do we jump back not our conscious selves our conscious selves get the message slowly but biologically? We jump back when we see a snake That's encoded In the genesis story. That's why it's a serpent in the garden now If you're in ken ham's crowd, you might say well, it's a serpent in the garden because it really was a serpent in the garden. Okay? Let's accept that say The bible says it was a serpent in the garden because it was a serpent in the garden Why was it a serpent? Why wasn't the talk? Why wasn't it a talking donkey like baleham's ass? Why wasn't it a talking chimp? Why wasn't it? Why was it a serpent? That's the question peterson is is answering and whether you're a fundamentalist who says okay, historically I embrace this as a historical document or you're not Quite that much of a literalist and you say There's event character in there There's you know, but this is relaying to us the development of our hard structures that is built into us as biological human creatures, that's what jordan peterson is saying And we listen to that and we say oh You got that from the bible, huh? Tell me more And this is what's happening all over the place So our ability to productively engage in an early world is dependent upon many generations of hard and soft Structures. Well, what are the soft structures? The soft structures are story-based. They're mental relational interpersonal Intersubjective social these have all been built into us and we pick this up from each other And we pick this up in watching each other act in watching each other behave and this gets encoded into stories and These stories eventually get written down into texts and these texts are in many ways just like the ideas in competition with each other and they're fighting against each other in this you know between us in the heavenlies in our minds in the in the communal subconscious In the collective subconscious and this is all what's happening and these stories are competing and jordan peterson is saying And the bible is a really strong contender Because it just keeps winning and we don't know why where does fiction come from? You don't know So i'm harris says well the bible is a fiction. Yeah But what do you mean by fiction? Do you mean that it's a story we don't fully understand its source But it's delivering truth to us No, I mean fiction as a made-up thing. Oh, okay. That's your definition of fiction Well, I wouldn't say the bible is a fiction. Is there fiction in the bible? Sure But it's way more Problem with sam harris is I don't think he understands what fiction is for Which is jordan peterson's argument about the humanities in the university So our ability to productively engage in an orderly world is dependent upon many generations of hard And soft structures that we inherit and or appropriate by watching human beings This is what we do and by watching nature by watching And listening and paying attention These soft structures are best transmitted through religion now in these conversations when you get into the the masturbation debates Sam harris wants to assert well, you can Be more productive by making a flat rational argument and then people will agree And jordan peterson says no, that's not true And we know it's not true by what by social science. We know it's not true Because if you can encode it into a nice little story it Human beings take it in as part of their story and religious people have known that all along both for and against If you tell people well, let's use nancy reagan. What did nancy reagan say about drugs? Just say no what about smoking cigarettes just say no Don't smoke cigarettes and the dad smoking a cigarette says don't smoke cigarettes Why do we say actions speak louder than words? Why do we take this phrase actions speak louder than words and elevate it? Above other phrases because it's true because it's more true than a lot of other things Action speak louder than words is more true than dad telling his son don't smoke Now it's more powerful if dad says to the son don't smoke because I smoked and it's really hard to quit. Okay. Well now Now we're doing something but actions speak louder than words And that phrase speaks more than most of the sentences that I will say in this video Well, what's with that dynamic? Its formation this is how we work And so these soft structures are transmitted through religion through sayings through aphorisms through proverbs through narratives through Sometimes through laws, but laws aren't really They're good in some areas, but not good in other areas Stories are the most foundational we appropriate them best because stories best capture how we make sense of ourselves As biological creatures traveling through time and change now last night my wife And I went to the movies and we saw crazy rich asians And it was a fun movie. There was fun music My wife got out of there and she says i've seen that story a million times and I said archetypes Seen that story a million times rich asian guy But you know keeps getting clothed in all of the different values of our culture and I was watching this movie because as i'm Always got this jordan peterson conversation constantly in my head and i'm watching this movie and i'm just saying This is how we transmit values You can sit down and give people a long list of do's and don'ts doesn't work very well Why because that conscious self is just a little part of our brain We've got all of these desires. We've got all of the rest of our brain And we attach to things and we see these beautiful people and they're beautiful things And we see the ugly things and the bad things and you watch that movie and it's basically A religious delivery system. It's a cultural delivery system And I was watching this movie and basically at the heart of the movie. I won't give away any spoilers. It's the it's the Conflict between traditional chinese family values and american Self of american values of self-expression So to all you young people out there here's one of the advantages of being old I read this book a lot of years ago And if you're looking for a good book to read, this is a good book to read. You can probably find it dirt cheap used habits of the heart robert bella yesterday talked to adam and You know adam and think club and his other channels puts out a lot of videos and a lot of um, a lot of You know where he's he does a little bit of comment. He does a lot of other snippet videos but adam's really a sociologist at heart and robert bella Sociologist habits of the heart sheila ism And he basically documents american american culture and american expressive and expressive individualism That's where that term comes from and and so in this movie Uh crazy rich asians the entire movie is is the question of Expressive individualism western american values versus chinese traditional family values. That's what the movie is about and guess who wins well and so I was thinking I was watching this movie and I was Appreciating the fact that oh this movie is really about the conflict between these two value systems now When hollywood makes movies today, they do a lot of thinking about china. There's a lot of money in china and so This movie is going to go to china. It's going to be very interesting to see how well this movie does in china because if the movie does well in china if the chinese government were to Censor movies, which i'm sure they do they might look at this movie and say Shouldn't let this movie in this movie is basically a cover story for american values infiltrating china but lo and behold american values have already deeply infiltrated china so that they're not the communists they used to be and Which is probably a good thing in many ways So these soft structures are best transmitted through religions stories are the most foundational We appropriate them best because stories best capture how we make sense of ourselves as biological creatures traveling through time Other writing laws and proverbs now again each of these forms have their strengths and their weaknesses Behaviors and motor skills transmitted intergenerationally and so not all of this is verbal some of this is physical and and you see this when you have to learn to Work in the kitchen where you're chopping and cutting or driving a car or doing a lot of little repetitive things that human beings have been using Technologically for a very long time and this is why we develop machines what machines are are engines Or that do repetitive things again and again and again and that replaces The repetitive motion things that our hands have done which this is of course how jordan peterson thinks These are inhabited Communally, okay, just like one lifetime is too short one Individual is too small and this capacity is clearly the reason human beings are the dominant species on the planet with no rival And the bible bears witness to that calling us image bearers. This is the source of human privilege This is why if a bunch of animals get killed we get a little bit of nervous, but If human beings get killed we get all upset And that This is human privilege human separation. This is what sets us apart from nature in terms of civilization Now jordan peterson in these videos will keep coming around to the point to say now wait a minute sam this idea of a Critique of dogma is actually instantiated in religions and you can find it at the top of christianity By the logos being put at the top of the hierarchy and you will in fact hear this coded in other ways in churches every time you hear something like jesus is lord because and this gets This gets into Okay, what is religion religion is the Long-term conversation of these issues throughout human history and in many ways It shouldn't be a surprise to us the popularity of these conversations between sam harrison jordan peterson Is popular because religion has always been popular because it is all about the meaning of life It is us trying to figure ourselves out one of the debates between christianity and judaism has everything to do with jesus at the height of the hierarchy versus the torah Because here's the thing with the torah The torah is in fact a coded document in the text that cannot be changed and we're going to get to that a little bit later but in Christianity it is a person And that person gets manifest in his holy spirit. And so here's a distinction between judaism and christianity now i'm sure there are Groups within judaism that modulate this in different ways and I'm sure someone will put it in the comment section, but in christianity the logos is at the top of the hierarchy And as you will hear christians say in different words from what jordan peterson uses they will say things like well I serve a risen savior. He's in the world today Let's write from a christian song. Well, what does that mean? That means jesus is judge That doesn't mean the law is judge jesus uses the law Jesus uses laws Jesus uses norms jesus uses dogma But jesus himself is above it and this is a key element of christianity And this is a point that jordan peterson makes in these talks over and over again He's saying but yeah sam this free speech idea. That's that's actually an expression of what christianity teaches that jesus Fulfills the law jesus is he's not technically above the law. He's the embodiment of the law And what that means is that jesus as judge because what does a judge do a judge takes the law and applies it to certain situations That's what a judge is supposed to do and we understand that in america and this is the whole fight about judicial activism Judges are not supposed to make laws. They're supposed to apply the law They're supposed to apply the law And but then you have this thing called case law where in a sense the law makes itself As it goes well in christianity jesus is the judge and jesus decides does he make law does he fulfill the law does he Enforce the law all those words are used to try to describe the practice that jesus uses as the law And this is why in an orthodox church jesus is up in the dome Okay, that is a physical expression of The world view and that's why as jordan peterson said the buildings are not incidental to This mental Framework articulation that is in fact theology The capacity through language to reevaluate Dogma sits at the top of the hierarchy of values in order to adapt to change in contexts and to perfect dogmas Built into the formation of individuals and communities. This is in fact case law that A legislator the congress even a group of men group of men and women are not smart enough to actually Write good laws and so what we do is rewrite some laws because those laws give us orientation And then we see what's going on in the world and we compare those things in the world to the laws and what we often have to do is Tune the laws and then we watch how they map out and if we don't like how that's going We retune the laws and then that goes that way see i'm even using jordan peterson hand language jordan peterson sign language This is the process that we use and this is a continual process and sam harris says oh dogma is horrible because it it gets it stuck into the system and jordan peterson says the stickiness is both a Is both a problem and a necessity and later on he will articulate this pretty clearly in there You you need the dogmas to be sticky enough to not just get moved for every whim In other words too much chaos, but you need them You need them flexible enough so that when there are changes in the environment You can adapt them. That's when order gets too rigid and this is jordan peterson's chaos and order Well, why we need dogmas well the structure that enables individual and communal powers are dependent upon Individual and communal stable agreements on how the world works. This is why for all of sam harris's complaining about dogmas If you sit and listen to him, there's tons of dogmas built into his system If there weren't he wouldn't have a system that we can in fact engage with and think about and evaluate and manipulate Dogma is a normal part of the function of human beings That's what it is These are dogmas sam harris uses them all the time matt dillahunty keeps saying laws of physics or laws of nature Right. Those are the dogmas now what they're saying is those are well now we're going to get into where these come from We operate with them no matter how conscious we are Of them and in fact jordan peterson's background as a clinical psychologist Is helpful in this because one of the things that clinical psychologists do and one of the things that pastors do is we sit and we listen to people and what you begin to discover when You sit and listen to a person is that they have developed dogmas? And those dogmas may be helpful and they may be unhelpful They may be helpful in certain ways and unhelpful in other ways They in fact might be totally wrong. And so what you'll often do as a pastor or a friend or a clinical psychologist Is you will gently Challenge a dogma that someone has built their life on here's an example mama's always right No, maybe mama's not always right Why because i'm using another dogma that human beings are fallible to critique the dogma that this person's mama was always right in fact A human being saying i'm always right Is almost always a red flag because that person doesn't understand the larger communal dogma that human beings are fallible And this is how dogmas work we need dogmas we have them all the time now dogmas are derived from evidence We're paying attention to what's going on and therefore their reevaluation is subject to elevant evidence This is what sam harris is noting with Conversion and what's happening underneath the surface and my metaphor for rapid worldview change or conversion That stuff is happening underneath And there's a whole there's all this doubt that has been formed and then suddenly something comes along and whoosh They deconvert from christianity or they convert into christianity now i'm describing this and you're saying well I thought it was the holy spirit. Well, i'm not saying it isn't I'm not d I'm not taking agency out of the holy spirit But i'm also not saying that the holy spirit can't use processes Okay, because the christian worldview has enough flexibility in it to both accept agency of non-human actors and Process within human actors that is rationally accessible to us And this is how christianity is a very large and robust and all-encompassing worldview because It is in fact larger i'd argue than sam harris's worldview because sam harris wants to say the only The only agents we know are human if them That's basically what he says because materialist will say there's no such thing as human agency. It's all just Process from the big bang on forward. That's all it is But because they can't really keep that game going as c.s. Lewis points out again and again in miracles They default to this language of us choosing but then they say it's only human beings that are agents There's no angels. There's no demons. There's no gods. There's no Demi-gods, there's nothing supernatural Let's see. This is the trick. There's nothing supernatural except us We're the only supernatural thing Well, what do you mean? No, there's no supernatural. Oh, but let's go back to the beginning We started this video by sam harris saying we have to transcend our ape things. We have to transcend our natural situation, okay What again is that transcending? c.s. Lewis in nature says You might as well call it supernatural because That's what our language says it is Now don't forget that reason isn't pure We're not real rational It's impacted and biased by pre-suppositions because these govern how we see Evidence, this is this a priori structure that peterson keeps talking about in these videos We don't just see the world our world is filtered through these structures and it has to be And it has to be I am seeing this room But I am only seeing this room within a certain spectrum of light I am hearing what's going on within a certain radius of my consciousness But I am only hearing on certain wavelengths. I my computer is connected right up now right to wi-fi There's no wire around it But somehow my computer is connected to the internet and I see I notice when it is and isn't connected But I don't see the connection because I don't see Radio waves there's lots of things going on that I don't see in other words my capacity for Apprehension is one of the filters, but that's not the only filter As i'm paying attention to what I see in the room. Remember jordan peterson and the ape and the basketball passing That the point of that whole video is that We are apprehending selectively based on our filters because the world is too large and complicated For us to take it all in so we prioritize. Well, how do we prioritize? We set up a hierarchy and we say this is most important. I'm sitting here making video But if someone burst through the door with a explosive vest on and an ak-47 I'm probably going to pause the video Why because there's this hierarchy of values if I hear a bomb go off on the street I'm going to pause the videos because there's a hierarchy of values Now what's happening that I don't see and going on i'm not pausing the video for but it might be way more important Than the guy coming in the room with an ak-47 and explosive vest or a bomb going off in the street It's just happening slowly And I don't appreciate it and that's why we call talk about What do we use use a little story the frog in the pot of boiling water now people tell me That's a fiction. Is it a fiction? well Yes, and no We know it's true It might not be true of frogs and hot water But it is true of us because it's the things that we don't notice that are changing that often are the most Substantive and that's where my metaphor of the collapsing Of the sinkhole comes into play because there's another metaphor not unlike the frog in the boiling water Now again dogmas are derived from evidence but evidence is selectively seen and this is the problem of sam harris's worldview that jordan peterson keeps trying to say And sam harris keeps saying yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that's not a problem Uh, no, it's a huge problem Well, let's look at the evidence. Well, we can't agree on the evidence. Why not because we have a priori structures that filter the evidence Well, can we get at these a priori structures? Ah Now we know jordan peterson's project we want to get a handle on the a priori structures That's what he's been doing Since 1985 and he started writing maps of meaning it's his life's work Now brett is helpful again here This is where this is where the the crux of it is well, so if if we follow the idea that this is actually some that the Seemingly sentimental and irrational attachment to the piece of land is some sort of meta rationality And this gets in and again, I want to treat a lot of this stuff if there's time in my life This is becoming like jordan peterson's biblical project, you know He's never going to get to he's never going to get to the book of judges much less the sermon on the mount Which sounds like your perspective then We are now confronted with the question of all right if it is an evolved kind of meta rationality That is being manifest in stories that cause people to behave in ways that sam sees as clearly irrational Then we are stuck with the naturalistic fallacy, which is to say so for those who don't know the naturalistic fallacy Says that just because something is doesn't mean it ought right the fact that see and here's the funny thing about these entire lectures They're really trying to get a handle on ought Which is really what human being humanity has always been trying to get a handle on go back to plato's republic The whole question is what is ought? But we have to use it even if we don't know what it is There's the human dilemma Selection favors something doesn't make it good when the aztecs Sacrifice their enemies it is good for continuing aztecness, but it may not be good in some absolute moral sense And what is that absolute moral sense? Is there an absolute moral sense or not? So here's the question for you You're arguing for a I think an evolutionarily very viable explanation for religious belief and dogma But aren't you stuck with the downside of it where much of what is encoded in that way may actually be abhorrent more? Okay abhorrent as a moral category Absolutely, okay. So what do we do about it? What do we do about? Well, this is this is exactly why sorting algorithm. Yes What is i'm trying to get to it? Okay. I mean he's trying to get to it He's gonna go through four lectures and sam's just gonna keep kicking over the blocks Okay, so this is actually why I asked sam this question. It wasn't it wasn't an attack. It's like, okay, so look People have these belief systems christian muslim jew will say for that and you're saying abandon those Let's say two two and move towards this transcendent rationality. It's like okay two transcendent rationality see peterson Peterson knows exactly what harris is doing harris. I don't know if he knows anything that peterson is doing problems Um, it's not so easy to abandon the belief system because you end up in the morally relativist nihilist pit You fall in the sinkhole notice pit. Why pit? Why does the sinkhole analogy work? And why does jordan peterson obviously didn't watch this video? Because i'm making this video after he made the analogy why do both jordan peterson and I think of it as at a pit Well, it's an archetype. Well, what does that mean? It means we have this our structures Are Giving us this sense now jordan peterson and I are fairly close. We're close in age. We're close in culture We're you know, we might we have difference in in in many ways But the great scheme of things those differences are really quite small Same with sam harris same with brett weinstein. We're all deeply formed by so much commonality Which means we can actually have interesting and productive conversations together. Well, that's a problem one doesn't have to well And here we're kicking over the blocks people tend to and so it's a very major problem. This is not I mean They don't have to look wait wait sam. That's that's an empirical claim that we would we would have to find out whether that's true Sam You started the video I started the video actually I started the video with you saying you're afraid That people get radicalized to isis by watching YouTubes and this is what you're afraid of and this is a big problem and it destroys their life and here jordan peterson just made 0.1 and said When they're when they fall in they when their worldview gets taken off They fall into a pit and sam wants like no no, no, that's not that's not a fact Oh You gave us that fact yourself There's plenty of evidence for it too But it's beside the point to some degree because I that isn't that isn't something that I want to quibble about There perhaps are trends there are transitional paths and sometimes people find a collapse of their faith actually freeing It's certainly the case that many of the people who are are are happy about what you're doing have found exactly that In what you've been saying and more power to you and so i'm not willing to dispute that But what you said was okay Here's these belief systems that are ancient and complex and we can step outside of them and there's this transcendent rationality that we could all aspire to See and that's sam harris's religion the transcendent rationality. He tries pushing and i'm saying That's a johnny cumlately system baby And it's and it's and it's it's not proven for a hundred years to get much over 10 or 13 percent of the population There's tools in there that we're all using But as a system as a religion It's a crappy religion That would solve the problems. It's like, okay What is it? Well, what is it exactly? It is at a minimum to value All of the variables that conspire to make the one life we know we have Okay, you can't value all those variables Well, no, we we're doing it right. We do it every day and how we organize ourselves because we apply an a priori Framework to the variables just to reduce them to a tiny subset that we can manage Exactly what we do when we walk into a room Your conscious self Sam likes talking about consciousness your conscious self Is a really thin it's like looking through a tube Okay, let's see if I can find my eye. There I am Like looking through a tube That's your conscious self about what you are when you go in a room and peterson makes this point over and over and over again It's the it's the ape walking through the basketball passers. We just see a tiny bit Well, how do we deal with that? Well, we set up a hierarchy well the The degree to which we can Flourish in the room now We're gonna have to get into this question of flourishing because that is not obvious the degree to which we flourish in the room And you've got time going through that the degree to which we flourish in the room depends on how good we are at setting up That hierarchy and you notice this when you notice someone that we call disabled Because they walk into a room and they find a color on the book and they pet the book and there might be a lecture there might be A sumptuous table full of food food gets our attention really fast because that's really high in our hierarchy And we live in a place where there's an abundance of food So we don't make it that much of a hierarchy because it's already satisfied but someone comes in the room says oh color I love this book, but let's suppose now let's get into another part of the conversation Let's suppose that this is a goutenberg bible walk into a room and everybody knows there's a goutenberg bible in the room They all gravitate towards the book. Why? We call this a museum or what's in that book that makes it so special. It's in the inter-relational and again This is all throughout these two talks Sam just doesn't seem to get it And it's the nature of that a priori framework that we haven't been able to have a discussion about We have an a priori framework that narrows our perception to almost nothing. It's built into us. It's partly socially constructed It has a deep neurological substrate and we actually understand how it emerges to a large degree And the thing is is that but I don't think I don't think that's actually our difference. I'm so And this is why you can't make any progress Jordan peterson a little bit later. We'll say again Here's the thing about dogmas. We have to keep reevaluating them But you can't reevaluate them too soon because the baby in the bathwater Well, what is the baby in the bathwater the baby in the bathwater is a little story that sam harris keeps using Because it works because we understand that if you throw out too much You use the bathwater to bathe the baby But the goal of the bathwater was the health of the baby if you toss the baby out with the bathwater The baby gets thrown into the rocks and you don't want that because you value the baby It's a hierarchy Dogma needs reevaluation swift religious conversion is often a result of forces Underneath the surface having been undermined and an event comes along to that dislodges the previous assumptions and commitments And we look at that and we say that's a conversion Personality also plays a role in this lots of things play a role in this Religious pluralism also multiplies the options and the size of the swings I would argue but like jordan peterson says there's problems on every side when to give up on a dogma and when to keep it Often we'll give up on a dogma and then we'll pick it up later Because I realized I threw away too much. I need that back This is all this part of sorting that we're all constantly doing and you say well, we're doing this based on evidence Well, we are but we can only see the evidence through the small window of consciousness and through our memory that somehow expands Consciousness back in time a little bit But we're really bad at this And that's why we need each other and so we do it when we go through time And this is why throughout human history old people have been revered. Why because they've gotten good at some of this stuff well when we threw out valuing listening to old people well, we did it when Environment was changing and we say well old people aren't adapting fast enough Okay, but here's the problem You have to figure out the pace at which you need to change For your environment for you to flourish and you don't even have a clear sense of what flourishing is Because and we know this all the time if you're paying attention to diet Especially if you're at my age or jordan peterson, so you pay attention to diet. So eat this don't eat that Don't eat the cake. Why not? The cake sure feels like flourishing sure feels like well-being in my mouth right now Yeah, but it's not going to be well-being in my stomach In my gut a year from now when I have all these extra carbs and sugar So what is well-being? It's not so easy sam because I don't eat cake all the time. It's it's looking at A desirable person and saying i'd like to have sex with that person Boy, you sure enjoyed having sex with that person wait until your spouse hears about it Then that's not going to feel terribly enjoyable And and this is what we deal with all through life So you have the the question of the moment my impulse of self, but then this other self Well, where do dogmas come in thou shalt not commit adultery? Gluttony is one of the Seven deadly sins. Well, those are dogmas. Well, what are those dogmas supposed to do? the anti-masturbation don't masturbate We can have a discussion about to the degree that masturbation is in the bible. It's a very long discussion, but Don't masturbate why not? Because you're owe your spouse something what do you mean? I owe my spouse something. Yeah, you owe your spouse something Dogmas are important. We need them to figure this stuff out Now Fundamentalist this could be another word that fudges sam harris says religious dogmas are bad because they can't be updated updated Brett weinstein says but religious people in the west aren't keeping slaves anymore They've been updating them and sam harris wants to say that's because it's been broken down The jaw has been broken down by rationality and it's like sam now you're talking transcending monkey monkey ideas again You're appealing to something above nature. What is that sam? What is that thing above nature? Where does it come from? How does it act? These are all the questions that jordan peterson has been asking and he's been breadpilling people right and left with those questions Because sam harris can't ask those questions because he keeps betraying them by the use of the english language Because this is the language he's inherited. So if he really wants his purely Transcendent rational world he's going to need a new language But nobody else will speak it and right there in that little story is his whole problem Let's try to define fundamentalism a little bit I think my best definition to that is someone for whom another person says their dogma is too rigid It isn't flexible enough, but here's the thing none of us know what's too rigid and what's too flexible I was having a conversation with someone about the the the junk the The housing market crash, right? The housing market crash, okay Often we say with religion. Well, nobody knows the answer to this That isn't exactly true Because when you think about the collapse of the housing market we say well nobody knew when the market would collapse Well, yes, and no and if you watch uh that movie short sale. No, it's not short sale. It's um It's the movie about the housing market collapse. It's a fun movie. Um But if you watch that movie a few individuals Could see it coming and we're banking on it. They didn't know the day but the one guy played by Batman, why can't I remember actor's name? So i'm making these videos So when my brain goes you'll say yeah back in 2018 we could see the early onset. Well, so be it. Here we go Uh christian bale see it always comes up later Things bubble up nice little metaphor well, he's playing the he's playing the um, he's playing the the investor in this that knows the housing market's going to collapse and he basically Figures out a way that when it does collapse he will make an unbelievable amount of money But his the investors who are counting on him are screaming To get out and they're abandoning his fund but he's doubled down. Okay. Is he a fundamentalist? Is he too rigid? Well Hindsight is 2020. Where does that little story come from? He was right Made a ton of money He bet right. Did he know depends what you mean by no. Yeah, he knew is it unknowable? No Are a lot of people wrong Yes, do you want to be right or wrong? Or you want to be right? How can you be right? Do you know you can be right for sure? It's a complicated question But what are you going to do with your time? What are you going to do with your commitments? What are you going to do with yourself? You want to be right? Work on it. Think about it work hard on it That's what these conversations are for Definition of a fundamentalism is someone whose attachment to dogma is too rigid and therefore brittle so it's a it's a It's a despairing term, but some people then kind of reverse the disparity and they own it say i'm a fundamentalist Okay, this is part of the game. We're playing with each other religious practice is centuries-long intentional processing of these issues This is what? Churches and religious people do now you might say well, I don't want to be religious Well, okay, but what are religious people doing we are having long conversations where we are prioritizing Information from the past. Well, how do you prioritize it? Will you give it a certain status? Well, What kind of status do you give it you give it the highest status? So that it won't be forgotten Well, how does that function in your life? Yeah, that's the question. How does that function in your life? Because actually there are layers to it Religious people are always working on this and say well, I want to be right about these questions. Well You're going to start winding up with religious conversation partners because this is what religious communities have been doing This is the definition of the process. This is what sam harrison jordan peterson they are attempting to have a theological conversation But this particular group in secularity they want to exclude the theologians because they don't think they have anything to offer All right, that's your choice Now I think there's some straw manning of revelation The abrahamic family of religions tend to use texts the hebrew scriptures the greek new testament the quran The book of mormon has foundational documents. They call them inspired. Well, what do you mean by that language game? You mean that you set them above yourself. You mean that you don't change them. They mean yet you and the community don't change them actually Right up there on that shelf. I keep my Whole bunch of print bibles You say well the bible doesn't change Well in the king james it says this and the niv it says this and the esv it says that say well in the greek Okay, but you've got the textus receptus that says this you've got the nessel allen 28 that says this What's the difference between the textus receptus and the nessel allen 28 now most of you have no idea What is the difference one's a critical text and one's basically an older critical text Well, why because text came in written form and there are differences between the texts. Well texts don't change Yeah, but we acknowledge little text little differences within the change see religious people have been Working these systems for a very long time And what actually happens in religious systems is that there are ways that things change and ways that don't that things don't change And we differ on the rules by which we agree that things do and don't change. That's what religious people are always doing Now these texts have a high degree of stability through canonicity Now, why is this important? Well, here's the problem with a conversation like we're having with jordan peterson's brett harris and sam weinstein Brett weinstein and sam harris Things keep changing Things keep changing Well, how do you how do you know things are changing? Well, Let's look at sea level change sea level has risen. Well, what do you mean sea level has risen? Isn't sea level like How do you measure sea level? Do you know sea level is different in different places? Well, why is that? Well, this is the nature of the world the Rupert sheldrake says the constants change Sea level changes. Well, well why because it's a dynamic environment well if you really want to if you really want to Be able to pay attention to change the kinds of changes that don't happen Like someone walked running into the room with an explosive vest or a bomb going off in the street The kinds of changes like the far the frog in the kettle You need a baseline There's your religious text there's your baseline. Well, how do you safeguard it against? The variability of all of these fighting communities Call it the word of god What does that what does that mean well, what does that mean we could have a big conversation about it Christians talk about this all the time they Talk about it in different ways they use different coded language because this is the way language works So you have the word of god. This is your baseline this you don't change. This is revelation. What does revelation mean? It means revelation. It means Apocalypse it means the curtain is pulled aside. Here it is the word of god revelation They say the too rigid dogma criticism of this is too simplistic What baseline do you have sam well I have the speed of light big g gravity Let's understand some layers here how religion works You have the word of god layer. This is the abraham abrahamic religions. Now. This is different As sam rightly notes in the hindu religion why well this goes down to what's your world view if your world view is Everything is chaos underneath it all and Order is an illusory experience that we map onto chaos You're going to lose science Because science is built on the assumption that there is a material substrata that is orderly and predictable Productively predictable that we can work from and upon that we can see it that's science and we can use it. That's technology So in terms of religion you have the word of god layer that doesn't change then you have what's called the confessional layer Well, what is that often confessions are implicit? I belong to a confessional tradition. Well, what do we do? Well, we take certain documents in my tradition the apostles creed the nysene creed the athenation creed And then the confessions the belgian confession the heidberg catechism the canons of dork and we use those documents to modulate Our appropriation of the word of god now. Do we change the bible? No What we do is we say we lay our cards on the table and we say this is how we understand the bible This is what the bible is to us. We as a community Say this is us Now you might hear that and say boy. It sounds a lot like democracy It was about the same time It's within the culture That's how these systems work Now you have the individual conscious interpretation layer What the rider on the elephant says in any given moment? Well, i'm reading this text and i'm filtering it through my confessional layer either explicit or implicitly And actually in this system the confessional layer is accountable to The word of god layer, okay So you can update the confessions if they no longer seem to correspond to the word of god and you might say Well, why would they change? Oh, that's a big conversation But this is part of the same dynamic the dogmas in the confessional layer get reevaluated and critiqued by the word of god layer But how does the word of god layer get critiqued? It gets critiqued by the practice of the interpretation layer and then the action layer That's how this system works Okay, it's a religious system now the problem that jordan peterson sam harrison brett weinstein have is They're not actually working with a community Self-consciously on any of these layers to help them orient and navigate in the world This is the advantage you will get from a religious community And many of the issues that these people are bumping into you will have actually revisited in different clothing Within your religious community over and over and over again throughout the years And that's how religious communities get robust And that's how religious communities get robust and it's this teaching that We begin to educate religious persons within so that they can in fact navigate the world and this becomes a frame of reference Which they use to navigate the world Now here's a funny thing. We're probably going to be seeing as the level of chaos increases As the pace of change increases people are going to be going out there as individuals trying everything on their own And what are they going to find? One individual is dumber than a community of individuals one short lifespan is not enough to Appreciate the wisdom of multiple lifespans. Well, who is going to be bearing the fruit of multiple lifespans And multiple people who is going to be submitting themselves to the wisdom of that religious people why because they adhere to dogmas and community standards Are those things being updated all the time and different communities are doing them at different levels and people are opting in and out of these communities at different levels And I think this is part of the reason why a society like the united states where there is in fact religious freedom becomes a vibrantly religious community because It's in a sense this marketplace of ideas and systems and structures that are going on So maybe you're part of a jehovah witness church or a christian science church and You need a blood transfusion and you can't get one Well, then maybe you're going to convert and become a baptist Or a christian reform or roman catholic or something else because you're figuring out the pieces of these systems You have all these different layers you might say yeah, but But I can't buy the word of god layer. All right belgian confession says we have two books We have the book of nature and the word of god And we orient ourselves with these two books This is the confessional document of my denomination Well, what is the book of nature? the Phenomenological world we experience and study in science The confessional layer is in a sense the laws of nature or the constants or the laws of physics The individual consciousness interpretive layer Well, this is the pits of science. We like well, I don't really believe in Vaccinations. Okay. Well, there's your interpretive layer Well, I think that we're cooking the world by pumping so much co2 into the atmosphere. There's your interpretive layer Well, I don't think we're cooking the world by pumping it into the atmosphere. Well, there's your interpretive layer So you have all these different layers and each layer is critiqued by other layers and it's a very dynamic process The problem you have now sam harris says well, I want to just stick to this and what jordan peterson says is You're using half your brain You're cutting you're isolating yourself from most of humanity You're putting yourself in this tiny little box and actually you're you're not really you're sneaking a whole bunch of stuff in But you're not really conscious of it. So why don't you? Relax be less of a fundamentalist open yourself up and look at a broader thing and as jonathan peugeot said Peterson probably initiated with this this was sam harris because sam harris kept wanting to talk about consciousness Peterson thought he was more open when sam harris was just trying to look cool like all the other cool buddhist kids What underlies a lot of this is a motivation for certain for certainty which itself should be critiqued We want to do science to develop technology to achieve the outcomes we desire But this then is only part of the layer of the matrix Okay, the desire layer because sam harris admitted right from the start our desires are not good We want to kill the next chimp tribe. We've got to transcend those desires with something supernatural In religion we do a similar thing with god I don't notice I put god in quotes if god in quotes is just another word for nature in quotes. This is god number one We're just playing a similar game We must face some grim conclusions about our tragic story because everything in the book of nature Tells us we're going to die That well we ducked the cumid missile crisis we don't know if we're going to get through the fossil fuel crisis But we do know that there's going to be a crisis at the end that we're not going to get through And that'll be the death of the sun or the death of the universe go ahead and re-watch my video where Joe rogan talks to elon musk death wins in that book But what you'll notice is that religions always bracket nature nearly all the myths do this this Phenomenological world is subject to agents who create govern and colonize That's what all the myths are about This is a line between jordan peterson's open agnosticism and sam harris's closed world But what about that line? I want to bring in c.s lewis from miracles because god number one The god of nature or the god that brackets nature this then becomes something like pantheism Now this imagined history of religion is not true What's the imagined history of religion that we had all this religious Particularity and then we saw the transcendence of it and we say oh I know how to do religion better Let's take the least common denominator of all of our religions and put them together into one super religion And then we won't have to choose between them. It doesn't work because the religions are not all consistent You finally do have to choose just like before the housing collapse you had to choose Were you going to believe that? The market was going to keep going up Or were you going to believe that they built in a lot of bad mortgages into these financial instruments? And at some point it was going to collapse a lot of people to say yeah at some point it will collapse The only question is in my lifetime Or with these even bigger questions, what is my life? Pantheism is a common answer. In fact pantheism is the most common answer says c.s lewis Pantheism certainly is as its advocates would say congenial to the modern mind But the fact that a shoe slips on easily does not prove it to be a new shoe Much less that it will keep your feet dry Pantheism is congenial to our minds not because it is the final stage and a slow process of enlightenment Which is something I hear a lot of But because it is almost as old as we are It may even be the most primitive of all religions the orenda Of a savage tribe has been interpreted by some to be an all-pervasive spirit. It is immemorial in india The greeks rose above it only at their peak in the thought of plato and aristotle c.s lewis is Showing his biases, okay Their successors relapsed into the great pantheistic system of the stoics Modern europe escaped it only while she remained predominantly christian With giordano bruno and spinoza it returned with hagel it became almost the agreed philosophy of higher educated people While more popular pantheists of wordsworth carlisle and emerson conveyed the same doctrine on those in a slightly lower cultural level So far from being the final religious refinement pantheism is in fact the permanent natural bend of the human mind The permanent ordinary level below which man sometimes sinks Under the influence of priestcraft and superstition, but above which his own unaided efforts can never raise him for very long Platonism and judaism and christianity which has incorporated both have proved the only things capable of resisting it It is the attitude into which the human mind automatically falls when left to itself No wonder we find it congenial If religion means simply what man says about god and not what god does about man then pantheism almost is religion and religion in that sense Has in the long run only really one formidable opponent namely christianity Because it itself is finally death and it can't transcend death. That's the point I made before Modern philosophy has rejected hagel and modern science started out with no bias in favor of religion But they had both proved quite powerless to curb the human impulse towards pantheism It is nearly as strong today as it was in ancient india or in ancient rome Theosophy and the worship of the life force Force are both forms of it Even the german worship of a racial spirit is only pantheism Truncated or whittled down to suit barbarians yet by a strange irony each new relapse into this Immemorial religion is hailed as the last word in novelty and emancipation That's from c.s. Lewis's miracles Now where do I Resolve all of this stuff for myself. Well I'm a reformed christian. I believe we are saved by grace through faith. What do I mean by that? Well, not just reform people believe in that line. That will be a line that you'll find many many many christians Embracing because it comes right out of the book of ephesians Right out of the word of god We are not in a position to fully capture the world with our conscious minds This is what peterson is challenging harris. He's saying harris your Okay, so you want to say a transcendent rationality can eliminate all of this Show it to me We've got four we got eight hours together show it to me He just says rationality a lot and he pooh-poohs religion That does not a worldview make And what peterson is basically saying is you need a lot more to make a worldview and sam You don't have enough time in your little lifetime just like jordan peterson doesn't have enough time even to talk about the bible We are simply too small our consciousness is too monofocal Our whole minds are smarter than the rider In other words your whole brain is smarter than your conscious self and sam harris is trying to build this whole thing just unconscious self And the rest of the spiritual people are saying yeah, but our intuitions are a better guide and then Harari comes along and says yeah, and our computers are going to be even smarter now. We're back to ai and joe rogan and elon musk But are they going to know the past are they going to take in mythology? This is part of my skepticism about the brilliance of ai it suffers from Many of the debilities that sam suffers from and if you want to know who's going to be Who's going to be rung out of a job by ai it's sam because they're dealing with the same frame Together we are smarter than alone But even together we're not smart enough Our mental or physical appropriation of even the most perfect story is always limited You can have the word of god Can you hold it all in your mind? Well in the ancient world they memorized it all is memorizing it all holding it all in your mind Is memorizing it better than having it in a book or having it in your computer software? Well, it's hard and just having it memorized doesn't mean you understand it because what does it mean to understand it means it's Appropriated completely into your life at every level into your physical structure. That's the resurrection Into your behavior that's obedience into your art That's worship How do you appropriate it well In a tiny little tiny little thing, which is why we're saved by grace through faith Because we can't act on enough faith is not having insufficient evidence faith is being insufficient in your person in every way That is why we are saved Not by it by grace through faith that is why we begin to act And where that doesn't even save us i'll get to that in a minute Our mental or physical appropriation even the most perfect story is always limited flawed and short-lived Jordan peterson is right that we don't know the limits of our potential here Partly because we seldom come close But this is why we always bump into this when we talk about the resurrection and his answer to tim lot about the resurrection is I don't know the limits What does he mean? If you were to actually act this out. Well, who did well jesus did we're smuggling jesus in yeah smuggling sneaking We're smuggling jesus in this The christian religion says jesus got there The buddha say buddha got there But here's the question is the there of buddhism the same as the there of christianity in jesus What is the difference between jesus and buddha? This is where cs lewis goes What's the difference between jesus and buddha and muhammad because each of these individuals historical human beings Wind up at the pinnacle of the hierarchy and so well, I want to be like jesus. What do you say? What does that mean when you're a christian you say that I want to Manifest all of this in me And so when jordan peterson is asked about the resurrection he says I don't know the limits if in fact you could get there Could it be true that you could walk on water? Could it be true that you could raise the dead could it be true that you could multiply loaves and fishes? Could it be true? That even rome's sword couldn't bring you to the end and then you would be smart enough Not to just go to pilate and say nah nah nah nah But you'd be smart enough to tell your disciples all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me Me And then in fact to ascend and to reign over human history because that's the story And when you look at neo in the matrix there's a lot in there right they're appropriating a lot But it's not the same story And so jordan peterson says I don't know the limits that's what he means and it's taken me How long ago did I listen to that's that lot video six eight months It's taken me eight months to figure out what jordan peterson has been saying Okay, you're a really smart guy Well, he had a head start on me in some ways But i've had a head start on him in other ways because i've been working on this well He's been working on that and this is why we're smarter together Because in my little lifetime I haven't had enough time to do this and to do everything jordan peterson has done. So what are we using rationality to communicate? Rationality to understand rationality to sit together and talk over a video and now jordan peterson won't listen to this He doesn't have two hours to listen to me But you all do because we're all watching and we're all learning and it's getting built into our structure And it's getting built into us generationally because right now out there in those jordan peterson fans. There's like one woman for every six guys But those women who are single are in the fans and they're looking around they're in the stands and they're looking around And they spotted that guy over there who's really getting it. He's really understanding jordan peterson and And he's really attractive to her for reasons She doesn't understand and they're going to get married and have babies and those babies are going to be already predisposed To understand this entire conversation because actually they've already been building this together And this is why religion runs in families because What I just described in terms of what happens at jordan peterson biblical extravaganza Is what's been happening at christian colleges for generations? and it's how sexual selection has been going on and this is why sam harris's Little religion will never win And it's going to be saved by grace through faith Colossians 1 jesus is the image of the invisible god. He's the firstborn of creation 1.0 He's the firstborn of the resurrection, which is creation 2.0 We don't know the limits he embodies in his resurrection our perfection Roman 6 how can I have a part of this we're united with him in baptism in death and resurrection But what does that mean? It's going to take your life to figure out How do you act this out misery deliverance gratitude? My faith itself doesn't save me. It's god's grace that saves me. I am powerless to do so. That's my misery God's action on my behalf. That's deliverance gratitude is how I act it out You act out of gratitude not desired driven technology because we don't have the power to save ourselves save us Ourselves from what save ourselves from everything? At every layer we act this out love god and your neighbor. Well, what does that mean? Well, it's going to take you a while to figure out that hopefully is what they're talking about in your church how to love god and your neighbor Why worship this is a question I get often what's the difference? Why can't I like Jordan Peterson just sit in my office and think about this? This is the great irony about Jordan Peterson's Story That i've been working on mentally and continue to try to figure out When Jordan Peterson doesn't go to church, what is that saying? What is he missing? Does it matter? Does it not matter? this is actually deeply involved in In Habits of the heart and Sheila ism Because Jordan Peterson is part of that system too when we go to church What do we do when we stand and when we sit? Maybe we kneel maybe we sing we participate in communion. We eat bread and we drink wine or juice What is all that doing that is encoding the elephant? The sermon is helping the rider and some of that will trickle down into the elephant to the degree that you act it out He who hears my words And does not do them. It's like someone who builds their house on sand and when the storm rises Great is the fall of that house He who listens to my words and puts them into practice builds the house on the rock when the storm comes The house withstands what is jesus saying in that little story? He's saying what creatures have said all the time You can't just think about it. You have to act it out and Jordan Peterson says I do act it out Wonderful what role does going to church play? Well, it plays a big role, but it plays roles in ways. We don't understand Now a little bit later Sam Harris is going to talk when they get back into the masturbation conversation In these lectures sam harris is going to say okay So maybe and brett weinstein's basically on the same page with sam in this well Maybe it was encoded in religious texts good things like you shouldn't masturbate too much Because that is actually going to doom you multi-generationally in terms of your reproductive mission And sam harris says yeah, but the problem with religion is it didn't put it right there. It didn't say the right thing Okay sam that's a good point But that problem is a smaller set of the larger problem in that we don't know what the thing is Because our little lives mine and yours are too small and which is why we listen to our ancestors Well, what's going to make us listen to our ancestors if we take the best of what they have and we set it at the highest Level that's the word of god Are you saying it's not the word of god? Are you saying it's not supernatural? No, i'm saying it is supernatural but supernatural comes from below and above This is what my theological tradition talks about in organic inspiration and I want to get into this in some of my future videos We've been working on this together now sam doesn't know any of this And that's forgivable because he's not been in church He doesn't understand the project and someone says well, why should I be involved in religion? Because you want to be involved in a community that has been working on these biggest issues For thousands of years and has preserved its conversation Like this That's why we do it. Yeah, but when I walk into church, it's weird. Yeah, it's weird It's weird because people are weird the pastor might not be any good But here's the thing you don't know what you need to get and the pastor doesn't know what he needs to give you And so we do bad at it But again, we're saved by grace through faith Oh, what does that mean? It means That the appropriating we do is something we do out of gratitude and we finally depend on god Well, what does that mean? Well, where is god? What's god one and god two? It's both the god the sum of all that selects Of what we slip in as universe because we've got all these issues about god And then it's also god, too the The agent the living god who acts There it is In church, it's the symbolic representation and reinforcement we act in ways that we don't understand But we do it anyway It's individual and communal we're in communion with The great cloud of witnesses with the saints who have gone before how well through their words. Yeah through their practices. Yeah This is how we're in Continuity with them and if you look at religious languages, we've talked this way for thousands of years Now remember the soft structures Because as I just gave in my little illustration it's the soft and the hard structures and they come together and this is what we do So there it is And that's enough for today an hour and 47 minutes probably good enough. Let me know what you think