https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-uS32YMGnvE

 Hi, this is Paul. Jordan Peterson did another conversation, end of year conversation with the Dutch blog. It's kind of a shock blog. I talked with Roland about it back almost a year ago when he had the previous conversation with this particular Dutch blog. They had their conversation right after the Kathy Newman interview. Now the whole video is one of the most worthwhile videos that Peterson has, well he's posted some good ones with Roger Scrutin was an excellent video, the conversation on the Rubin Report with Dave Rubin and Ben Shapiro was an excellent one. But I thought this video was outstanding and after listening to it a couple times, I really think that Jordan Peterson is building the most potent natural theology of this generation. What do I mean by that? That natural theology is a project of trying to find and explain God from the ground up. And as I listened to Peterson, as I was thinking about the fact earlier in the video, he talks about two and a half sales of two and a half million books. This book tour all around the world, 115 events, book events in one year, 365 days, 115 events. That's a staggering schedule and the amount of travel and he's still doing it. And in this listening to this video, I continue to hear him develop and nuance and he I think is getting more, a better and better understanding in his own way of Christianity and how it works and he's contributing more and more in terms of figuring this stuff out in ways that people connect with. And that's why I think this is, this is, he's building the most potent natural theology of this generation. So let's, I'm going to start the video at minute 36. I don't know if I'm going to have time right now to go through the rest of the video. The whole video is worth watching. The first part of the video, he talks about the book tour and then he talks about freedom of speech stuff and some of those kinds of things. Those aren't generally the focus of my channel. So you can watch them on your own. I'm sure Adam Friended will pick them up and do some things with them. But for minute 36, we really start to get into the natural theology. And when I heard him say, well, we're going to talk about the movie Gladiator, I thought, well, that's kind of funny. That movie's been out a long time. And, but actually it really, really worked well for this video and it really opened up the conversation. And I think this is one of the best videos I've heard from Peterson in a while. So let's, I'm just going to play it and I'm going to do my commentary and throw in a few things as we go along. And I've got an appointment at noon. So this will be about an hour and a half. I'm sure I won't get through the whole thing. So Gladiator, I think this movie is ingrained in the psyche of my generation more so than any other like epic movie of its sort. And that surprised me. I enjoyed the movie. I saw the movie a long time ago. I hadn't, I've seen it now and then over the years. I hadn't seen the movie since I've been listening to Jordan Peterson and had done any of this thinking. But this individual says it's the biggest movie of his generation, I assume in the Netherlands. And I thought, wow, I didn't know it was that impactful. So go ahead, tell us why. There's other characters. There's Aragorn from Lord of the Rings. There's Hector from Troy. There's William Wallace from Braveheart. There's Spartacus. There's Leonidas from 300. All these characters are the same archetypal figures, but somehow only Maximus Decimus Meridius really sticks through the years. And I have, I've put some thought into this and I have some ideas about why particularly this character and this movie sticks. I want to present to you three points that culminate in what I think is the implicit central thesis that runs throughout the movie. So I'm going to list now the three points and then the central thesis. Point number one is that Maximus is by far the best modern portrayal of the male archetype. He's highly capable, but very gentle. And he's modest in word and body language, and he's admired and loved solely for his character and skill. So that's the portrayal of the archetype. Point two is that the movie also contains the very best modern portrayal of the embittered villain whose character and skill are simply insufficient. And he makes up for it through deceit and cruelness while still knowing every step of the way that eventually he'll lose. There's nothing he can do about it. And three, the characters themselves are exquisite in their own right. But in this movie, they're juxtapositioned within a hostile brother framework, which makes it, which is a deeply archetypal framework, which might be the reason that it sticks so much more than all the other archetypal figures. And this brings me to the central thesis. And I only figured this out two days ago, and I'm very excited to get to share this with you. I think the central implicit thesis throughout the whole movie is as follows. That no matter how powerful someone is, the pain of a man whose soul has been irreversibly corrupted far out exceeds the pain of a righteous man whose wife and son have been murdered and who's been reduced to abject slavery. Which is really something to think about. Yeah, right. This part is so funny because Peterson kind of puts on his college professor hat and here, here, here the young man has turned in his term paper and he's so excited about his thesis and Peterson's about to, don't want to discourage you, but basically accepts it because he's basically right, but I love where Peterson goes now. Yeah, well, okay. So the themes that you've been developing there. Okay. So the first thing we might also note though that you lost over, maybe that's the right way of thinking about it. Mr. College Professor, he's, well, let's, we got a B plus here. Well, let's, let's see if we can get it up into A category. Is that Maximus is a paragon of soldierly virtue, right? He's now bear in mind, Peterson never saw this movie back in 2000 or so when it was out. So he just watched it the night before in anticipation of this conversation. So it's fresh in his mind and, and I'm really impressed. I'm really impressed at what Peterson and this, this young man are going to do with this conversation. It's really good physical combatant, a warrior. Yeah. He's dutiful. He serves his commander, but also serves the principles. More importantly, the principles that govern his commander and he serves the principles more than the commander himself. And this goes back to Peterson's biblical series where Peterson always notes that the, you serve, you serve what is above the king. There was always something above the king. And Peterson articulates that well here. And you can tell that because he chooses not to serve the new emperor, Commodus, because he doesn't believe that he abides by the proper principles. And Commodus, of course, also killed his own father, which means that he killed the principles by which the state, he's like, he's like the elder gods in the Mesopotamian creation myth who kill Apsu, who's their father, and then try to live on his corpse. It doesn't work out well for them. All that does is breed chaos. And that's exactly what happens in, in, in the movie gladiator as well. Yeah. And Maximus as son is an interesting S-O-N is also an interesting character because he becomes son as a consequence of his virtue rather than as a consequence of his birth, right? Commodus has the, has the advantage of birth, but Maximus has the advantage of virtue, but it's virtue, it's a virtue of strength. And, you know, that makes the movie in some sense, also extremely barbaric. There's just endless death and killing, which is a very strange thing when you're talking about someone who's operating within a fundamentally moral framework. And I guess part of the moral of the story is that it's better to be a soldier than a coward. And that's a, you know, that's, it's not, I would say that on the one hand, that's self-evident and on the other hand, that's a mystery because the coward might be able to avoid the mayhem and killing that characterizes the life of the soldier. Anyways, Maximus does organize himself under the the virtues of courage and, and forbearance and strength. Yeah. So my observation is actually, of course, he's a very powerful soldier, but my observation is that that is not the reason, not so much the reason this archetype sticks. How I read this character, that he is the absolute embodiment of the characteristics that allow you to contend with tragedy and malevolence in an optimal way, not just on the battlefield. It's not really about the battlefield. Right. Well, you see, you see his soldierly capability as a representation of competence itself. Yeah. Competence guided by principle. Yeah. I think that's reasonable. And I also think that that's probably how the conduct of the soldier should be judged. Right. Yeah. It appears that soldiers are necessary despite the mayhem that warfare produces. Yeah. We haven't figured out how to dispense with that necessity. So do you think, sorry, do you think the Canaan, the, do you think that the Canaan-able framework in which it is implicitly structured, do you think that adds to, to how much a story sticks? Yes, definitely. Why is that? Well, because the story of Canaan able does lay out very, very elegantly and, and it was incredible compression to fundamentally opposed modes of being both being the characterizes able the favorite son and the mode of being that characterizes came and able is competent and virtuous and God theory, let's say, but more practically, which means he's alive with the highest of principles. That's the right way to think about it psychologically, whatever the highest of principles might be. There's an attempt. One of the things that you might consider psychologically is that the movement from polytheism to monotheism parallels, parallels the integration of the individual psyche and the development of larger and larger scale social organizations. All those things. Now, the first piece, the development of the individual psyche is a point that he made in the biblical lectures. The second point, I don't recall that he made it in the biblical lectures. And so this is a, this is an interesting point because what he's essentially saying is that there's something essential to there's something correlative between monotheism and larger, more stable forms of government, which is, which is really fascinating given the history, let's say, of colonialism in the West. When the British arrived in what today we call India, it was a patchwork of kingdoms, polytheistic kingdoms. The British come with their monotheism and they basically organize the country into, into one, into one country. So it's a very interesting observation, and I'm not sure that I had heard him make it before. I'll back up so we can hear it again. And again, I know some of you complain that, well, I'm pausing it. Well, that's kind of the purpose of what I do with these videos. Go to his channel. You can listen to the whole thing all the way through. I promise I won't interrupt a single time, but that's what, that's what I do here. Develops the integration of the individual psyche and the development of larger and larger scale social organizations. All those things happen at the same time. So you imagine that the larger scale, the organization, the human organization, so the more people included under the umbrella of the same state, the more organized and orderly the principles by which that state have to function must be because of the increasing complexity and also the, the, the problem of having to determine how the state can remain intact over a long period of time without fragment. And that's so interesting in terms of this association with polytheism versus monotheism. Completely new thought for me. So the state has to organize itself so that the needs and wants of the bulk of the population are met with sufficient regularity so that the state itself doesn't fragment. And that means that the state has to organize itself in what you might regard as an virtuous manner that can be iterated. And at the same time, the people who compose the state in its increasing complexity have to ally themselves with that long-term state goal. So it's a, it's a coalition between psychological integration and sociological complexity. And, and that's, that is foreshadowed, we might say, or accompanied by the movement from polytheism, which is the pulling of people in all directions by fundamental motivational and natural forces into monotheism, which is the direction of the individual under the rubric of a single set of principles, a single superordinate set of principles. Now that's, again, that's, that's such an interesting idea in terms of how this is mirroring. So the, and this is, this makes perfect sense if you listen to Peterson back at the, I think it was Lafayette College, that conversation where he talks about what religion is. And so polytheism has multiple, basically multiple competing top value virtues within hierarchies, whereas with monotheism, they, there's the pressure to get them integrated so you can have one coherent system. It's just very interesting the way he puts it together. Again, it was completely new thought for me, never thought of it, fascinating. Now what those principles are is not obvious, which is partly why we're having the discussion of gladiator. So I can give you an example of this. So for example, in the Old Testament, you see the articulation of the guiding principles emerge in its most fully formed manner with the commandments of Moses. You have to ask the question, well, what is the Old Testament? It's the law and the prophets and the writings. It's those three sections and the laws, the first five books. Now, now obviously in the Decalogue, which is the 10 commandments, and then in the 613 laws that comprise these laws in Exodus and Deuteronomy, that is in some senses the law, but also Genesis is the law, and there are different forms of law. Now he's going to go on to make the point that he made in the biblical lectures with respect to his, let's call it an etiology, an origin story of how the law emerges, which is a very interesting thing to think about and something worth talking about. But you have the covenant, and the covenant works in conjunction with the narratives. So when you ask what the law is, well, it's really the first five books. The first five books have lots of things besides laws, and so laws play a very big role, obviously, the Mosaic law, but one of the things that Peterson hasn't yet really integrated is the covenantal aspect to these laws, which is, in other words, he's still working through this. I mean, obviously he hasn't gotten to Deuteronomy yet, but that's a little hemming and hawing that I'm doing here, a little ye-butting. So you might say all of the diverse forces that might pull people hither and yon have been aggregated into a list of thou shalt nots. Here's how to regulate yourself. Here's how to inhibit yourself across time so that you can have it. And that's really good. Here's how to inhibit yourself across time. And it was interesting when he talked to Ian McGillchrist talking about something with the fact that like 40% of our neurons are inhibitors, and one of the big differences we have between, let's say, the chimpanzees. The chimpanzees are very, they have no inhibition. We have quite a bit of inhibition, and so the law acts as even more inhibitors. You shall not kill. You shall not commit adultery. Now that's the second table of the law. The first table of the law, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make, so there's some negatives there. You shall honor your father and mother. So a stable, long-term, large-scale society. But then there's a mystery that emerges in the New Testament, which is, it emerges, for example, when Christ is asked by the scribes and Pharisees, which is the greatest of the commandments. Now it's important to know Christ is asked that, but that was a standard question, and the answer that Jesus gives is the standard answer. So not everything that we have from Jesus is original to Jesus. We know this because we know it, because we have teachings from that period, and because a lot of what Jesus actually teaches is from the Old Testament. But again, I really like what Peterson is doing. So you take all of these laws and say, well, what is the law? Well, the law is embodied. Now it's very interesting what Peterson does and doesn't say with it here. And Christ actually performs a very intelligent sleight of hand that he says, well. See, and again, this is a standard answer that Jesus gives. This isn't new to Jesus, but it was the standard answer that was given. It's in a sense a catechism question. You have to love God with all your heart and all your soul, and you have to love your brother as if he's yourself, love your neighbor as if he's yourself. On those two propositions, rest all the commandments and the law. There's an attempt to integrate even the commandments into something that's a higher order principle, and that higher order principle actually manifests itself into Judeo-Christian society as the logos. It manifests itself as the logos, yes. There's a few jumps in between there because love is the command. And this, I've talked a little bit about it in my Sunday school class this past Sunday, I haven't posted it yet. And it's interesting how Peterson Seldom talks about love in these contexts. And part of that is that I think that love is complicated, love is huge. Love is in our culture and in our language something that we connect with an emotional response or an emotional experience, whereas in the ancient world, love is what the inferior owes the superior. And so there very much is obligation in that command to love. But it's very broad, but it's interesting how Peterson doesn't stop here on love. And others have pointed this out in terms of his treatment that he doesn't really go into love, even though it's obviously all of the commands get then basically said love, and Augustine picks this up, love and you fulfill the law. Whatever that is. And it's something like truthful communication devoted towards the highest good. See, and so he jumped to logos. Now of course, God is love, first epistle of John, Jesus is love, but then he jumps to truthful communication as logos, which truth is in there. But if you're watching my Sunday school class on the first epistle of John, the first epistle of John, which is probably a commentary on the gospel of John, works very hard to integrate truth, love, remaining. I just did this in last week's thing, so I'll have to upload it. But so there's more work that needs to be done there, but it's interesting again, how Peterson doesn't dwell on love, and he immediately jumps to truthful communication via the logos. Now again, the logos isn't misplaced there, but I'm not sure that all connects. And the embodiment of that becomes the fundamental principle. And in gladiatorism, you see movement towards that embodiment, right? Because Maximus is an organized and disciplined person who's governed by principle. The question is, and the question is posed throughout the movie, well, what is Rome? Right? That's asked four or five times. It's asked by Marcus Aurelius, because he feels that a lot of what he's done is a failure. It's asked by Commodus, and it's asked by the sister whose name escapes me at the moment. Lucina. It's what? I think it's Lucina. Okay, okay, okay. And they all ask, well, what is Rome? And she comes the closest. She says it's a great idea, but it's not. It's an animating principle. And the question is- Now, I love that too. What is Rome? Rome is an animating principle. If you go back to Jonathan Pujol and my conversation with Jonathan Pujol about principalities and powers, Rome is an animating principle. There's a principality and power. Now, you get to, let's say, Augustine's City of God. I should pull up that audiobook. This is one of my- I know I talk a lot about philosophy and religion in the West by Philip Carey, which is one of the great courses that I really enjoy. I've listened to it a couple of times. This one is my favorite, Books That Matter the City of God by Charles Matthews, because he goes into Augustine and the libido dominandi and what the Roman Empire is. And one of the things that struck me about Gladiator is Gladiator is a post-Christian representation of what the Roman Empire is. And that comes through very clearly with Tom Holland's conversation with N.T. Wright on Unbelievable. That was last year, because Tom Holland set some of these things out. And so what we see from Maximus is really very much the the principle, the principality, the governing principle that is being expressed by Maximus is really someone who has now been shaped by Christianity, not necessarily Rome, as Tom Holland will note here. Temporary Caesar is by some accounts slaughtering a million Gauls and enslaving another million in the cause of boosting his political career. And far from feeling in any way embarrassed about this, he's kind of promoting it. And so when he holds his triumph, people are going through the streets of Rome carrying billboards, boasting about how many people he's killed. And this is a really terrifyingly alien world. And the more you look at it, the more you realize that it is built on systematic exploitation. So the entire economy is founded on slave labor. The sexual economy is founded on the absolute right of free Roman males to have sex with anyone that they want, any way that they like. And in almost every way, this is a world that is unspeakably cruel to our way of thinking. And so this worried me more and more. And it was kind of like I was thinking, well, you know, I'm clearly not, as I'd vaguely imagined, the heir of the Greeks and the Romans in any way, really. And so where am I coming from? And it was like a kind of itch. You know, you get on your back and you can't find it. And this was then enhanced for me by then writing a book about the about late antiquity and the emergence of Islam from the the late religious, the religious and imperial context of late antiquity. And again, finding in Islam, a profound quality of the alien that you know, there were aspects of Islam that were very familiar, but there were many aspects of it that again seemed deeply, deeply alien. And I began to realize that actually, in almost every way, I am Christian. And I began to realize that actually, Paul, although in many ways, he seems a much less familiar figure than Cicero, the kind of, you know, a vain man with his property problems. You know, Paul never had any property, he just made tens. In almost every way, you know, what is it, seven, that is the seven letters that are conventionally, people absolutely accept that, you know, and as Tom Wright was saying, you know, this is not a very lengthy amount of writing, but compacted into this very, very small amount of writing was almost everything that explains the modern world. Well, the Western world as we take for granted. Yeah. But also the way that the West has then moved on to shape, you know, concepts like international law, for instance. So the fact the concepts of human rights, all these kind of things, ultimately, they don't go back to Greek philosophers, they don't go back to Roman imperialism. They go back to Paul. His letters, I think, are along with the four gospels, the most influential, the most impactful, the most revolutionary writings that have emerged from the ancient world. And when you penned that article, I think it was for the New Statesman, where you said, what I got wrong, and you sort of came out as it were and said, as far as my values and background are concerned, I am a Christian. It was interesting to see the response to that, because I saw lots of atheists and humanists saying, hang on, you know, democracy, that goes back to the Greeks, you know, don't pretend that Christianity gave us everything we're grateful for. But you honestly think that actually people simply haven't appreciated just how much we owe to the Jewish Christian. I think, I mean, if we're talking of Paul, I think of him as a kind of depth charge, deep beneath the foundations of the classical world. And, you know, it's not anything that you particularly notice if you're, you know, in Corinth or Alexandria. And then you start feeling this kind of rippling outwards. And, you know, by the time you get to the 11th century in Latin Christendom, everything has changed. And you have this, I think, essentially, what Paul's significance is, is that he sets up ripple effects of revolution throughout Western history. So the 11th century, with the papal revolution, essentially, it establishes this idea that society has to be reborn, reconfigured, that vested interests have to be torn down. And then the reformation, what we call the reformation, is a further ripple effect of that. And the enlightenment is a further ripple effect of that. And, you know, it spilled out so much that now in the 21st century, we don't even realize where these ripple effects are coming from. We just take them for granted. So unbelievable. Watch it. It's a great show. Justin Varietta does absolutely terrific work. Back to Peterson. That what Maximus has here is he embodies the Roman principality. What is Rome? And Maximus is Rome. And he embodies it and he acts it out. But now, of course, in the year 2000, the Rome we look back on is the Rome, and the Rome that we value in Maximus, we don't find Maximus, you know, raping his slaves, because that would not be, that would not fit an American vision of what a hero should do. A high status Roman in that time period, like as Tom Holland would say, basically, the sexual ethic was if you're high status and you're a male, just take what you want. That obviously isn't in the movie. The movie is geared to our context and the movie expresses our context, but Peterson is dead on right. Within the frame of the film, Maximus is expressing the archetype of what it means to be the true Roman, what it means to be Rome, the principality and power. ...story and then we aggregate a hundred stories of undesirable life. And then we abstract... Now let's back up a little bit. ...look like with someone when a particular person lives an undesirable life. We tell the story of ...we've had to gather as a collective, we've had to gather information about, well, what does it look like when a particular person lives an undesirable life? We tell the story of someone who lives an undesirable life. And I just did that. Let's say Nero was known to, he'd find a political enemy and he would basically rape the man right there on the streets of Rome. This is what a Roman emperor could do. Now, if Donald Trump tried to rape Chuck Schumer on the Senate floor, I think he could be convicted of that. Donald Trump isn't going to do it. That is gone. But even telling the story here, this is how, we have this big conversation about, okay, where does Brett Weinstein get his morality that he imagines we can transcend our programming? Where is this implicit morality that we're all walking around with and we feel it in our bones, this morality, where does it come from? Well, it comes from this process of stories and it comes from the movies we watch and it comes from the stories we tell in family and it comes from, we're constantly having these moral conversations. I just caught a little bit of Jonathan Haidt on Joe Rogan this morning and Jonathan Haidt rightly said, we're amazingly tuned to status and once we have our basic needs met, then we just continue to play status games. And morality is one of the key elements of these status games. Well, how do we construct our morality? We do it through all these stories, as Peterson is saying. Maybe he tells his own story and then we aggregate a hundred stories of undesirable life. And then we abstract out from those stories what constitutes undesirable. And so that's like a picture of Cain, right? It's a portrait of Cain. And we do the same thing on the other side. We listen to people who have lived triumphantly and we aggregate their stories and we synthesize them and say, well, then we extract from that a portrait of Abel. And that's a precursor. The successful and the unsuccessful are precursors to Abel and Cain. And Abel and Cain are precursors to the divine figures, the quasi-divine figures, the divine figures of Christ and Satan. It's an abstract process, a continual abstraction. Now the demonic is interesting because Christ and Satan. And so actually yesterday I had a conversation with, I don't know if he hasn't told me yet whether or not he wants me to post it, but I had a conversation about the demonic with someone. And what's interesting about the demonic and this individual raised the character of the Joker in the Christopher Nolan, the second of the Christopher Nolan trilogy of Batman. And well, what is evil? Well, I think as Alfred says in that movie, some people just like to watch the world burn. And evil isn't just, well, I'm going to take this from you because it's mine. There's a logic to that. And truly demonic evil doesn't even have that logic. It's just bent on destruction and derives its joy from destruction. And again, we know this at a deep level. And then as we talked about the film, he said, well, a lot of people really identify with the Joker and really applaud it. And I said, you know, that doesn't mean that they're evil. It means that they're looking at the excellence in storytelling and the excellence in filmmaking. And so when you watch the Joker in, what is it? Dark Knight Rising. I don't remember what the second one was called, but I do remember the second one with Heath Ledger playing the Joker. The acting, the storytelling, just well, well done. And so people are attracted to it, not because they're attracted to evil, but because they're attracted to the excellence of the storytelling. That's all done through, at least to begin with, through ritual and narrative and art. It's so complicated. It can't be done any other way. So first it's acted out and it enters the domain of ritual, art and narratives. Then it becomes operational, like an operational. And this is what Peterson reiterates. It's in 12 Rules for Life. It's in his biblical series. This is kind of the process that Peterson says, this is how we as human beings come to these things. Things loop, right? Because once you get the image, sure. Well, once you get the image and the ritual and the drama, then those modes of communication start to alter behavior. You know, so it's like, well, that's why we're having this discussion. We're talking about gladiator. We're talking about a movie that's an artistic representation. And we're discussing it to articulate principles. And we're also articulating those principles so that in principle our behavior can be altered. Yeah, that's exactly it. I never thought about the loop. Oh yes, you have to think about the loop. These things, these things feed back. And Peterson is exactly right. That's why we see gladiator. That's why we keep making movies. That's why we keep trying our hands at these representations. That's why other stories come into play. That's why we keep doing this because we're keeping, we, again, now this is natural theology. We are working our way towards the city of God, as Jordan Peterson will end this by talking about. Right, so it's the collective behavior. It's that negotiation at the collective level, that fractious centuries-long, millennial-long negotiation that produces something like synthesis. And that synthesis is represented in drama and mythology and ritual and art. And then that's articulating, but those loop. And so the whole process starts to spiral up. Yeah. Maybe spiral upward at an increasingly rapid rate. Yeah, so what I was always wondering is that if these archetypal patterns that lead to the most favorable life are already known for such a long time, why does every generation seem to have to invent them? And there's known and known. Like one of the things that played. I often use the Spanish. The Spanish has conocer and saber. And conocer is to know, Adam knew Eve. Now I know. Saber is more a fact. And so it's, and I think Ian McGillchrist talks about this, it's on Vimeo, this lecture to an educational group, but he talks about what it means to understand. And what it means is that, remember how I talked about how language is in, it's the association. Language really isn't contained by words. Language is contained in the relationship between words. And so this knowing, we know full well. You can watch someone ride a bike. If you've never ridden a bike, you don't really know how to ride a bike, even if you can sit there and describe how all the movements that the bike rider is using in order to propel the bike to actually ride the bike is a different level of knowing. This is the colonization. This is the, this is the embodiment. Socrates insisted on was that all learning was remembering. Okay. So let's say that when you're born, you, you have a proclivity to manifest a number of patterns and you certainly do. You can manifest the patterns of rage and, and fear and hunger and thirst. But, but then also imagine, okay, so it's something like this. As this looping process has occurred, the people who are more likely to manifest the pattern that is being pointed to are more practically likely to live and to successfully propagate. That's natural law. They just, he just put it right there. Okay. And, and so now natural law is going to become natural theology as it continues to move. Now, again, I am saying he is the most potent. I'm not saying he gets everything right. He's building the most potent natural theology that I see anywhere right now. And this is where he's doing it. So, so here's the natural law. This gets, this is built into us. He covered that with Sam Harris. In terms of the, the a priori structures, it gets, it gets into, it gets into mate selection. And, and then we, it's, it's the game that we all, we are all playing, but we're not necessarily conscious of. It's, it's far deeper than that. So there's an evolutionary element that kicks in, right? So if the society values something and the degree to, and this is where the principalities and powers come in because not all societies value the same thing. Again, if you go to the, the Jonathan Haight conversation with Joe Rogan, Jonathan Haight talks about how this Filipino society valued, they gained status by head hunting other tribes. And he talks about how right now call out culture gains value at the expense of people outside their group. So, so each society has a principality and power and in each society therefore has a hierarchy and they embody it. My book of Ecclesiastes, I preached on a couple of weeks ago, Ecclesiastes is about an alpha male. And so you look at Ecclesiastes, the New Testament, what you see is this, this continual, this continual working on what ought we to embody. You look at Job, you look at Abraham, you look at David, you look at Elijah. Now, now David is embodying the kingly archetype. Elijah is embodying the prophetic role. Jesus is prophet, priest and king. Jesus is the integration of them, is the sum of the hierarchies. But there are principalities and powers connected with these hierarchies and these embodiments. To which you manifest that value is proportionate to your success and your success is proportionate to your reproductive fitness, then as, then over time the proclivity for that sort of ethical behavior will become coded in some sense in your genetic structure, selected for that. So then you might say, well that exists, this is what the archetype is in some sense. It exists as the possibility of being gripped by a particular kind of vision. Now there might be enough diversity in the ideal so that you can't emerge from the womb but say fully Christian. That's amazing. You know what I mean, ideal. And again, that's why I included Tom, Tom Holland's comments here because, and this is why Jordan Peterson says to Sam Harris and Matt Dillahunty, well you're way more Christian. He doesn't say it this way. You're way more Christian than you care to admit. You just are. And because it's been built into who you are for generation after generation since Christianity and you don't know it. That's the most powerful aspects or the things that we just assume. But there it is. So that you can't emerge from the womb but say fully Christian. You know what I mean? Put it that way. But that doesn't mean that there won't be something that beckons to you as a consequence of observing the manifestation of a kind of ideal. And that does beckon to you because otherwise you wouldn't be gripped by the damn stories. Now earlier in the video, before the part that I played, you talked about basically competition between stories and that's exactly right. The best story wins. But how do we know the best story wins when we have these competing principalities and powers? When we have these competing hierarchies? Well, natural law, natural theology says, well the God of redemption is the God of creation. This is built into us. Well, how are we supposed to find it? Well actually we're always working on it. But here's the rub too. It can't be hard-coded exactly. So look, here's something interesting about Christianity. It was actually posed as an interesting question in the musical Jesus Christ Superstar near the end. The actor who played Judas asked Christ after he's dead, there's a scene where everyone's singing and dancing. It's strange sort of quasi-disco scene. And Judas asks why Christ had to come to earth at such a strange time and in such an isolated place. Because he appears as a carpenter in a backwoods region you know 2000 years ago. Why then? Why there? And the answer is that the divine principle has to manifest itself constantly within the confines of an individual life with all of the peculiarities and idiosyncrasies and limitations of that individual life. And so part of the reason that the ideal beckons is because you can't just be born as Christ. Because what Christ represents, let's say this overarching ideal, is actually the union of the divine with the particulars of your time and place. And so because you're particularized then you have to determine how to manifest the archetype in your conditions. And again I think this is just beautiful. Abraham Kuyper. There's not one square inch over God's creation in which he does not declare this is mine. And what happens then, Christians talk about we become more like Christ. Well does that mean we become like first century carpenters? No. We actually within our contexts become Christ within our context. And this is an incredible thought because Christ is somehow recognizable in all of the multitude of contexts that we see. Well how will he be recognizable? And again so often we can't articulate it. We can point it out when we see it. We point out aspects when we see it. And then you swing back to what he was talking about before. It's this constant conversation. People say well the church can't agree. Well that's right the church can't agree. Well why can't the church agree? Because the church is always working on this. And that's where the text comes in. Because in a sense the text is orientation for us. And so we're always working on this. And then we hold it up to the text. And well which text? Well there's many texts. And so we're in fact always working on which text is where on the hierarchy. And if you look at the history of the Christian church this is a very live conversation that goes century after century. And we're all trying to embody Christ whether you're a 55 year old man who lives in Sacramento or you're a 30 year old woman who lives in Los Angeles or you're a 15 year old youth who lives in Buenos Aires, Argentina. It's we're embodying Christ within this context. We say well make me a list of what Christ is. And now you can begin to see how this is beyond the law because whereas if you look at the law you can gain orientation from looking at the law. But laws are are very contextual. Even abstracted laws like you shall not kill, you should not commit adultery, you shall not steal. You say well what about being a soldier? You kill when you're a soldier. Is that what this law is about? And so what about stealing? Is not paying my workers enough? Is that a form of stealing? And so in fact you're always working at this. And so of course when you get into the New Testament you get into love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, strength, love your neighbors, yourself. So love then can become the test. Okay how much should I pay my workers? Well you should love your workers. Well what does that mean? That means you should figure out what is right to pay them. If you pay them too much you know there's there can be problems with that. If you pay them too little there can be definite problems with that. You have to figure out the right amount. Well why isn't there a law that comes out from heaven to tell me the right amount? No this is a little bit later he's going to talk about you know this is the co-laboring that we're doing with God in fact in all of this. Your specific conditions and that's partly associated with that dialogue with your conscience. So now he's going to get into conscience but before he goes there it's very interesting because I remember a question that's asked by one of his students in it could have been maps of meaning or the personalities. Why can't we why can't someone just tell the purely archetypal tale? And this is exactly the reason that he's stating here because you cannot have an archetype you cannot you cannot hug an archetype without skin on it. You cannot see and know an archetype without contextuality. It all involves these contexts and so then what we do with stories is we multiply the stories. So you have Star Wars and you have ancient Rome and you have 19th century England and you have 20th century India and you have 21st century China and you have story after story after story after story with all these different you have Middle Earth you have Hogwarts you have Narnia you just you just multiply the stories and from these multitude of stories we're always working on this question what is the good what is the true what is the beautiful we're always working on these things we don't even pay attention that we are most of the times but we're always working and then we're we're attracted to them. Now I also had a conversation which didn't record he didn't want to record it and every time I don't record it's like I should have recorded it because then I'd have a better copy of it but we were talking about we were talking about the fact of you know I forgot I got I distracted myself anyway I'll think about it in a minute. So there's an archetypal mode of being that's that's supposedly the ideal and you have to integrate it with your surroundings. That's what needs to happen. It has to be met that's right it has to be manifest in the particulars of your time and place and that's the individuation process. That's exactly what it is because Jung regarded the self. Now the thing about Jung is that a lot of his terms like self it isn't really that connected with our colloquial understanding of self. Self is a much bigger thing that's out there. Jung regarded Christ as a symbol of the self he actually reversed the spiritual and the psychological yeah right or the theological and the psychological and he thought he was thinking about the cosmic Christ as a and for Jung the self was the totality of individual being it was everything that you were right now everything that you were in the past but also everything that you could possibly become across your your set of potential futures. That's not a heretical idea that's a really powerful idea and when when so a number of years ago I was I was actually thinking about writing a book and and I wanted to I wanted to write a book about basically rewriting a lot of Christianity and relational terms and and I spent a lot of time thinking about the self the soul the psyche and and thinking about how this plays in the New Testament and and what exactly is it of us that is preserved in the Christian tradition unlike let's say reincarnation where there's some there's some element of myself but but all of the accidents of Paul Vanderkley are stripped away. What what happens in Christianity is that I am refined and I am raised and and the resurrected Paul Vanderkley will will bear the potentiality of the Paul Vanderkley you see now. He will be perfected he will bear this potentiality and you know then in the new heavens in the new heavens in the new earth this goes out and and this goes forward. There's there's one paragraph from Jung that I'm going to send to you in the chat right now and I would like to ask you if you could could read it out it's not that long because I think that illustrates exactly what what you're talking about. I'm sending you a link if you click on it it's an image and you probably know it. When a summit is reached when the bug unfolds and from the lesser the greater emerges it as Nietzsche says one becomes two and the greater figure which one always was but which remained invisible appears to the lesser personality with the force of a revelation. The greater figure is the greater figure. And that's the manifestation of the self that's right what that is is an intimation of who you could be and it's also an intimation of what you're associated with that might guide you to what you could be so so it would you might say it's a revelation of your own possibility but it's a revelation of your possibility in relationship to something that's infinite and transcendent. Yeah that's the that's the and I would also say that that does that is also very commonly manifested by a transformation in the relationship with conscience because when something like this happens sometimes this happens to people for example in uh hallucinatory or psychedelic experiences right they start to take their conscience seriously as the see Jung believed at least to some degree that what guided your interest and that would include your conscience was a manifestation of the totality of the self in the restricted domain of the present. Okay so that's okay so so okay which one always was but which remained invisible right that's the heavenly father that would be the the Marcus Aurelius principle that manifests itself in in in maximus and that that that comedus resists right and and which Marcus Aurelius also made himself subordinate to at least to some degree right that's the the one which always was but which remained invisible. Yeah. He who is truly and hopelessly little will always drag the revelation of the greater down to the level of his littleness and will never understand that the day of judgment for his littleness has dawned but the man who is inwardly great will know that the long expected friend of his soul the immortal one has now really come to lead captivity captive that is that sounds a lot like Luke 4. Sees hold of him by whom this immortal had always been confined and held prisoner and to make his life flow into that greater life a moment of deadliest peril. Nietzsche's prophetic vision of the tightrope walker reveals the awful danger that lies in having a tightrope walking attitude towards an event to which Saint Paul gave the most exalted name he could find. Yeah that's uh that's quite the that's quite the densely packed parallel on that one. For for for a few years it's from it's from the archetypes and the collective unconscious page 121. That's volume one right because volume two is Ion which is even a more frightening book so yes because the peril that you talks about there is the peril of psychosis at least in part inflation because the manifestation of that that second figure let's say the self it's it's a deadly temptation as well because once you see that there's a relationship between you and the transcendent let's say and you start to take that seriously then you can you can you can become inflated by that yeah sense of prophetic duty let's say and and and that's and that's a very dangerous technique. Yeah he actually writes this like 20 pages further he says for the great psychic danger which always is always connected with individuation lies in the identification of ego consciousness with the self this produces inflation which threaten which threatens conscience consciousness with disillusion. Yes and he wrote a great essay a great essay called relations between the ego and the unconscious which is completely incomprehensible unless you know the background that we're discussing where he warned very carefully that you have to stay in the proper relationship to the self right if the self overtakes the the the the ego then that's a descent into like manic religious insanity something that balance has to be struck where there's a relationship with the transcendent but there's also still the grounding in the particulars of here and now you see this echo this idea echo interestingly enough in the superhero mythology that dominated the adolescent imagination in the 20th century every superhero so imagine the superhero is like a partial manifestation of the redemptive archetype every superhero has to have an alter ego and the alter ego well for superman it's clark kent mild mannered reporter and for spider-man it's you know high school troubled high school quasi nerd and but and but what's so interesting about those stories is that they understand that without the alter ego there's no superhero and and that's it's really brilliant that both of those have to exist at the same time the limitations and the and the transcendence of the limitations have to both be there and and you get this in terms of christ christ in terms of orthodox christian doctrine christ is fully human fully divine when when you watch him in the gospels he is stilling storms and raising the dead and he gets hungry and he gets tired and he gets frustrated with his disciples who can't seem to catch a clue and he and and but but you don't have jesus going into a phone booth and coming out with a cape you have this all integrated into him and and this is again and one of the kind of the conversation didn't tape yesterday we're talking about healing and miracles but jesus you know so the temptations of jesus well their stones make them bread well c.s lewis makes the point that he won't turn stones to bread because that is unfitting for the creator god there's multiple layers it's also jesus doesn't use his own power to rescue himself this is what you see in the superhero movies they're always selfless they've been given amazing power and they are to use it for the good of others and this is this is this is in this is built into christ jesus in terms of who he is in the gospels he he can still storms he can raise the dead he can he can do all of this but he himself allows himself to be beaten and bloodied and mocked and he suffers willingly let's see if i can make it through this i might be able to that terrible paradoxical juxtaposition yeah and so because the character isn't the character can't exist without that tension and and i think that that's well that motif wouldn't recur continually unless there was something to it that was narratively precise and accurate there's something in this paragraph that i want to tie together with our previous talk because you talks about the end stage of individuation as as a coming together with the immortal he calls it the immortal now joseph kempo kempo does exactly the same he says the christ in you doesn't die the christ in you survives death and resurrects and you said in our last talk when you um closed your um you elaborate you elaborated on the death of socrates and how he died in truth and honor and then you said that part of the spirit doesn't die so there is this theme of these people are somehow connected with something that is immortal and and eternal could that be understood simply as they have they have established a relation with an archetypal mode of being that is eternal and that continues to exist uh beyond them and before them but they've they've established a relationship with that is that what that what he means by by the immortal well that yes that that is that's what's meant is that that's right it's that it's the eternal pattern it's the eternal music it's like you're dancing to the eternal music and the music goes on even if you depart the scene yeah exactly now the christian there's a christian insistence though that that i also wouldn't overlook which is that that also characterizes the finite right that's the promise of the resurrection that the resurrection of the body is that the christians insist that that transcendent factor exists and and that's the christ that's the word that's there at the beginning of time and at the end of time as as the judging revelation right this transcendent logos that's eternal but that that's no more valuable in some sense than the particular a particularized creature that's that's that's subject to apparent apparent permanent death jesus after his resurrection continues to bear his scars in his hand why it's it's it's history you know you don't jesus isn't lost in the resurrection he isn't displaced by the resurrection he he is perfected in the resurrection how can he be perfected if he's already perfect again we difficulty language in these things but but peterson is dead on right and this is right christians insist on this resurrection on a bodily resurrection on a physical resurrection why lots of reasons oops and you know it's very difficult for modern people to grant the idea of the bodily resurrection any credence and it's not something of which anyone can speak i believe with any degree of what would you say it non-arrogant authority something like that but by the same token the world is a very strange place and it isn't obvious to me that i've learned to i've learned to be very cautious in casually dismissing deep and ancient ideas regardless of their strangeness now when i when i get back to the maxwell video we'll talk about that because something happened in the history of western philosophy that makes us pause here at the resurrection whereas peter paul read the book of acts paul peter and paul go out and they preach the resurrection and they preach the then these were people who mean paul after his conversion goes to jerusalem finds peter finds james the brother of jesus meets with the apostle because he wants to he wants to talk to people that will say yeah i touched him i saw his scars this is what he's doing you can look at garry habermas's video on on from ucsd that he did on veritas form where he walks through the argument says we can know paul and and and we can we can get right down here to the resurrection now why do christians insist on this well i think the better question is why in the history of the west did we decide we can't believe this because the rest of the world doesn't have a problem with it this is this is our problem and i do think that see the thing that's so interesting about that christian insistence is that it valorizes the particular that's unbelievably important because you could say well if it's merely a matter of the eternal then the particular doesn't matter but then if the particular doesn't matter you end up with that kind of nihilistic buddhism the suffering that characterizes or even in in the proclivity you should say gnosticism here because that that also goes there for christianity to degenerate into the forms that nicha criticized which is well when you and kirkegaard chase everything out into an eternal beyond it justifies everything terrible that's happening on earth as trivial and insignificant it relieves you of your moral responsibility for for addressing it and it valorizes so so you get the amago dei that valorizes makes me gives value to that gives value to every human being but this comes through very very clearly in cs lewis's work too that the resurrection means that okay so let's say let's say i talk to someone else how do i treat them well i should treat them see in in in terms of our limited history we treat people as disposable i'm going to use their services now i'm going to use them now and i'll never know them well in the resurrection you might be spending eternity with this person and and the history that you are building now does not evaporate at the resurrection we don't know how this is translated we don't know how this is brought to fruition we don't know how this is but but as peterson says this valorizes all of history and and dostoevsky knows that this valorizes all of history and so how i treat another image bearer of god is not just about image bearing it's also about the resurrection that i i can't just simply be rude and and dispose of people because not only are they image bearers of god but they are they are eternal as cs lewis says they are eternal beings that either one day will be the type of being that right now we would be tempted to worship or will be one type of being that right now we would run in terror from so how do we treat human beings treat them with a great deal of respect because this is the story you can't at the very minimum the idea that the body is resurrected is a valorization of the value of the particular here and now and of the body and and an emphasis on the fact that that has divine value as well it needs to be attended to and cared for properly at minimum it's that yeah that's profound there's one one thing under you and again i i i'm a little curious about this guy i mean he's obviously been tracking peterson the first interview he had all these lists he's been he's studying peterson but but at some point you have to ask if you're a big enough star wars fan will you will you don the clothes and go to the theater for the sacrament will you at some point begin to embody not just theorize and not just not just postulate theoretically what all of this stuff means but will you start to walk into the drama and decide to live it well what does it mean to live in that drama well it means to relate to the story it needs to live in the story it means to inhabit the story paragraph i want to reflect on it's when he says that individuation is a could be a moment of deadliest peril and then he refers to the to the tightrope walker from sarah dustra what i think this means is that it can be so the danger can be so grave when you embark on individuation because it it almost by definition means that a that the lesser you a lesser part of your soul a lesser soul has to die yeah and christian history we call that mortification uh mortician mort death part of being a christian is dying to self and then and i think i've been there in my own life and that requires violence and recovery is by no means guaranteed right that's exactly well that's why that's why that motif that's the most figurative violence okay we're not going to wear a hair shirt and beat ourselves of going into the abyss to to to rescue your father like it's an abyss there's no guarantee that you'll emerge from it it it's a real it's genuine peril now the you know the the the what you need to be armed with in some sense to face that is the willingness to die the faith in rebirth the the the what the the willingness as well or the the decision to start to abide by the truth this is the christian life yeah because in a moment of great peril this is another thing that that this is one of the things i think that terrified me into um attempting to abide by the truth to the degree that i've been able to manage that see i i started to understand not least by reading you that there were common points in my life where i needed to rely on my own judgment that i would be in a particular situation that no one could advise me about because no one would have access to these things access to the information about the particularities of my situation that i would have and that i could call on my relationship with the eternal let's say to some degree but prayer but also the body of christ this is in fact because in christian theology you are say well i don't need to go to church to be a christian okay do you are you going to be connected see so christ in pauline theology is is jesus it's jesus title but paul keeps talking about us being in christ and so that aspect then it's the holy spirit it's prayer it's it's participating in the traditions of the church and the community of the church in in growing in the spirit this is natural theology he's doing here it's christian natural theology it's just he's just using different terms if i had warped and corrupted my own judgment then when when the necessity for a decision emerged i would make the wrong decision yeah and then i'd be lost what stood out to me the few times you talked about this in a few lectures like as a sidetrack you talked about the death of the soul and what what stood out to me is that you did this in a very very visceral way you really felt it seemed to me like you felt the gravity of it and and then when you kind of laid out your own story that you had to stop drinking had to stop smoking to to to focus more on your work intuitively there was to there was a kind of a disparity between how visceral you could talk about the death of the soul we all have our own hard things in our lives that we have to that we have to die to self with um and not everybody some people don't have any problem drinking some people don't have any problem smoking but everybody's got their problem somewhere and it's a and it's a and it's a biggie for them and what you described as what that meant for you which i interpreted as mainly changing your lifestyle a little and and and focus on your studies so the question would be that why why do you think i i saw that disparity and and if the disparity is indeed there how is it that you can talk about the death of the soul with such figures well i think i i do think that there are things that are worse than death i mean i think that psychological disintegration might be worse than death because it can go on for so long and it can be so incredibly painful i do think that your point about communists is correct is that the state that he exists in is worse than death it's hell and now the disparity i'm not sure exactly what you meant by that um yeah um what i meant was is that you talk with such vigor and in such a visceral way about the death of the soul and then when you talked about letting parts of yourself die you said it was mainly it was stopped drinking stuff and stopped smoking it was your responsibility i would say at least to some degree is the letting go of that because i had to make a choice between something approximating gratifying immediate pleasure seeking and hyper social a hyper social way of being you know that wasn't sustainable in many ways for obvious reasons and doing doing the difficult intellectual work that i had decided to embark on and that was a that's a death of a previous personality and it's trivial in some sense because it's it's it's burning off that which obviously needs to be burned off but i would also say by the same token that that doesn't make it a straightforward process and you alluded to this you know you said that you underwent a similar set of experiences where the old parts of you had to die it's like well that's sub-optimal and immature as they are first of all those are still parts that are alive and still and still an element of your being they might even be parts that you love and that other people love yeah and and there's certainly things that you're familiar with their their modes of being that you're familiar with it's it's a major sacrifice to let elements of your personality go it's also a proper sacrifice it was not an indictment on your part no no i understand that good good see the problem with the identity politics types as far as i'm concerned is that their proclivity is always to sacrifice someone else the oppressor that's right and and what jesus does is and and what jesus does is jesus comes into the garden and the temple guard comes for him and peter pulls out a sword and he's going to live our welfare at the expense of our enemies and jesus comes into that garden and says if anyone's blood is going to be shed here let it be mine there's the christian life jesus takes the weight of the world on himself for us well what does that mean for us well can we do it well we're not him so we don't have the capacity he does so he first did it for us and what then do we do we respond in gratitude we respond in adoration he is the we respond in gratitude we respond in adoration he is the leader he is the one going ahead forward he is the one who he is the one who does it for us and so we want to be like him and and this is where this is where law ends and freedom begins this this is where we stop saying i need to do this in order to push my rock up a hill this is where we say i want to do this because i want to go up that hill with him because i want to be like him because i want to embody him in the particularity the unique particularity of the time and place and story that i am in this world and this is the way that christ invades this world i asked in a previous video who is more successful gangus khan or jesus gangus khan spreads his seeds his genetic material at least that we know it one of the most successful people that we can name on record 300 million people are direct descendants of gangus khan jesus invades us we become him and we don't become him mindlessly we don't become him under duress we become him freely joyfully we long to become him and at that moment that we become him we become truly ourselves and and so we are most like him as we are most unique in and of ourselves and that is our true self it's not a secret sacred self it is the self that that we become through him in communion with him cs lewis talks about the fact that in in good relationships so cs lewis had a friend charles williams who died and and one of the things that cs lewis mourned was that the part of cs lewis that connected with charles williams died with charles and that part of cs lewis that that cs lewis could only know when he was with his friend and by virtue of who his friend was went into the tomb with charles christ binds us we are baptized into his death and then we are into his resurrection roman 6 with christ that doesn't end in fact it's as in the last battle it's further up and further in now i'm going to pause it here because there are a number of things that i wanted to talk about in this video i don't know if they're coming at the end there's rafael there's jacob and wrestling with god i've listened to this three times so far and i'm very excited about this video so i will do a part two to this but i'm out of time i get to do a conversation with my friend john vendonk who's following up on a video that i did before and then we got a couple of conversations with with some other folks that are on my list of people who've wanted who want to talk to me so thanks for watching by all means watch this video i don't mean this yeah watch this video you're already watching it but watch the he calls it responsibility conscience and meaning so much good stuff in this video from from start to finish very excited about it thank you jordan for for doing this for us i really appreciate it