https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Wzb9hGsjDrk

 Ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba. Oh, okay. That's okay. You can just ask me. Well, actually, let me just tell you real quick some of the things. So I never really explained Imago Dei and why that matters, why that was such a big part of my transformation. And why did I keep insisting that Christ is more than an example? Um, I think that kind of comes back to, um, um, um, you know, if they didn't, if there's no real resurrection, if there's no real cross and resurrection, then there's no real payment and no real, you know, my faith is in vain, right? It doesn't, like, you can say so much about, oh, he's an example, he's an example. That's great. Like, people accept that. But without it actually happening, it's really, for me, it's not worth it. Yeah. Well, let's go back a little bit and let's talk a little bit about your story because in the video, so first of all, you have this, you have this opportunity with Peterson. It was a Patreon opportunity, right? Yeah. Okay. Are you recording already? Yep, I'm recording. Okay, good. So, let's, let's talk, why don't you talk, why don't you, you told you, tell your story fairly well in that video for Peterson to get a chance of it, chance to hear you. But why don't you give kind of a short version of it now. You were raised in a Christian home, you were, you were in Germany, so go a little bit into your, your crazy story. Yeah. So, yeah, my dad was a pastor and they planted a church in Germany. We're all Americans but we left when I was four and so I grew up in a German school and didn't really speak English, just, you know, German public school just like any other kid out there. And we lived there until I was 13. And then we came back to the States and I went to high school in Fresno. And I went to UC Davis for undergrad and started taking, I needed a class and it was like last minute and I signed up for African American Studies. And I was like, why not? You know, it's interesting. And you know, I actually came with the express goal of destroying the Republican Party. That was my intent when I went to college. I was a political science major and I was like all about that. You know, that was my life. And then I switched to sociology because I felt like, oh, that has much better arguments and it's just more forceful. And part of that, that was the question of race, which I felt like was super important. And so I actually ended up getting a major in African American Studies as well. And so I graduated with that and I decided to go to graduate school at Temple University. And kind of my idea was like, you know, secular academic work where you're trying to change the world with writing books about race and things like that. And that's kind of the world that I was in when I, it was a little crazy out there. So, you know, the department at Temple was, the faculty was making really hostile remarks about Christianity. Not all the faculty, but the primary, the chair of the department. I don't know if it was the chair, but anyway, Molefio Sante, the one with the most influence there. And so for me, that really made me like, had to wrestle with what do I really believe because you know, you can't just sit there and be like, oh yeah, you're right. And like everything I grew up with in Christianity is, you know, what does it really mean? And I was determined to be, to have an honest response. Like I wasn't like, you know, like if I felt like the Bible was not real, and if I, if, you know, I wasn't going to lie to myself just to protect my identity as, you know, I grew up as a Christian, I want to stay that way. Yeah. Now, let me, Peterson, I know you a little bit better because you used to worship at a church just down the road here, a black church. And you're from Fresno, and you and I have had a few conversations, so I can play and play around with this a little bit more than Peterson could because he just had that little window of talking to you. Now, you were raised a Christian. Yeah. And so clearly your parents, your parents are Christians, they love Jesus. They, they, how do they, well, maybe it's probably unfair to have you talk about them. When you went to, when you went to UC Davis on your mind that, you know, your mission was to destroy the Republican Party, how did that connect with your Christianity for you then? How many years ago are we talking, by the way? So that was in 2000. I graduated high school in 2000. Okay. So you graduated high school in 2000, you're going to UC Davis, and you're a, you're, you're at least an anti-Republican, and so you're going to go to UC Davis and get armed with all these ways to, you know, destroy the Republican Party. Play the game of politics. That was though, that was quite connected with your Christianity, was it, or was your Christianity kind of separate for you at that point? No, I thought it was the moral thing to do. Oh, okay. It wasn't, I wasn't cheating on my Christianity. I felt it was very authentic. Okay. And my parents did too. My parents have a very similar, had a very similar perspective. Okay. You should say your name at least, because I don't know if you... Oh, hi, I'm Matt. Your name is Matt. Matthew Schellenberg. Schellenberg, and you live in Fresno. And you and I got, you and I got to know each other because you contacted me because you started watching my videos. Pretty much. And you called me, I don't know, it was a number of months ago, and then at one point you were passing through. We had lunch, and... Yeah, it was great. You haven't been able to make it up to the meetup. We'll see if you can do that. So, so that was, so that was the moral thing to do. Did you consider yourself a Christian when you went to UC Davis? Absolutely. Okay. I never, yeah, no, absolutely. Okay, okay. And, and this attitude of destroying the Republican Party, this was, for you, kind of an expression of what Christian, of what a good Christian should do in your context, in your situation. Yeah, I just felt that it was, I just liked the positions better. I thought it was more moral, you know, that's how I felt. So then, so then you graduate, you've got an African Studies degree, and you've got a Sociology degree, and you go to Temple University, where's that at? Philly, Philadelphia. What's the background of that school? What do you mean, like the department, or just the school in general? The school itself, does it, a lot of colleges come out of religious backgrounds? Yes, well, Temple was formerly a Baptist school, it was a night school, that's why they're called the Temple Owls. And, so it kind of grew out of a religious thing, but it became a public school a couple decades ago, I don't know exactly when. But it is a public school in Pennsylvania. Okay, so it's not, it's not, it's not religious in any way. Religious in any way. So you went there to get a graduate degree in African American Studies? That's correct. Okay. And when you started taking classes there, you began hearing a lot of things that you interpreted as anti-Christian, and you still identified as a Christian. Well, it's hard to misconstrue, I mean, it's, their stance was pretty much, it's the white man's religion, you know, it's holding black people in bondage, and they need to be freed from that, so anything we can do to destroy it is good. Okay, okay. And, and so how did you feel about that when you were there? I had felt that my Christianity was not in conflict with what I was trying to do. So, you know, for me, the sociological, the problems, the sociological problems that I saw, I felt it was my moral duty to kind of help resolve that, and you know, being a Christian, it's kind of like, yeah, you should, you should work for that. And so I thought it was, I thought it was not consistent with what I felt, with what I believed, and I felt he was wrong in a lot, like, his attacks were just sloppy. They weren't, you know, it was just, it was just hatred. So now, when you were talking to Peterson, you very much expressed a conversion. I mean, that's the language you used, a conversion, but, and so when I was listening to that, I was kind of thinking, I'm not sure if you've kind of shown Peterson how this worked, because I knew a little bit more of your story. Talk about the, talk about why you saw that as a conversion, and also some of the stuff you talked with Peterson. How did your life change? Yeah. Well, he took it, I didn't really say that. He kind of said, you know, he ascribed to me an atheistic background or something like, I didn't agree with that, but, you know, I let him continue. Okay. Because I didn't feel like I was, certainly you could say that the Marxist doctrine, you could say, yeah, that's atheistic, you know, that's what I was involved with, if you want to make that claim. So you can make, yeah, you can make a claim that was atheistic, but I didn't ascribe that to myself. Okay. And what was the other part? Well, but you, I mean, there was, you did describe it as a pretty dramatic change in your life. And that Jesus was different for you. Jesus 2.0 was different from Jesus 1.0, at least with respect to the timeline of your life. Because it was real. So like, the difference is abstract versus real. Okay. And so for me, like, my Christianity was just the right thing to do. But when you're young and immature, you just take the world for granted. You're like, that's the right thing to do. I'm a Christian. And you haven't really wrestled with, is he real or not? Like, is that, are you just, you know, what do you do? Why are you a Christian? Like, do you believe? And I was like, yeah, sure I believe. Like, without question, without thinking. You know, but after that, see, there's a lot I glossed over. A lot of wrestling, a lot of reading, a lot of praying, a lot of asking lots of questions about the Bible and its veracity and all kinds of stuff. That I wrestled with for like, that whole time I was out in Philly. And really tried to get to the bottom of it. And like I said, I was trying to be as honest with it as I could. And willing to take the conclusions wherever they went, including dumping Christianity wholesale if I felt that it was not correct. And so what were some of the lines of demarcation? Now you dropped out of your degree program at Temple. That's right. That was pretty big. Actually, I was close to finishing. Really? Yes. Yeah, I only needed four more classes. And you still dropped it. I still dropped it because I felt it was so worthless to me. Wow. I was just like, what's the point? I'm not going to go back there. There's nothing there for me. So that was that is a pretty dramatic turn in your life. I mean, to get that close to the end and then say, you know, I mean, even just to finish the degree so you can, you know, have a piece of paper. I have an amaze. And then you drop it. And what did you do when you left Temple? I started looking for a seminary. So the summer I was only there for one year. The Master's program was actually very short. It's only 30 units. Okay. So, you know, I finished 18. Yeah, 18. And I think I had another class in the summer. But I forget exactly. But anyway, it's only four, you know, 12 units, four classes, one semester. Not that far away. So I dropped out and I started taking classes. There was a seminary in town, a Mennonite seminary, and I took some non-matriculated classes and started researching different seminaries and where to go. You know, as I listen to you, I hear people, the missions people have in their life are almost always a direct reflection of their worldview. And so this change for you of you were, I mean, you were on track to be, you wanted to be a public intellectual, what's now loosely called a social justice warrior. This was, you wanted to be, you wanted to fight republicanism and racism. And I don't want to make this too political because this isn't really about political parties for you. I became completely non-political. I was like, we don't change the world through politics. That's the real conversion in you, is the question of what is most important in this world. And it wasn't before what was most important was the political aspect where we've got to make sure democrats get elected and republicans don't and I because, you know, I grew up in an African American community and I've always voted with the black community, which means I've always voted democrat. But I've always been suspicious of politics because I look around at the folks that I live around and many of whom are black and I say, the government ain't going to save you buddy. If you're waiting for Uncle Sam to wait in and make your life great, you know, it's not going to happen in your lifetime. But for you, this was very much of a transition in terms of who you were and what you wanted to give your life to. So describe for me a little bit more about that transition. So it's one thing to look at this track you are on and say, this isn't it. It's another thing to look at another track and say, this is it. What made that change in your life? That's complex. So what I said in the video was just seeing the power of it. And listening back to it, I realized, oh, I wasn't very clear about that. It made it almost seem like I just read something. But what I was actually referring to was the people in the church that I was attending. And seeing people's lives changed, you know, and so that was part of it. You know, so I saw that there was power. And so when I went to school, like they're all trying to change the world. They have no idea how. It's just, you know, let's just have more education and that's going to help people and they should do this and that. And really, what do you know what's going to come of it? So they know every problem in the world, like every, every problem with racism, they know to the minutiae. They know exactly everything that could be that could be wrong. They figured that out. But solutions they were hard to come by. And so when I realized what I said to in the video is God changes people one person at a time. God changes people and by that, his power is displayed. In people's lives, they change from bad to good. And when I saw that, that was really big. I think that's part of it. The other part for me was just studying the Bible and is there a supernatural element here? You know, is God really real? Or is it just a theoretical thing that did people write this or did God have his hand in this? So I just want to know if God was real for real. And you can't have, you can't have a conversion without that. So when I really realized that, that was, it was like the God of the universe who created everything, he loves me and he knows me. That just changed everything. It's like, I want to live for that. So then, so then the application of that, you saw that as being different from the type of world saving you were trying to do before. You were going to save the world through education, through making people's consciousness, through anti-racism, through all of those things. And now you say, and I thought that was a stunning moment in the video when you told Peterson, you know, God saves one person at a time. You can almost hear Peterson's, you know, the sovereign individual, that theme that he has, riding through that. So... And Christianity is the solution for racism. Right? So I was looking for the solution. It's not like I stopped caring about racism. It's just, I felt like, you know, kind of the conversion I had, like, I used to hate white people. I like really hated white people. Like, they annoyed me. I didn't want to be associated with them. I was picking up a lot of this, this attitude. And just one day realizing, like, God loves them! Like, why do I have such a problem? And that goes for everyone. It's not just, hey, stop hating white people. My point is, all, you know, God loves everyone. And he values us. He places the values in us. And so that, who might disagree with God? You know, so I'm going to value every human being, too. That's the whole Imago Day. We're made in the image of God. That gives us value. Now, so you became a Christian. That was obviously before Jordan Peterson came on the scene. Right. What about Jordan Peterson? Why did he interest you? What about him caught your ear? Yeah. There were a couple. Let's back up a little bit. So you, get back into the narrative. So you left Temple. You're done with that. You have, we won't call it a conversion experience going from atheism to Christianity, but your Christianity very much morphed, became very personal, became much more real to you. Well, it's hard for me to say I was a Christian if I didn't really believe it was true. Okay. Because I really felt, because I was a real skeptic. Yeah. You know, I think that's what Peterson picked up on when you were talking to him. And so I think he understood you in that certain way. So, so then you dropped out of Temple. Then what did you do? So like I said, I spent a year at home, just taking classes, just working and taking classes and looking for a seminary and doing the whole application process. And I ended up going to Talbot. Okay. Okay. And you completed your seminary degree? I did. Okay. So that one you finished. Yes. Good for you. So And that was way more. That was almost, what is it, like 70 units just from, just from the seminary. You know, it is, it is something, you know, to get a seminary degree like you and I have, to get a master's, those are heavy programs. You know, you're in class about as long as a PhD in many cases. You get a master's at the end of it. A lot of pastors get a little chagrined by that, but so be it. And not only the grading scale, A is only 100 to 94 or something. It's like, the grading scale is really tough too. So now, also, so then you came across Jordan Peterson and also with your conversation with him, the question of marriage came up. So let's, let's come back to that a little later. But when did you first start, when did you first notice Jordan Peterson? What caught your ear and how has that impacted your life? So there's a couple of reasons. Obviously his stuff runs the gamut. So you know, I liked a lot of the self-improvement stuff and I think just taking on responsibility and how important it is, that really caught my eye. The stuff he was saying about Bill C-16 in Canada was very interesting to me because I think I felt it pertained to religious freedom as well. So freedom of speech and freedom of religion for me are tied together. Okay. But then I think what really, really got me into it was his biblical lectures. And you know, sometimes I listen to him like I cringe a little, I disagree, but what he was doing was phenomenal because I felt like he was making Christianity interesting to people who really don't care about Christianity. And like, because our culture, you know, a lot of the atheists before like Christianity was pointless. Like let's throw away 2,000 years of massive it's everything in our culture, literature, art, you know, if you don't know Christianity, like you're you know, why would you throw that away? It's intellectually dishonest. To say, oh it has no value. Like, really? So I like that about him because he kind of helped people understand that. Okay. And so you actually, obviously if you had Patreon time with him, you became a patron and a pretty significant patron. Well, that's the only way I could get to meet him. That was really the point. So why did you want to talk to him so badly? I mean you invested I'm not going to ask you for details, but we know at least the old regime by which a patron you invested hundreds of dollars in the hopes of having a 30 minute conversation. I really don't have a good answer. I really thought I wanted to talk to him. And so was it worth it? Yeah. Yeah, I think so. Okay. Why? It was a great conversation. It just showed me more about what I had to say. It opened up lines of communication. And I just think that's really cool. I'm a fan. So like yeah, of course I want to talk to him. I want to send him some stuff and maybe I can help him think things through. Yeah, yeah. And talk about the Bible better. I mean obviously he doesn't have a seminary education. He isn't I don't know exactly what Talbot equipped you to do, but my training is historical grammatical historical interpretation of the Bible. He obviously comes at the Bible from a different perspective. So what are the things well so critique your conversation with him and what would you like to have done differently at least on your part? I thought it was an amazing conversation. I told you I often I don't usually listen to videos when I'm at work. Yeah. Usually when I'm washing dishes or driving or something and often I'll put in a video before I go to bed and I was it was the end of the day and I turned your video basically into an mp3 so I could just listen to it. I'm like I could just listen to it and I'm thinking okay I'm just going to fall asleep and I'll just pick up wherever I left off from Matt and hear the rest of it. But the video starts out slowly. Yeah. And you're like yeah I'd kind of like to record this and put it up on YouTube and he's like no no no. I got turned down. And you say well you might change your mind at the end and I'm like no. And of course complete switch and by that by about halfway two thirds of the way through the video I'm just kind of like holy cow that this conversation is going some places that are really interesting for me. Now I think he's I've never I haven't seen any videos of him really engaging in that kind of stuff. Well and what and like I like I said to you before what really impressed me about it was so hierarchies to take a little bit of Jonathan Haight and Jordan Peterson put them together. Hierarchies bind and blind. And so the Jordan Peterson who is a University of Toronto professor you know he's got a little world around him he's on public TV so he's kind of a public intellectual in Ontario and people know who he is but that's kind of small potatoes and then obviously in the last two years he's been on a status rocket and you know if you want to actually talk to Jordan Peterson good luck because there's a line of a million other people who want to talk to him and he's been burned by this line a number of times. And so maybe he was just trying to you know protect himself by saying no don't. Oh absolutely. Oh if I've been burned by all the people he's been burned by and in New York Times and all of these places take one little sound bite and vice and just you know yeah I'd be very reticent to talk to anybody about anything with any camera going. And so I kind of thought well maybe at this point maybe he's just gun shy and rightfully so but it's interesting in the in the video because you get to a point it's clear you know he's just kind of you know he's doing his I mean he's doing his psychologist thing he's listening he's asking a few questions. At some point he gets engaged and then he's hooked and then he's in and it was just and he was so what amazed me is he was so open to listen. Open to hear you. He didn't like argue with me really. No not at all. He was practicing his point about you can learn something from pretty much anyone in front of you and he really wanted to learn from you and that's powerful. Yeah. Yeah. So I was yeah. Like I said I was just going to listen to it and Peterson will talk about all these things that I've heard him talk about many many times and it's like well you say this to him and I'm thinking I wonder what he's going to say about that. Then he goes here and he says no keep talking and it was a real conversation to the end that he does clips he says yeah you and VanderKlay can do what you want with this put it up on YouTube because this is a good conversation and again it's these kinds of things that continue to impress me about him. That's a level of honesty that is unusual. Yeah. Yeah he took a sincere interest in what I had to say. Yeah. And he doesn't have to write it's like oh my no he doesn't need you. In fact if anything you're a liability to him. That's right. And which again amazes me that he's still doing these conversations and he's not. So the part that got cut off from the recording is at the beginning he said I don't do these anymore. And I started recording right after that. Yeah. My on my recording of him too it was the beginning was just a total train wreck and he had a bad internet connection and I mean it was just a disaster and I felt badly because I really wish I had had the conversation with you that at the beginning said I'd like to record this and if it goes well maybe publish it but totally cool not to. I also I just wanted to. So this internet thing is a weird thing and this YouTube is a weird thing because you know people come up to me like oh it's weird talking to you in person. It's like yeah but you know what I put my pants on one leg at a time and it's you know we're all just human beings. We really are. So what didn't you get around to that you'd like to say now? Yeah. There's a lot that so I just felt like when I listened to it again afterwards I was like I should have said that and I never explained this part and you know so I kind of felt bad about that but I was like you know I did the best I could in the moment and maybe I can explain some things later. So I think one of the things we already touched on was like the image of God because I kind of said oh that was really important to me and I never really explained it. I think it's about the value that God places on us and it's like big whoop. Okay God loves you. Great. I've heard it a million times. Who cares? But when you actually believe that God is real and that he is who he says he is then it means something. Then all of a sudden it's like wow God loves me? Wow. And so for me that was the switch where I was kind of like yeah I know God loves me. I've heard it a million times. To actually being like that's God. He loves me. You know it's very different when God is personal rather than oh this is the God of the Bible. This is theology. Blah blah blah. Abstract. And so the switch for me was going from abstract to real. Yeah. Yeah. Well and you know I think back on you know falling in love with the woman that is my wife. You know you see someone and naturally in that process of infatuation you're you know it's like they become in the sense an object of worship and you know as a young man you know you might have this with always fawning after all these unattainable women and then when it happens when you know she loves you and you love her and it's like bang. It's you know there's little there's few things like it. And I you know when I read like the book of 1 Peter when I first went through that book carefully it was like this book is all about status. And what you know what Peter is saying is that you know if the God of the universe loves you anybody else's opinion of you? You know yeah it's real yeah you feel it. And it's that amago dei and this is it's interesting because that's one of the central things in Peterson's point. And so I went to the he was in Sacramento and actually two other the all three other people from my meetup that went one of them is training to be a marriage and family therapist. The other two have PhDs in psychology and so we had our meetup the night after and I talked to those two guys that were at the meetup and all three of us had the same response which was the most incredible thing about that evening was not what he said it was how he worked a line of a hundred and sixty people and every single person that he talked to felt that even if it was just for thirty seconds they had all of his attention. And that was powerful. And that's what blows me away about these Patreon conversations because you know I talk to high status people sometimes and like you said they don't need us. We're nothing. Well they're tired out too. They might have started that way you know but then after the thousandth person you're like gosh. That's right. But yeah I felt the same way because I met him in San Francisco at the what was that called the simulation. Oh the simulation yeah I was there too. Yeah yeah yeah. And I just caught him just briefly his attention at the end and I wanted to tell him something. And he like turned to me and like leaned forward and there's hundreds of people around him trying to get his attention. And he like made me feel like I was the only one he was talking to. Wow he's a really good listener and that really meant a lot to me. That is a powerful thing. I mean people don't appreciate what a difficult and powerful thing that is. There's a lot of smart people but that you know because in this whole you know experience that I've had too I worry about that because you know what's lovely about a small church is that I can do the Freddie and Paul show and I know everybody there by their name and I can spend time with people. That's the way people are supposed to be treated but the more and more people come the all of the dynamics get different. The video is slow and it's making you slow so I'm recording it on my end you'll probably laugh when it's here. So. Well you were slowing down for me too but I think I caught it all. Okay. Yeah. So anything else you want to say? So what I'm kind of thinking of is that I'll take this and I'll put this as the front end where we talk about it and then we'll put your conversation with him on the back end. And I again I was I was blown away. I was seriously you know there's all these little videos on the internet about you know and you won't believe what happens next. Well I didn't believe what happened in that talk. Yeah. And there's some specifics we should probably talk about and tease out too. Okay. Yeah I've got about 15 minutes. I think some of the things I didn't talk about was oh you got 15 minutes? Okay. Uh like we didn't finish talking about like crusts parents with a lot. You know and then yeah some parents abuse that. Yeah. And my point was kind of like that doesn't absolve the parent from the responsibility. And they're going to be held accountable for what they do. And so what's unaddressed is really the end of like what's the problem of evil but that's a whole nother like that's a whole nother. We can talk for hours on that. Well what what struck me was he and this is I mean in some ways this is one of the how to describe it. So he I heard him get to a point where okay so here's the here's the big question. Does God save us? You know salvation by grace alone or do we save ourselves by fulfilling the law and you know so he kind of and that's where he kind of wanted to engage and he basically saying I haven't worked that out and it's kind of like yeah you and you know we're still fighting over the Protestant Reformation. And where do where do we and God how to talk about agency in this world and of course Calvinists have you know predestination and election. His major hang up I'm sorry it's video stuff if people don't why is he interrupting him? It's the lack. Yeah he had this hang up about like if you're saved like he said redemption but why the heck would you do anything? You know like it's kind of like once saved always saved so like hey do whatever you want right and that was a real hang up for him because he's like that doesn't make any sense to me that's completely illogical. And so and that's what we teased out right that was what was so awesome. Yeah yeah and it's amazing that you know again I'm I was just blown away by how open he was and how honest he was with you and at the end he says yeah do whatever you want with this. This was a conversation. I'm thinking this dude really believes what he believes again I hear a lot of people he's a fake he's a phony I've seen a lot of fakes and phonies. No this dude believes what he believes. Yeah and I think he thinks we can actually accomplish some good so I think he actually felt good about it and yeah I think he learned something. Yeah yeah I you know again this I I'm speechless I just was amazed I mean because you talked to me you said oh it went great and I thought well okay we'll see and then you know and then I'm listening to it I'm thinking gosh wow that's something. What did you think about the virginity cloth thing like it was a weird way to answer the question I thought. I had never I had never there's a lot of different ways that Christians and pastors try to talk about the relationship between blood and atonement and I've been doing all these videos lately about sacrifice and blood and then the virginity cloth it's like wow is that gonna get some comments. Yeah I didn't I seriously I did not go into this conversation thinking like how can I like tell him everything about Christianity I didn't even know we'd be talking about this and certainly I didn't think I'd have that I'd be telling that story that I did not think that because you told me write some things down that you're gonna say and that was not on the list okay that was When you went there I thought well you know if dropping out of temple didn't you know completely destroy his social justice warrior cred this virginity cloth is just gonna nuke it but I really like the story because it's so revolting right because it's the most barbaric thing we can think of in our society it's like the worst possible thing is like this you'll do this virginity you have to keep it pure if not you're gonna be stoned like that's the most barbaric thing but it highlights and it's like exactly exactly that's what God thinks too. I had never heard it before. Right? So he's like well God's like I don't want that either that's why I came and died. Yeah yeah yeah and I know a lot of I know a lot of the atheists that listen they might they might have turned off by now but we'll put this at the beginning and you know we'll just keep teasing the Peterson video and at some point it'll start in this video but I you know I listened to that and I thought like I didn't know I didn't know before you know if if Matt asked me to post this should I post this after I listened to it I thought I hope he wants to post it because this this adds something to the this adds something to the Jordan Peterson story it's a you know it adds something because this so much of us so many of us have been listening to so much of his so much of his stuff and everyone just waiting for something new you know explored territory unexplored territory you know two hemispheres of the brain all this stuff and then this happens and it's like dog on it isn't fun when stuff surprises you no it was really fun I'm really happy about everything so so what's what's next for you Matt watch it now you're getting married that was part of the video right everyone knows the video you were pretty transparent in that video so you know I just want to make sure I really thought it was going to be private I I really I didn't go into the thinking like oh yeah like people are going to hear this I just really kind of gave I was like ah forget that I'll just be private I'll just be personal you've got the you've got the dour you've got the impending marriage and the dour view of you wouldn't believe how many people tell me that it's like oh you're getting married I'm really sorry it's like that's like what I hear most of the time and I think that's sad but have you ever read Tim Keller's book on marriage? probably no not that one it's a good book it's a good book cause one of the things I appreciate about Americans assume marriage is supposed to make you happy which is why they divorce right marriage isn't supposed to make you happy marriage is supposed to make you godly right well how do we get godly we get godly through suffering and sacrifice yeah and it's the two irons sharpening each other right that's right what's great is when you're married to someone who's mature and wise and gracious and a person of good character because they're looking out for your best good too and they're not trying to beat you over the head with it you know they're you're both trying to grow and I think it's really beautiful well it is it is and marriage has the capacity to test you like nothing else and again this was one of the early things when I started watching Peterson the way he spoke about marriage I thought dog on it this guy so often even among psychologists and therapists it's like a lot of therapy winds up being well my job as a therapist is to make you happy and a lot of pastoring is my job as a pastor is to make you happy and no that's not right and so when he talked about marriage often I thought this is one of the few secular psychologists that talked about marriage in a way I could respect so crazy crazy thing crazy crazy thing it's going to be interesting to see what happens with Jordan Peterson in the long term because he sure turned a lot of our worlds upside down yeah yeah so in the end God's not a respecter of persons and I don't want to elevate him too much and I'm grateful for what he's obviously he's done a great thing and I love a lot of the stuff he's done well I like Jonathan Peugeot's take which is Cyrus because you know Cyrus was a pagan emperor of the Persian Empire and if you read the prophet Isaiah he's called the servant of the Lord well Israel is called the servant of the Lord and those servant of the Lord passages are the ones we trot out at Advent to refer to Jesus so Christians are sometimes a little too wow boy I always how much more trouble can I get into? Christians are always a little too tribal they're just a little too peculiar about some things and God God does what he wants God uses who he wants and God runs history towards whatever end he wants and we it's very Calvinist of you Calvinist of me well Matt I'm gonna pause the recording here just so we can chat a little bit before I have my next appointment so thank you so much for this this was this is wild I was just maybe gonna put some of it up on YouTube if that's fine with you yeah I think I'd rather I didn't go up on YouTube I think that's alright so that's fine unless you change your mind later no I think we should just keep it as a private discussion can I share it with Paul VanderKlay? sure do you know who he is? Do you remember him? yes that's no problem I've had an opportunity to meet with him and to talk with him and I went to Sacramento and I live not too far away so he and I got to talking and I don't know if you've seen some of his videos but he's getting more and more subscribers and you know kind of taking the yeah how's he doing? How's this channel doing? It's growing a lot like he started off with just like a few hundred subscribers now and then a couple months ago it's like two thousand and he's like wow you know my church only has fifty people and you know I got two thousand people online and it's like now it's like almost ten thousand I think so it's growing it's growing yeah well that's yeah it's very exciting well he's starting to have a real conversation so tell me his name again? Paul VanderKlay Paul VanderKlay yes yeah I highly some of his stuff is really interesting like he has a take on it that I haven't heard elsewhere and you can tell he's been trained on like philosophy and theology and really insightful stuff yeah and he says hi yeah yeah well I met him I met him yeah you said he was at the other week that's right that's right and so that was good yeah and I see that he's yes he's talking right now about the the Sam Harris some of my Sam Harris discussions yeah he's a if you want to get a good feedback I think he's a good place to go on kind of like adjudicating your performance and just in general how it went getting married this fall I'm getting married in October and you know I think when I was younger before I was like marriage and family that's a huge responsibility I don't know if I can do that now it's like marriage and family is a huge responsibility that's awesome I want to do that great great so that's a huge difference in orientation it is I'd be more than happy to hear about it because you know you bring a very particular perspective to this issue and so I have some things to say about it that I probably couldn't hear from anyone else that's true what was the guilt about and where do you think it stemmed from I think it was kind of like I felt associated with all the people that had done horrible things in the past and that you know by my white skin I was associated with them and culpable and when I first heard that I was in tears I was just like but I've only ever wanted to help people how could I be guilty of such things right and so that guilt really overtook me in trying to make things right like when I heard that people don't like me because I'm white I try to do everything in my power to prove them wrong like I'm a good guy I'm I'm worth I'm not like them you know I understand and I'm I'm a virtuous person and just well look obviously there's some things about that that you might think are laudable right you know I mean there isn't anything wrong with trying to be a good person right and even more there is some utility in taking on well that's the question the question is what should your what should your what is your moral responsibility to what occurred in the past and the answer isn't well you have none so that's not that's not so simple either but to be guilty I think that the error comes when you're guilty on behalf of your race maybe you should be guilty on behalf of your humanity that's the original sin doctrine maybe that's part of the reason why that doctrine was so useful it's like well yeah you're corrupt and flawed but it doesn't come in some sense if everyone accepts it it doesn't come as a surprise it's also not parceled out more for some people than others I went to graduate school at Temple University in Philadelphia in African American Studies and that particular department was extremely difficult to get to and I was a student and I was a student and I was a student and that particular department was extremely radical and also very anti-Christian and also very anti-Christian so for myself so for myself that's interesting that's interesting because it doesn't seem to me that it's credible that Christianity as such was an enemy of American blacks absolutely you are correct and there are other departments that will take a completely different stance I see what was it like first of all you must have been a minority racially speaking in those departments what was it like to take the sociology degree and the African American Studies degrees and what did it do for and to you? and what did it do for and to you? and what did it do for and to you? and what did it do for and to you? I've thought about this a lot I've thought about this a lot and I've come a long long ways and I've come a long long ways let me start with kind of my experience in the department let me start with kind of my experience in the department you know there's some people that just flat out you know there's some people that just flat out don't like you doesn't matter how woke you are doesn't matter your woke points doesn't matter your woke points how much you've proved yourself it doesn't, none of that stuff matters it probably makes it worse pardon? I think with people like that who are prepared to dislike you a priori being nice to them is actually the worst strategy I don't think it helps at all I don't think it helps at all which is quite interesting because you know you'd think that well it's easy to think that the proper way to befriend someone is to be friendly to them but that's true for most people but that's true for most people but not all so you know this story is also really just a part of growing up so you know this story is also really just a part of growing up it's learning to have self confidence it's learning to believe in yourself and not please please like me, please accept me please you know it's if I don't do X, Y, and Z they won't like me, they won't accept me I have to do X, Y, and Z and you know that's a huge part of it that's just me maturing lately in that facet I think you know like have you tried a personality test? I have not I might be interested to try to understand myself personality test I might be interested to try to understand myself personality test and see how high in agreeableness you are oh I'm sure I was sky high before yeah well it seems that way it seems that way and you know that has some we found that the best predictor of politically correct or a great predictor of politically correct belief was in fact trait agreeableness even though it doesn't predict political liberalism very well yeah I think just as a side note I had a great counselor a couple years ago who really helped me sort through a lot of these things and really helped me to advocate for myself and really believe in myself being able to say no to people and X, Y, and Z you know and I think that really helped me a lot but back to the story yeah back to the story well just being there there are some people obviously that they're nice, they're nice people they want to be friends, they don't care you're obviously at the department so you're not a racist against black people there's a reason why you're here so there were some really nice people there that I befriended but for me it was kind of like well of course they don't like me I'm white, like kind of like that's totally okay and that's normal and fine because white people have done all these things it's okay if I suffer a little bit after all I deserve it right, right, right and so that was my mentality I was not offended by it I was just like they don't like me I'll just tread easily I won't offend them and just kind of go my own way so like that that's kind of how I coped with that never really thinking that they're pathological just accepting their behavior as justified yes, well especially given your guilt yeah yeah, so the thing that really snapped me out of it was actually becoming a Christian and actually if I back up, it was actually the attacks on Christianity that were leveled in class that kind of became a diatribe against Christianity so my parents were missionaries obviously my dad was a pastor so I I was invested in my faith but I'd say there was a lot of things I hadn't worked through or really made my own and it kind of challenged me to wrestle with that more because if I'm having these charges leveled at me it was kind of like I was determined to research that I was determined to figure that out and so thankfully I was going to a great church in Philadelphia at the time, they really explained the Bible really well and I just kind of saw I just dropped out I saw that I felt like there was more power in what I was hearing from the Bible people being changed by their people being evil and bad becoming Christians and turning from their evil that's way more powerful than this stuff that they're saying at school so why do you think that that struck you as more powerful? because it's not obvious you had committed yourself in some sense to a doctrine of group identity and political activism you'd stake a lot of your life on that but then you experienced the the religious your exposure to the religious doctrine what it did do it convinced you that there was a different pathway, what was it? first of all I think the biggest thing I think the going back to the group identity thing the Imago Dei the image of God that was hugely important for me so first of all I think it was a matter of just my skepticism a lot of my questions being answered so for me it was a big part of it was apologetics and realize the veracity of the Bible questions that I had I felt intellectually were answered but I think the real change for me as a result was when I was home that summer I hadn't dropped out yet how old were you when this was happening? 23? 23 I hadn't dropped out yet I came home to Fresno for the summer and when I was at church and I think like everyone up on stage was white and my old self was kind of like this is bad this is not acceptable and then I was thinking but wait a second, God loves these people, well am I smarter than God? Wait a second if he likes them why don't I like them? God doesn't seem to be afraid of being associated with them you know so it's it's real why do you think you felt that that was a reasonable thing to think? I mean because you said you had been approaching this previously from an agnostic or atheistic perspective and then all of a sudden you had these ideas, why did you give them any credibility? Well because I believe the Bible I mean I believe what it said I became a Christian and it's That must have been a shock Yes, yeah absolutely, I mean my life is totally different but you know that's for me it was just a matter of fidelity you know it was a matter of of taking the consequences seriously and making proper conclusions So what do you think Christianity offered you morally and practically conceptually perhaps as well that you weren't being offered in your political slash academic pursuits I realized that God reconciled people to himself one person at a time and and that my old approach simply wasn't realistic simply wasn't proper I felt that God's way of doing was effective because because of what I saw around me and also what I saw in myself and the drastic changes in my life What were those? Well dropping out and just totally rearranging my value system deciding oh I want to go into ministry I want to be a pastor forget all this secular stuff I felt like I could change the world by writing books and race based stuff which ironically my cohort member is doing right now and is getting super famous but that could have been me I could have been that guy but never mind Do you have regrets about that? No, no, no, no, absolutely not No, but So how is ok so another question that relates to what we were talking about at the beginning you talked about your your upcoming marriage could say impending marriage but I'll say upcoming impending impending doom yeah, yeah, exactly but you know you said you reconfigured your attitude from man that's a lot of responsibility oh no to man that's a lot of responsibility oh good and to what degree if any is that transformation associated with this movement away from the identity politics and towards Christianity or am I asking what's the leading question there No, you're right on, I have an answer for you I thought about so if you know the sacrifice of Jesus Christ God enters pain voluntarily ok and it's not not just the pain of the cross is that like a definition of God? I think he's more than that but it's certainly one thing he does well it's really an interesting statement man because it takes a tremendous amount of courage to enter pain and suffering voluntarily that's a big deal and that's a big part of the motif of the crucifixion and the passion, right? It's the adoption of pain and suffering voluntarily and that's a really redemptive that's a redemptive act and so that's where I you know you see God doing that not just the pain of the cross I think also the pain of rejection the pain of rejection that God suffers from his children and he's like well regardless of that it's worth it. Why is it worth it? That's not obvious You're perfect God you're fine, you're chilling you're doing great, you're not missing anything, you're not lonely you know why would you enter this suffering, this pain voluntarily, just the pain of the cross and the pain of rejection which I believe is greater than a parent who is rejected by their child, there's no reason to believe that I think God feels it even stronger Why would God do that? So for me that was like well if he I suppose it has something to do I mean you know there's an idea that God is whatever is perfect but I kind of wonder if whatever is perfect whatever is perfect isn't something static, I wonder if whatever is perfect is something that's in search of an even more perfect perfection So the perfection isn't in a static state it's in a state of continual transformation and maybe that's maybe God has a destiny in that sense I have some comments on that I want to finish what I had to say real quick and then I'll come back to that if I can remember because now I lost my train of thought Sorry! No worries We're talking about God adopting suffering and pain voluntarily and why he would do that Right, so for me that was inspiring that was kind of like because I'm thinking is it worth it? Can I handle it? So I'm like well I see the example of what Christ did and I'm like it's worth it, so he believes the love is worth it, the love that he gets the love from those that do accept him is worth the rejection of those who don't That's a good idea man Well it's so funny I could see a human parallel in that in my personal experience I've had a lot of trouble with critical press people in particular and people have asked me in some sense why bother with it I guess and part of it is that the positive consequences like from my lectures for example the public lectures are so absolutely overwhelming that they more than fully justify the trouble that is involved in doing this Bingo! That's parenting too, right? You're like oh this is going to be trouble this is going to be you have this thing and all this and you have to deal with this and there's this huge responsibility and you're like well it's worth it for me I will endeavor that despite the drawback Yes, exactly and that's also what you do while this is relevant to your marriage because that's also what you think God this is going to be a lot of pain and suffering it's like yeah but it's not only it's not exactly that that's justified by the totality of it but in some sense it's intrinsic to the process by which that desirable totality comes about but I really like the idea of example I hadn't thought about that I mean it clicked in right away because obviously part of the idea the Christian idea that God became incarnate to suffer through the entire catastrophe of human existence was to do that as the ultimate example Yes, it's more than that but it is that Yes, it's more and okay so when you say it's more than that what are you thinking about? I'm not disputing that I'm curious as to what you think Well, I mean there has to be a payment for sin and ultimately that is what the crucifixion accomplishes Well, that's something I have more difficult time on I think this is why the Eastern Orthodox types like me because I'm very I'd never be comfortable I'd never be comfortable it might be my own ignorance I've never been comfortable with that part of the doctrine the idea of the payment for sin because I don't understand it so man, explain away How much time do you have? I want to make this short but tell me honestly I can tell you give me a sec here We have 11 minutes Okay, I'll make this short Do you know what a virginity cloth is? No Okay, so in ancient Israelite wedding practices when the marriage was consummated the couple had to produce a virginity cloth after the consummation after the consummation after the consummation so the virginity cloth proved that the bride was a virgin at the time Oh yes, okay, I know Okay, so and this is relevant to your Exodus lectures and all that too because the Bible keeps talking about blood purifying the priest has to sprinkle blood on this and that you have to put blood on this and that and the other, put it on the doorposts and everything else Why is there this concept of blood purifying? Well imagine that the bride is found not to be a virgin she doesn't have the blood, whatever she is then stoned to death she has the shame the pain, the bitterness she's killed in front of her friends and family, it's horrible it's the worst thing you can imagine it's absolutely barbaric so where does this come in? In order to prove purity she needs blood In order to prove purity she needs blood Well, if the bride cannot produce her own blood the groom will take some of his blood and shed it as a substitute in order to provide her cover in order to provide her purity Right? So the bride is without purity but the groom provides the purity by giving his blood as a sacrifice in order to make her pure and respectable and clean Ok, so I have a question about that Is that actually what happened anthropologically? So you suppose there were multiple episodes where there was no virginity, cloth, blood because the bride wasn't a virgin but the husband loved her enough to do exactly that Yeah, I mean I haven't done enough, I know that this was a ritual so yeah, the anthropological stuff is correct but the Christian principle is that then the church is known as the bride of Christ and so as Christians we acknowledge that we are sinful people we are not pure and judged by the eyes of God if he judged our lives he would say wrong bad So what do we do? Well, Christ is the groom who shed his blood on our behalf so that we can be presented as pure and spotless So as the groom he sheds his blood that provides us with purity we're presentable in the most literal sense of the word we're presentable to God as pure and holy because we accept the sacrifice of Christ so he shed his blood because he knew that we didn't have it and he didn't want us to suffer he didn't want us to suffer that that ignominy the stoning, the death, the hell Ok, so let me ask you a question about that It's late in the day so this is pushing me No, no, no, that's fine I'm just hoping that I can get the conceptualization right It seems to me that to accept that sacrifice and to be redeemed by it you have to act out its consequences you have to act out its consequences So it's like you already said that you claimed and accepted perhaps the idea that God's incarnation in Christ was exemplary That's part of it, yes He teaches you how to behave, it's part of it Well, isn't the reconciliation and atonement a consequence of the pathway that opens up because that exemplar can now be embodied It seems in Western Christianity in particular there's this polarity it's like you have this moral obligation to imitate Christ but to believe in him but to imitate him, those are different things conceptually, because belief might be the statement of the creed but the imitation is in action Yeah, well beliefs if they're sincere result in action Yes, and actions should be What you believe shapes what you do Yes, yes it does hypothetically at least if you actually believe it it shapes what you do, if you don't just say it Okay, so if Christ sacrificed redeemed people for all time why is the imitation of Christ necessary? Well, because part of what he does is he is the true man, he shows us what true humanity is and so you know, how this is a big part of what I had to figure out I'm not trying to trap you I just don't understand this When I was in graduate school when I was doing that stuff with African American Studies I was trying to find a way to live pure, to live to be respectable, to have morality what's the morality? What morality should I follow? How can I absolve myself of guilt? How can I be a good moral person? What is it I have to do as a white person? That's how I felt and thought Right? And so Christ basically says I am the moral authority I am the example of how you should be imitate me, you know and so if you see Christ and his value system as true and perfect then, and you believe that and well that's, how should I act? Well, what does Christ believe? What is his world view? How does he treat people? Et cetera, et cetera What's his morality? And that is, he proved his perfect morality and his perfection so therefore, how else should I live? If I take it seriously Look, I'm not I'm absolutely not I'm with you completely there but I have this one sticking point which is I buy the idea that you have a moral obligation to do that What I don't understand is if you're already redeemed by the sacrifice then why do you have the moral obligation? Because it just doesn't It's not logically I'm also not saying that Because if you didn't, you'd be a hypocrite I mean you'd be like, oh yeah It's totally the way to go But so what if you're a hypocrite? No, but then you're not really redeemed because then you didn't really get it you didn't really understand it your value system was never changed you did not truly accept the sacrifice I see, so that's, okay So you're basically making an internal consistency argument That's what they call partly that's the philosophical claim of no performative contradictions You have to bring your action in accordance with your beliefs Well yeah, but I'm not perfect Yeah, to the degree that you can Otherwise you're lying somewhere You might be lying in your action or your belief but you're lying somewhere If I went completely the other way I don't think you meant what he said It's kind of like a marriage You said you were going to marry me and love me but all you do is sleep around with other people Well, you know That kind of proves that you didn't really take it seriously Yes, and that there's no marriage Right, exactly Despite what you said And it is a marriage That's exactly the idea See, I also had this strange idea I don't know what you think about this I'm sure it's not original I thought it could also be that Christ's crucifixion and resurrection let's say, redeemed humanity for all time But that doesn't mean that we don't have to do the work Oh, yes So this is a big part of Genesis and Exodus God wants us to be in charge He wants you guys to administer justice Here's what you do I'm counting on you guys to fulfill those responsibilities Because God trusts humans with a lot God trusts government and humans to kind of take care of a lot of those things And it's just like parenting, okay? It's just like parenting God trusts parents to take care of kids That's a huge responsibility Why would he do that? And clearly oftentimes it fails But that doesn't mean you don't have the responsibility Or that your shortcomings are not... Well, then that is another question too And a profound question Because as you said, it fails a lot It's Ivan Karmatsov's objection to Alyosha's belief in God He said, well, you see parents torturing a child What does that say about the goodness of God? Which is a perfectly reasonable criticism And so the first question might be Well, why would God allow such a thing? And it has something to do with autonomy But then the next question, which is Why is autonomy important? And then the next question might be Well, why are people important even? Why in the world would God want to be involved even? That's parenting God loves us, we're his children That's at the fundamental level It seems like a very strange thing for God to do Yeah, you know I mean, I'm not going to judge it Yeah, so I think that's what's amazing about That's the whole thing about suffering and entering suffering It's kind of like, why would you do that? Why would you enter into that? What are you getting out of this? I mean, we're not that great We're not that good looking We're not that smart We're not that wonderful We're actually kind of nasty sometimes It is something to be loved by your children Yeah, exactly And God does get that Well, look, that's a good place to stop Yeah Okay, I'll tell you what You and Vanderklay can decide what to do with this video Okay, what do you mean? Do whatever you want with it It was a good conversation If you think that it can be put to positive use Okay You can put it to positive use in whatever way you see fit Oh, thank you So you did change your mind It's a good conversation I think it might be helpful to people So you can figure out what to do with it One quick thing, I never did get to talk about the Exodus stuff Is there a kind of send you a video or send you a paper or something? Send me a paper You prefer that to a video? Yeah, probably Send both Okay Okay Thank you very much Good to meet you Likewise Say hi to Paul for me I'll do that Wish him well Thank you, I'll do that Okay, bye Okay, bye Bye