https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=e2sakW-kNoQ

 Good morning, good morning. I'm trying not to be late. Wow, it's been a huge week since the ARC conference and since I've gotten back from Europe, the video work has been intense and the thoughts have been intense and the conversations have been intense. And I'm super glad that we could do this livestream. Next week is Thanksgiving in America and so I doubt I will do a livestream next Friday. I am not going to be at Walmart or Best Buy looking for Black Friday deals. I am hopefully going to be at home with whichever of my children are gathered at my house for the holiday and I will be probably playing board games with them if I can get all of my work done on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday of that so I can enjoy Friday sort of as a holiday and then of course the Thursday holiday which I tend to spend with friends and neighbors and then Friday a holiday I'll spend with the kids and then Sunday of course is Sunday where we're back at church and then the week after that starts. So thank you for joining me for the livestream this morning. I'm looking to gather, I'm continuing to gather conversations from some of the people who I spent time with at ARC including a number of the artists and I just sent them a message this morning saying oh we could, yeah board games that's right, San Giro board games. So I'm going to have a bunch of those artists on and I'm going to, I had my conversation with Rafe Kelly, I'm going to talk with Grant Scrivner of course the Ianne Hersi Ali story is enormous and Jordan Peterson's video with John Lennox, a bunch of the stuff that I covered this week. These are things that have been in the making for the last five years and so I thought this morning for the livestream I would begin with a little presentation that I just sort of put together to gain a little bit of perspective on this and then we'll have questions from the livestream and then I'll probably open things up a little bit later on to bring some more people onto the screen and we can talk about all the things that I've been talking about this week and probably some of the things that you want to talk about. So the title of this livestream is the reassertion of civilizational Christianity. So as is often common with me, I think slowly and I went to ARC, we had the German Festival, we had a few little things in the Netherlands and then had some estuary meetings in the UK afterwards but all of that sort of contextualization in Europe was super helpful for me to sort of understand a lot of the differences between Europe and America. Now on stage in this picture obviously you have Jordan Peterson, a Canadian, you have John Anderson, an Aussie, you have Ianne Hersi Ali who when they had this panel was probably the person I knew the least about. I had a brief conversation with John Anderson a number of years ago in anticipation for the Australian Jordan Peterson event that I hosted and then of course Oz Guinness who many of you will know from the Exodus seminar but Oz Guinness is a well-known figure in Christianity and actually it was Oz Guinness that in his presentation at the ARC talked about civilizational Christianity and that term sort of cemented some things for me. A number of the different threads that we've been processing with respect to liberalism, the recession of modernity, the crisis of liberalism and a couple of Oz Guinness' terms just sort of cemented some things there for me. When words fit into place they're sort of like revelation, they sort of drop in and make things tangible. So that is where I think this week has been about in the Ianne Hersi Ali. I know a number of people right away sort of framed her conversion in that sense of sort of civilizational Christianity. It wasn't authentic and in the video I used, I went this week when I said that her conversion was authentic. I'm very much using Hans Georg Mueller's term of authenticity. She feels this to be sincere in her heart. Now the formation of it, I only saw, I had a chance this morning to see half of Glenn Scrivner's treatment. I said Rafe Kelly was the coolest guy at the ARC conference. The Peugeotian artists I think were the coolest group at the conference but I told Glenn Scrivner I thought he was the cleverest guy at the conference. Glenn Scrivner is super clever and I love watching him and just listening to what he does with his language and with his words. But really what the ARC conference is about is about civilizational Christianity covered in the cloth of liberalism, covered in the way in which in the 19th and early 20th century Christianity sort of took on a mantle of liberalism and said these are our values, these are values we're going to promote and talk about why some of this receded and why some of this is coming back again. I want to first talk about the way we were. So here's a picture of Queen Elizabeth's coronation and here's a picture of a scene from It's a Wonderful Life. Now via the American Revolution, America has managed civilizational Christianity in a different way from the United Kingdom. Now the Netherlands, all of the different European stories will be different with respect to this. I had an early morning Zoom call with Matthias and Cassidy. We did some reflection on the German estuary conference that we had and one of the things that I said to them that I've said in a number of the live streams is that part of what my trip to Europe really impressed upon me is just how different America is from the European situation. With respect to estuary, it is far easier for us here in North America to have a conference, to have a big conference and have people come from all over the continent. The United States is just such a mammoth country. United States, 330, 340 million people as compared to 65, 70 million people in Great Britain. Australia, 28 million. Canada, maybe 35 million. So United States is just a behemoth when it comes to this and so without the national borders, even though the borders aren't what they used to be in Europe, it's just so easy to gather a group of people. In America, in Europe, having the people from England gather with the people from the Netherlands, gather with the people from Germany. Germany tends to attract, we had people from Hungary, Estonia last week, we had from Poland, we had from Romania. We had a nice gathering of Eastern Europeans in Germany, but the Brits are over there on their little island. Now, England of course had the, in some ways, the greatest of all classical empires. The sun never set on the British Empire. And all around the world they had colonies. Now, we are continuing to do assessment of what colonies were. Now of course there's this sort of low resolution decolonization meme that is going on. Jordan Peterson has had, what was his name, was Nigel something or other on his channel, basically trying to do a fair assessment of colonialization, the good and the bad. That continues to sort of work through. But the relationship between England, Britain and her colonies was very different. And now that many people of those colonies are coming into England and immigration, of course immigration is this huge topic in England, especially now since the Israeli-Middle East conflict and some of the demonstrations in the UK, there's obviously a lot of question about that going on. In America, we didn't have a state church. So it's interesting, one of the people that hosted me in the UK, Church of England his whole life said, you don't have to believe in God to be a member of the Church of England. And that's true. Figuring out what the Church of England is as compared to say what American denominations are is a very interesting thought experiment. Because the Church of England was the expression of empire in church form. And in my visit last year when I had more time to talk with various current and retired clergy from the Church of England, there's a lot of consternation with respect to how explicit could the Church of England be with respect to its Christian claims. And so there are sort of little factions within the Church of England that express the different postures with respect to that. And there's a breathtaking diversity within the Church of England about well what is church and what should the church be doing, et cetera, et cetera. In the United States, that sort of came out in terms of denominationalism. And up until the Second World War, the American establishment was WASPy. And what I mean by that is white Anglo-Saxon Protestant. And in the first ARC video that I did, I pulled up this piece from Eric Torenberg's substack with respect to lions versus foxes. And you can go back with the ARC 1 video where I had a big lion and then sort of I couldn't really get the AI to make good foxes. And I only had 10 or 15 minutes in the UK to sort of put things like thumbnails together for live streams or for videos. And so it's sort of lions versus foxes. In terms of popular American culture, there was sort of this pervasive cultural Christianity that diffused the culture. And you can see that in a movie like the 1946 Frank Capra It's a Wonderful Life. You can see that in a movie that I've paid some attention to with Meet John Doe. You can just see this pervasive cultural Christianity in the United States that is generically Protestant, is sort of a least common denominator Protestant Christianity. Nobody's going to really chide you for going to the wrong church necessarily. But the assumption was to have status as a good American, you should go to church. That's pre-Second World War. Now this, the edges of this start to break down and sort of the post-colonial post-WASP establishment. Protestantism always had within it, within its civilizational Christianity, a strong theme of egalitarianism. And this of course is deep in the Enlightenment view that comes in via the Declaration of Independence that all men are created equal and endowed with their creator with certain inalienable rights. These ideas began to continue to work their way through to sort of dissolve the hierarchies that were sort of insisting on certain forms of civilizational Christianity and mandating them. One of the things that I, that was impressed upon me when I was in the UK this time was the languages. I was, we had a lovely dinner with our hosts in Oxford and Taya was there and another person came. And the host of the, the host of the, the host that they were hosting me in the home said of the guests, oh, you're clearly Welsh. And it was like, how did he know that? How on earth would he know that? And again, it was what was amazing to me about my trip to the UK this time was that they're all looking at a layer that I couldn't see, which were their languages. And all the little intricacies of all these tiny little accents within England had hierarchical implications. It was, it was just absolutely incredible to me how everybody knew and sort of judged everyone else by with respect to the accents. And it's not that rigid. And, but, but it's, what's incredible to me was that was just so dominant. And then to be in a country where there's been enormous immigration and you just have to ask the question, how do people of Asian and African people have a sense, how do they fit into a culture, which before these waves of immigration was deeply stratified by class and by place of origin. It just, it just amazes me how these accents continue and how these accents, the language that you use, the English that you use, locate you onto a map in England that for an American, we have some of that. You know, if you're, if, if during let's say the rise of new atheism, you want to kind of poke fun at someone, you might put on something like a southern drawl and say Jesus and evangelical. You've got tiny little bits of that, or you can poke fun at Boston, park the car by the curb. And, you know, you have a little bit of that in the United States, but nothing, nothing, nothing like it is in the UK. Here is a map from is a map of Africa from 1914. Just think about how different that is from the map of Africa today. And of course you can go to the Middle East, the fall of the Ottoman Empire and you can go to Asia, and the world has just changed dramatically. And, and what sort of the, the European, the recession of Europe from sort of via coloni, colonies dominating the rest of the world. And of course, in the post-colonial moment there was this, first there was sort of this euphoria of liberation. And, and then you know, we're free of our European oppressors or we're free of our European overlords, but then suddenly the shock of, well, how will we then govern? And is Nigeria actually one country? Is India actually one country? And then you had all the deaths in that. And so the, it's amazing to me how this facile narrative of liberation from colonialism can endure. It can only endure via sort of the ignorance and low resolution of imagining that, oh, once you get rid of sort of the colonial oppressors, then everybody will be happy. And Wakanda will just break out all over Africa. Well, hasn't happened. And the realities are extraordinarily complex that colonialism offered some things and, and at times was full of brutality and racism and all of these, all of these other ugly things. And it's actually going to take decades and continue to take decades to sort of source this all out. Because of course, if all of these countries that dominated these colonies for years were so absolutely racist and horrible, why are the people trying to get from their former colonies into those countries now? And of course there are lots of justifications to get rolled around this way or that way, but well, there you go. And so, but this again is part of the recession of civilizational Christianity. In North America, the civil rights movement in many ways was the last great awakening. Martin Luther King Jr., whose theological education, it's worthwhile doing a little bit of reading in terms of the theological education of, of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. He very much was being educated in the middle of the 20th century in sort of mainline American Christianity. That was sort of a combination of liberalism and neo-orthodoxy. And I can't really go into all of those things, but, but also sort of a keeping an eye on, keeping an eye on Gandhi and of course what had happened in terms of the, the end of the Raj in India and how Gandhi sort of appropriates Jesus and Tolstoy into Gandhi's own sort of liberation movement. But then again, you have the partition, which of course grieved Gandhi's soul because Gandhi, you know, sort of believed too that, well, once we get rid of the, once we get rid of the Raj and have this soul power, then, you know, you can pull, pluck how many songs from the counterculture, even as late as John Lennon's imagined that, well, once we just sort of get rid of all of this civilizational Christianity and these oppressors, well, then it's again, it's just going to be Wakanda everywhere and everybody's, and everybody's little ethnic tribe. And it didn't happen. So Martin Luther King Jr. very much appropriates the, I Have a Dream speech makes absolutely no sense without the Declaration of Independence. Martin Luther King Jr. speaks about the promissory note of the Declaration of Independence. And so what you have is this movement to actually say liberalism promised better than it delivered for African Americans in America, for Hispanics in America, for Asians in America, for even Jews and Roman Catholics in America. Remember in mid 20th century in the United States, you have Protestant Catholic Jew. What the heck is PVK doing here, Grizz? This is a history lesson. This is a history lesson. That's right. Now you're getting to see how the sausage is made. So what he does though is he takes many of these ideas that were very much around in WASPy elite circles of American Christianity and mobilizes the African American church. Now in the African American church, they did have status as well. And so a lot of you are big fans of Thomas Sowell, who in many ways is someone who, you know, he's in his 90s now, someone who continues to embody this older tradition of African American culture that really tried to aspire and achieve within the old civilizational Christianity framework. And that sort of reaches its peak in the civil rights movement. But then of course, the civil rights movement is just before the counterculture. And it's, I'm so frustrated because of Christian American historians aren't writing the history that really matters. Like, like putting together the relationship between the civil rights movement and the counterculture, because they're deeply connected. But of course, the counterculture, which is this deep populist movement, which brings about this sort of new wave of Christianity, this born again Christianity, you can see hints of it in the Jesus Revolution movie, although that's very much a Hollywood movie and very much a love story. But there's enough in there that you can see some of that mythology and understand some of what came to become evangelical American Christianity with big stages and big sound and electric guitars and popular music and skinny jeans preachers. All of that, all of that is moving through this history. So when I was in Oxford, one of the interesting things was on one hand, I could, I, so my hosts were both Oxford alums, so they had their alumni card, so they could, they could take me into the chapels and a lot of the places in the colleges. I'd never heard of any of these places. So when I was in Oxford, one of the interesting things was on one hand, I could, I, so my hosts were both Oxford alums, so they had their alumni card, so they could, they could take me into the chapels and a lot of the places in the colleges. I never understood what Oxford was until I was there, and then it suddenly got my mind around, this whole city is a university and there are all these colleges behind walls and all of these colleges have their own characters and emphases. And so I went to the sacred conversation with Ian McGillchrist and everything's just sort of right there in Oxford. I heard the story that the reason Oxford didn't get bombed during the Second World War is that Hitler was planning on living there and he didn't want to bomb his future home. Because Oxford is just one of the coolest places you can, you can find in the UK. On one hand, you have sort of a crusader tomb and one of these chapels are sort of like these mini cathedrals, places where the students would worship. And so you have here civilizational Christianity sort of in stone in Oxford, but then there's this amazing museum in Oxford and my host told me that they now sort of in kind of an ashamed way hide the shrunken heads that all, of course, all the kids who grew up in Oxford and go to that museum, they want to find the shrunken heads because they got to see the shrunken heads. But, you know, we don't want to talk about, we don't want to talk about how we got all the stuff in our awesome museums in England during that colonial period where we wander into these countries that have ancient histories. And for many of the people there, they're like, yeah, that stuff is all around, ruins are everywhere. And the Brits are like, let's take some of this stuff home and let's create new cathedrals of transparent glass and steel arches. And let's fill them with fossils. And right there in Oxford in the stones and the steel and the glass and the shrunken heads and the fossils, you can see this turn, this transformation of civilizational Christianity into secularism. Well, we don't know how to deal with pluralism. So why don't we smuggle Jesus and his values this way? Let's cover them and say Protestant Catholic Jew. Let's cover it with a multicultural cloth and say it's multiculturalism, but really we're smuggling Jesus' values. Now, what happens in America, of course, is that a lot of Christians look at this and say, I don't like this at all. We're against civilizational Christianity. We're against cultural Christianity. We want the real thing. And you can find that in Chuck Colson's book Born Again, where I paraphrase a moment in the book where, of course, Chuck Colson is working the civilizational Christianity following Quaker President Richard Nixon, who's trying to continue to secure the imperial presidency. See, Nixon was going to easily win the 72 election, but he's paranoid. And so you have this crazy HBO has this hilarious show with Woody Harrelson having the White House plumbers. Actually, a hilarious little miniseries. But so, so of course Chuck Colson is Nixon's hatchet man. And he very quickly realized that Nixon is going to hang him out to dry. And Chuck Colson is realizing that he's going to go to jail for a dude that doesn't really care about him. And I think there's a this is going to get me into trouble. I think there's a whole bunch of people who work for Donald Trump who are having the Chuck Colson experience now because. Just ask some of the people who are already in jail, Donald Trump will let you go to jail for him. He really will. But he won't go to jail for you. And again, Christianity has a God who will die for his people. And most presidents and kings will not die for their followers. Just read John 10. The Good Shepherd lays down his life for his people. Anyway, so Chuck Colson is in the middle of this thing. I got to silence my watch because people be texting me and stuff. Let's see. Two hours ought to do it. And so Chuck Colson is basically D. He's just he's just coming to he's just coming apart. And there's these this group of civilizational Christianity and evangelical people in Washington, D.C. That sort of take him in and they introduced Chuck Colson to this countercultural sort of Bibliscist language of being born again. And and and Chuck Colson comes home one day to his wife and says, honey. I've become a Christian. And she basically looks at him and says, I thought we were Episcopalian. And so here you see this movement via the counterculture into this born again Christianity. Of course, Richard Nixon goes down. Gerald R. Ford from Grand Rapids, Michigan, as vice president, Caspiro Agnew had to resign because of his corruption. Gerald R. Ford, a very decent man, senator from Michigan, from Grand Rapids, Michigan, who had been in the Congress, becomes president. Ford runs against Jimmy Carter and Jimmy Carter is the first born again Christian in the White House in America. And Time magazine has him on the cover as born again. And this born again language just goes through the whole culture. And but that is a movement against civilizational Christianity because the civilizational Christianity in America was seen as corrupt, institutional and the fruit had been they had been cut flowers and Ion Hearst, Hersey, Ali's words. And as Glenn Scrivner said, the fruit had been separated from the roots. And so this born again movement tries to once again connect the fruit and the roots. But there's sort of a suspicion about civilizational Christianity and institutional Christianity. And then you get all of this talk that Christianity isn't a religion, it's a relationship. And so in American evangelicalism, there's very much this popular movement down into felt belief. But of course, this is along the backdrop backdrop of a lot of other cultural movements going on with respect to the sincerity movement, the authenticity movement. And so you have the rise of evangelical Christianity and the suspicion of civilizational Christianity. A lot of this has its roots in the modernist fundamentalist fight because prior to Darwin and Freud and Marx, basically universal history could be sort of broadly assumed. But these fossils led people to imagine that, well, did Adam did Adam name the T. rex? Did Adam ride a dinosaur where the dinosaurs killed in the flood? You can already see the roots of where was the Grand Canyon created by Noah's flood? You have all of these questions. You have geology and biology and all of the sciences. And so then there's a split in Christianity between the modernist and the fundamentalist. And the modernists, who are still sort of working the civilizational Christianity line, say, you know, you can't really trust the Bible for science or for what we call history and what they mean is sort of modern correspondence, physicalist history. But you can trust the Bible for morality and you sort of have the upper and lower registers begin to separate. And the fundamentalists see intuitively that this is going to break something. And so they sort of double down, but they double down in a modernist way and say, oh, no. And then you get like the six day creationism and a whole bunch of things that, of course, had been conversations throughout Christianity for a very long time, but they double down on the physicalism. And so both modern Christians, modernist Christians and fundamentalist Christians double down on physicalism. And that sort of then becomes sort of a bizarro twin dynamic between the two of them. And this sort of so civilizational Christianity sort of holds, especially because of the Cold War and the fight against communism, because, of course, communism says that they are atheistic. And so in the United States, if we're going to fight communism, we're going to have our civilizational Christianity war. Notice the subtitle of Ion Hersey Ali's Peace and Unheard Civilizational War. Well, America was fighting civilizational war against the communist world. And part of what that meant was put God on our side. And so you sort of recruit the God of the Bible to be something like Thor for Infinity Wars, and you recruit that God to help fight godless communism. So you smuggle Bibles into Russia and etc., etc. There's so many pieces of this story. I mean, I haven't really touched the Protestant Catholic thing, which is a hugely important piece in why American civilizational Christianity was Protestant. And it's not that you were Catholic because the French were a threat and the Spanish were a threat and the French were Catholic and the Spanish were Catholic. So you sort of stayed in this Protestant thing. And there weren't that many Catholics in America, really, for much of a long time. 9-11, of course, dramatically changes the landscape. And you have the rise of new atheism. And so, you know, John W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. W. And so, there's a veil of secularism over civilizational Christianity happening that it just seemed uncouth to say too many things against Islam. Now, that gets complex too because actually this veil of colonial secularism that had promoted civilizational Christianity in a very sneaky way had been, in my opinion, continuing to impact both Judaism and Islam and Hinduism. And so, in many ways, the right kind of Muslim is one who has sort of implicitly adopted a lot of values of Western liberalism, which of course had a lot of Jesus values smuggled into them. So, when you see the rise of Islamic fundamentalism that is self-consciously anti-liberal, and again, Ayaan Hirsi Ali is the one who is vocalizing a lot of this stuff, it's anti-liberal. And so, suddenly you have civilizational warfare, but when someone like Sam Harris wants to go on Bill Maher and talk against Islam, well, all of that waspy institutional thing says, no, no, religions are all the same. There's this amazing moment in the Unheard interview that is behind the paywall on Unheard where someone basically tries to once again promote multiculturalism, and Ayaan Hirsi Ali isn't having it because she says, no, it's kind of a lie. Now, I think that's an overstatement. I think it's actually more nuanced than that. But the reality is that the major world religions have been impacting each other. And what has happened is that I think in very subtle ways, Jesus has been winning. And Jesus has been winning not only against some of the other major world religions, but Jesus has been winning by infiltrating the other major world religions. And they have to sort of adopt these values that have been filtered through liberalism to actually be able to live in the democratic West. A video coming out maybe this weekend, maybe Monday, is a thought I had watching John Verveke on the sacred YouTube channel. If you haven't found that yet, some people found it and said, Have you watched this interview with John Verveke? No, I hadn't heard about it. It's a tiny little channel, some Brits. They have their little organization, and they have a really sharp woman who is doing these interviews. And it's like, she's taking my shtick. She's asking them all about their childhood. I can't believe she's made that move. One of the best John Verveke interviews out there. And John, you know, he talks about the fact that sort of he himself is a very shy person. And actually, Ian McGilchrist talks about this in the other interview where you sort of take on a persona, because McGilchrist says he's shy as well. Sort of take on a persona, and you perform as a university professor. But part of what's happening with John is now that, especially in a format like YouTube, he has to be personal and transparent, because that's that authenticity, that culture of authenticity sort of pervades YouTube. And so he talks about his story. And as he was talking about, and he was talking about the fundamentalist Christian community in which he grew up in, it really started to impact me this relationship between, again, John's theme of domicide and fundamentalism. And so, you know, a lot of what happened in the colonial period was domicides large and small, remapping of people groups, nationalisms both as an aspiration, but also as something which the colonial powers tried to disrupt, and you have a tremendous amount of domicide. And domicide, and you can lose both your physical home, your cultural home, your religious home, your biological home, your social home. These are fertile grounds for various fundamentalisms, because fundamentalisms are very energetic, often a little bit traumatic, and And so I think actually binary attempts to really solidify a new home, and to give that new home bright, strong walls and rules and borders and enforcement. And so I think actually domicide and fundamentalisms work together, and he talked about his mother's story a bit, and how she basically had a choice of leave the community or double down, and that's what you see with fundamentalisms. And so when, you know, the deep shocks of Darwin and Freud and Marx and sort of colonialism not really being able to live up to its Christian aspirations, breathes a lot of fundamentalism. And you can understand the rise of fundamental Islam in the collapse of the Caliphate and the destruction of the Ottoman Empire. That was not just the end, you know, the Ottoman Empire losing a war. It was the end of a civilization that had been dominant for, you know, 1300, 1400 years. And that's just fertile ground for the rise of the kind of Islam that re-emerged then in the crucible of the 20th century, which really came into the world stage at 9-11. Now, this goes through cultures. You have this mass movements of people, you have the destruction of many universal histories, you have the meaning crisis, you have the necessity of a mythology to live in, and the rise of these, you also have technological change, you have the rise of these Hollywood fandoms of Star Wars and Harry Potter and Lord of the Rings. And what, so when you look at Ion Hersey Elise, now I'm going to have to check out her book Infidel. I'm sure there's lots of very cheap used copies on Amazon. But her story is this story. Her story is the story of an African girl who was living in sort of pre-radical Islam, which is deeply impacted by secularism and sort of the rules of liberal modernity. As a young girl, she can do this and don't do that, but then radicalized by the Muslim Brotherhood and then goes to the West to avoid an arranged marriage and discovers in the Netherlands, I mean, the Netherlands in some ways has for a very long time been the quintessential country of Western liberalism. And there's reasons for that. The Dutch pioneered many of these ideas, the Dutch pioneered capitalism, the Dutch pioneered freedom of religion. There's a good biography of Roger Williams and the founding of Rhode Island, which I read years before any of the Jordan Peterson stuff, which part of what happens is that you, you know, during the English struggles over religion, the English Civil Wars, a lot of religious refugees go to the Netherlands because the Netherlands has this tradition of tolerance. And one of the things that sort of emerges from that are these ideas of religious liberty and those ideas of religious liberty go to America and New Holland. And they're also propagated then by people like Roger Williams in America who, who founds ideas of religious liberty. And so here in the United States, you have, you actually had churches of states, but remember states are these little provincial like things in the United States. And so you have the strange history of states and then the federal government. And so you have eventually by the early part of the 19th century, no more state churches, the state church of New England, of Massachusetts was the last one to give up, give up its state church. But, but then again, you have this sort of implicit in America, the civilizational Christianity. And so when young Ion Hersi Ali goes to the Netherlands, she's like, yeah, atheism, duh, of course, look around you. She can't quite see through the secular veil to the civilizational Christianity underneath and she said this is all atheism. And of course she sort of drinks the new atheist Kool-Aid and thinks that, oh, the problem is religion. No, no, no, you just haven't understood the subtle turns that secularism did to sort of smuggle Jesus ethics and Christian ethics and Western Christian ethics into civilization. And of course, Tom Holland sort of mostly not working. You can probably develop a really nice meme for this. It's sort of a Scooby Doo meme. Here you have the monster and you know, you pull the mask off the monster and it's Jesus. That's been spooking the kids in the mystery machine. Yeah, and her director gets murdered. That's right. So there's all of this going on. And so Ion Hersi Ali is the one who's sort of been living this. And then again, if you listen to the unheard, spend the $5. I mean, unheard, you can give me a finder's fee. I don't want to find her fee unheard. Just I'll have a conversation with Freddie Sayers. How about that unheard? If you want to say thank you for all the for all of the subscriptions I'm sending to unheard, Freddie Sayers, look me up on Twitter. Let's talk. Let's bring the five bucks to listen to that interview or wait because probably in a month, they'll put it on YouTube. It's an amazing interview where she talks about the fact that when she was sort of touring with the A-list, the Four Horsemen of New Atheism, and Muslims were sort of breathing threats of murder to her. And she's coming out as this new atheist and she's getting messages from Christians saying, I'm praying for you. And she's like, she doesn't know what to think about that. And then she has a meaning crisis. She did. So Dave Rubin did a whole bunch of these interviews alongside of ARC. You can always tell because they're in this little gray box. Dave Rubin did an interview with her. It's not the greatest interview, but one of the things that she says in that interview is she says, well, last time you saw me, Dave, was I was depressed. And she talks about that quite candidly. And I don't know why all y'all can't be Americans where we just pour our hearts out onto the world. She says, well, this is kind of my personal story. So I don't know if it'll help anybody. And it's like, no, this is the story I'm here for. This is why we ask people about their stories because she says basically she was depressed. She was going to counselors. She was drinking too much. And I'm sitting there listening to this and I'm thinking this is like 500 randos conversations that I had been having. She's having nihilistic depression and a meaning crisis. She's going to, but she, of course, has the resources. She's living in Northern California, which is, of course, the best place in the world to live. I'm sorry. It still is. Ben Shapiro. California still is great. And she's going to therapist after therapist. And basically, one therapist finally says to her, you're spiritually bankrupt. You're you. You probably she she prescribes a religion. You know, you need a religion. And and she says, hey, I had that God stuff. You know, God would, you know, wanted to put me into an arranged marriage and cover me from head to foot and and alter parts of my body and and keep me locked in a house without a driver's license. And, you know, keep me from an education, yada, yada, yada, yada. And so the therapist says, well, why don't you try making up a God to worship? Hopefully post Freudian here. You're exactly right, Nathan. You're exactly right, Nathan. Grim Grizz once wants to know what I'm doing in this video. Just want to recognize that you're articulating right now as a product of six years of relentless ministry. That's exactly what I'm doing, Nathan. You nailed it. And and so, OK, so maybe Freud's right. And maybe, you know, we just make up gods of our own. OK, make up a god of your own. All right. Well, you know, drinking hasn't helped. Antidepressant hasn't helped. You know, thousands and thousands of dollars of therapy hasn't helped. Well, why not? You know, you sort of have you sort of have. I was going to say, Nable, it's not Nable. It's the Syrian general. Come on, put it in the comments section. Kings, first King 17. It'll bubble up. You know, he's got leprosy and he's got a Jewish slave girl that he probably grabbed in a raid. And she says, there's a prophet in Israel, Elisha, who can heal you. And so he goes down there and. You know, and the the prophet can't see you now. I'm just a servant. He says, go dunk in the Jordan. Naaman, thank you, Anthony. Thank you, Anthony. Thank you, Anselm. Naaman, it's saving throws bonuses for you guys. You get grid grizzle roll the saving throws for you. Go ahead, Grizz, roll the saving throws. Naaman and Naaman's first he's offended. He's like, aren't there better rivers in Syria? And then the slaves say to him, hey, look, you're already down here. If he had asked for a hard thing, wouldn't you have done it? So then he goes and dunks in the Jordan and he's clean. And as another meeting with Elisha, who says, yeah, I understand you're subject to a tyrant. And so when we're in the tyrants temple and you have to bend the knee for the tyrant, God understands. I and Hersi Ali is I mean, this is life threatening. And so she starts making up a god. And of course, she was raised in Islam and has been in the West long enough. And here's the thing. What C.S. Lewis says about an atheist can't be too careful about their reading. What's so funny is that I love the way Alastair McGrath and Justin Briarly are sort of turning the table on atheism with how Dawkins made me a Christian and the surprising rebirth of Christianity, because all of these atheists reading the Bible for material are reading the Bible. That's just how sneaky of a smuggler Jesus is. He smuggles himself all over the place. You just if you really want to avoid Jesus, C.S. Lewis was right. And so she's making up her god and she begins to realize. He's her god is looking like Jesus. Thank you, Grizz. So here you're here. Your savings throws heart 14 wisdom 20. This video is going to have no impact at all on any of you. Yeah, that's right, Anthony. It's almost like he's the logos. And then, of course, once she realizes that the god she wants to worship is Jesus, then it's like, well, you're going to stay home and watch him on Netflix. Or do you want to actually embody? Remember, embody. I got to I got to get some of Grizz's branding in here. Remember, embody. Why don't I go to church? So her and her husband are going to church. I talked to someone who was backstage before that panel discussion. And Jordan and the panel and a few other people were in the room talking. And she basically she basically outed herself to the group and said, I, I'm a Christian. And everyone was like, what? I didn't know her story well enough to understand the impact of that. But the guy who told me the story does. And people are like, what? You were you were friends with the four horsemen. You did the tour. You were on stage. You wrote a book called Infidel. You were promoting atheism as a way of promoting this civilizational Western Christianity with this veil of secularism on top of it. And now you've taken the veil off and there's Jesus under the mask. Yeah. And and I know when when when it when the news broke, I mean, the eighth, the Church of Atheism was freaking out like, well, it's so funny watching the atheist. It's so funny watching the atheist lecture us about who is and isn't a real Christian. And it's it's good. I guess it's I guess it's turnaround for Jordan Peterson telling Sam Harris. He's not a real atheist. Oh, we want to go to church with the people we live with. And we live in ourselves. That's true. That's true. That's why Christianity spread so quickly in prisons. Think about that. So here she is. And and now, of course, she's still the same person. And and and people that, you know, didn't like her politics before will continue to not like her politics now. OK, it's fine. People get it. I mean, here's the thing in America, there's Christians all over the place. So Christians fight with Christians about politics. At least some of the last surveys that I did before sort of the disruption of twenty fifth, twenty sixteen Christians, people who identified Christians voted in equal numbers for Democrats, Democrats and Republicans. So Christians will fight about their politics. So but, you know, so Glenn Scrivener was honest on his video talking about it again. You just name it, Tom Holland. It's the Tom Holland pill. I mean, he's Tom Holland is and I knew it when I read his book and when I saw and I listened to him, I thought Tom Holland is going to be one Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson. People who are sort of under the secular veil in many respects are going to be the most effective evangelists in the West right now. And they continue to be. But in America, civilizational Christianity, that fight is sort of going under the flag of dread Christian nationalism. Well, why? Because civilizational Christianity in America isn't about to be reconstructed because, of course, the main ecclesiastical player of civilizational Christianity in the West was the mainline church and the mainline church has basically been committing suicide for the last 50 years. Sorry, mainliners, just saying. And what's going to happen in the mainline is that so many people are going to leave the church and some of the mainline is going to get so ridiculous that in the end, those really stubborn mainline Christians who are real Christians are going to inherit the church because they're going to be the only ones left there. The evangelicals in the 80s and 90s have tried to sort of step into the mainline. But I think Aaron Ren, I think Aaron Ren is a prophet in this because he has sort of noted that there are some deep structural reasons why evangelicals can't really replace the mainline. And it has a lot to do with elites versus populists. And evangelicalism has long been a populist religion. And, you know, I in many ways, I'm an evangelical. Now, Christian foreign people are just sort of always uneasy with that because in the 1920s and 30s, the Christian foreign church was very suspicious of Methodism, Methodism, and very, very suspicious of the Christian foreign church was always just sort of a tweener with respect to these things. But yeah. And so this conversation in North America with respect to Christian nationalism is sort of balled up with this civilizational Christianity thing. And whereas, you know, when they do the Ark Conference in London, nobody gets nervous because nobody really takes them seriously because, you know, looking for Christians is like looking for hen's teeth. Christians are all sort of hiding. And so the fact that the Ark Conference happened in London is very much a piece of this. And it's going to be really interesting to see where they do it again in February of 2015 because they said at the conference, the next the follow-up Ark Conference is going to be in 2015, February. So where's that going to be? If it happened in America, it would be a totally different conference. So I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. What's going to happen to Ark? I don't know. But that's so civilizational Christianity in America. It's a very different conversation and it's a difficult one because the history of civilizational Christianity in America is different from the history of civilizational Christianity in Europe. But I think that is a lot of what we are seeing. And there's a lot going on. There's a lot. It's in competition. Is the Ark II is in competition with the Symbolic World? No, 2015. The Symbolic World Conference is in 2014. That's right. Yeah, Jacob. Jacob. Jacob, Jacob, Jacob. Jacob. All right. So yeah, that's the end of my historical lecture that sort of grim gris. Didn't quite know what to do with. So I took an hour for that. Well, that's not too bad. That's not too bad. So questions you can you can you can ask a question and just put question in all caps or something or do a super chat. Those are always easy to see because the super chats are starred. So if you have a question, let me know. Yeah, 102 watching 24 likes. What's wrong with you people? Don't you know? If you want other people to watch your likes, you know, I don't say like and subscribe all the time in my videos because. But if you want more people to find this, just hit the like button. That's that's how you that's how you vote for other people finding something. Hit the like button. That's how YouTube works. All right. So TV case watchers are. Yeah, some rabbis are atheists. Just ask Jacob. Jacob will tell you, Jacob, hey, hey, that drives Jacob crazy. Smash that like button. Well, you actually have to like to press like. See, hates Hank is my Hank is my hate watcher. All right. What do you think about a six day week? I don't understand the question. I seven days you shut six days you shall labor and do all your work on the seventh is the Sabbath to the Lord your God in it. You shall not do any work. You that neither you nor your son or your daughter, your man servant or your maid servant. And you're not going to make your animals work either. So I don't know what you mean by a six day week. Now, I on her see Lee, you know, in her in her. And her little chat there basically, you know, did not come out as a fundamentalist said, you know, I don't want to fight about six day creation or any of these things. She's she's there for the civilizational Christianity. But it's also sincere in her Christianity because again, it was there to address her meaning crisis. So in many ways, she's a rando. She could have shown up on this channel and, you know, except she didn't come through the Vanderclay Peterson Peugeot pipeline. All right. What do we got here? Reading Dawkins letter to that person. In person. OK. Grim Grizz is dropping names. Thank you, Kale. Thank you. They're not all haters like Hank out there, even though I am wearing denim that that nuclear that Twitter nuclear bomb video that that Kale put in with with Friday that that that one. Yeah, that one hit its payload. Did Dawkins write a letter to her? I don't know. Question. All right. Can you recap the week's videos quickly? All right. I'll try to do that. Let's see. I don't have any branding to stitch in here like Grim Grizz does. I hope to be able to I hope to be able to do videos as well as Grim Grizz does. All right. Content. Here's here's my content. All right. Let's let's share the screen. Here we are. All right. Here's the back end of my channel. Where where were we? OK. This was back in England and this was back in the USA being jet lagged in the night and maybe I'll make myself small here. P.V.K. back in sack Grim Grizz. Philip a Stroud that video. Maybe I can actually if I go to my channel your channel and then I go to videos. And maybe this is the easiest way to do it. So there's some members only videos and. So I got back in Sacramento and then I and when I got back I thought Grim Grizz did an awesome job on the. Sort of recapping Peterson. And so that was that was super helpful. And so then that video was sort of this little big snippet from from Grim Grizz. And actually Grim some people contacted me because a lot of the stuff you had in that video is stuff as you noted you can't find any more on Peterson's channel. So I mean like the cat cat and Peterson and a T-shirt talking to a reporter. I mean all of all of the stuff that we you know that we really that we really love. So and then I made the video on an arc and sort of the difference between Philip a Stroud and one of the elephants in the room in terms of the Weinstein's who are very much sort of. Getting increasingly post liberal Eric with his catastrophism which is very interesting. And then I I want to do some more Chris Williamson Chris has really been doing some great stuff. And so I took a little video from that and again doing a lot of C.S. Lewis stuff. They did my rough draft for Sunday. I wasn't real happy with my rough draft because I had very little time in it. I had the Freddie and Paul show. It's. So when I started this doing this video five years ago a lot of people thought well my church is going to fill up with people from my church is going to fill up with people from the video thing and that didn't really happen of course Rick came right away and Rick's been here the whole time. But so our pianist is from the Internet and dog bark is here and so it's kind of slowly happening and in January when we start doing every Sunday morning estuary meetings. We'll see what happens to little living stones who knows. And then my Sunday school class on Sunday and that's I'm I'm thinking about moving my Sunday school class online and putting it within the pay area and then maybe maybe letting the videos out afterwards but something like that because I love doing the Sunday school class and I personally would really miss it. The problem is that there's often only three or four people in for Sunday school and if I can have eventually 20 30 40 50 80 people in for estuary on Sunday morning maybe then that's a better use of Sunday morning. I don't know we still have the church service obviously at 11 o'clock but so figuring that out. And then yeah the CS Lewis addresses storytelling entropy like stories of old which is a terrific channel and sort of movie reviews. There's a ton of videos on YouTube about sort of the fall of Disney and Marvel and all of that but but he's right and that there's a bigger crisis civilizationally and storytelling and that's really where Pujo and his fairy tales and even arc telling a better story sort of fits into this. And so that's that's a that's something that I'm thinking about and then because the rough draft went so poorly I just decided to drop the Sunday sermon because the Sunday sermon I thought went well but the sound on the Sunday sermon is not really good. Rick and I have tried a bunch of ways to try to fix that but we've never really managed to. And then I had my conversation with rave which was great. It was it was so good to spend time time with rave at the conference and we hung out a lot together. I'm going to also do a video with Nathan Jacob. Nathan Jacobs and I hung out a lot together at the conference too. Also did some hanging out with Glenn Scrivner so I'm going to have him on. And then there's this group of artists from the conference that were so cool and so awesome that I'm in a I'm in a WhatsApp chat group with them still from the conference. So I'm going to have them and there's a whole I've got a real long list of people plus the randos that the conversation thing is really backlogged and I can't really do much next week because next week schedule is chaotic for me because it's Thanksgiving. So I have to get all my Sunday work done first and then so then I did the then I saw so I got home and and then somewhere along the line I caught Bill Maher and I just caught that Jordan was on Bill Maher again on HBO. So then I looked that up and of course the clips of all the sort of blue church stuff made it to YouTube. But the best moment was the moment that I wanted to capture. So I made a transcript of that moment in the show and you're not going to see it unless you have access to Bill Maher show on HBO. But I thought I haven't seen Jordan like that since 2018. So that was that was that was there. And then so David I had promised a randos conversation to and then everything came up. I had doggy prison puppy prison at all these things and then the trip. And so then when I got back, it's like I got to get David as randos slot. So I contacted David and then we had a lovely conversation. But, you know, I hate to say it for those of you who love the randos conversations. I think a lot of those randos conversations are going to be in the three dollar area just because a conversation like I had with David and like I've had with Laura and with some others. They're not going to be out on the open Internet, understandably and reasonably so. So the three dollar area allows me to share them with people, whereas before they wouldn't have been shared at all and you wouldn't have had any. So there are a lot of randos conversations that never saw the light of day because people have to talk about their stuff and people have to talk about their families. So that's in the membership section. I thought that was a great conversation. David was a lovely person to talk to. And then the I on her see Ali thing really broke on Twitter. And I thought, I want to give some perspective to that. And so I made that video. Hank, you don't smoke weed. I know you're you're an old dude who's very sane. You don't smoke weed. So so then I did that video on I and her see Ali. And actually, I did a bunch of these videos early. And so I've been dropping videos into the no wait, no ad section of the membership section. For those of you who absolutely can't wait to see what's coming up on the horizon. No wait, no ads is the level for you. And and then, of course, and then when I was talking to someone on the phone about all of this arc stuff and he said there's an interview with I and her see Ali behind the scenes. And I was behind the paywall and on her and I thought, paywalls and I'm doing it myself. And so then I thought, well, how much would that cost? So then I went to the website. It was only five dollars a month. And since unheard is has become sort of one of my primary sources for stuff, I watched it and it just blew my mind. It's an amazing interview. And again, five dollars a month is what unheard and asking for for their membership. At least in the U.S. I don't know what it is in the UK. Yeah, because all these atheists were like, well, it's it's you know, basically, she's playing a political game. No, when you listen, it's not a political game. It's it's personal. It's sincere. It's authentic in the authenticity and what we mean by authenticity. So and when I saw that, I had to make a sort of little follow up video, which I did to it. And that's the little four minute video that follows. And then in the membership right now is the video I made on the relationship between domicile and fundamentalism. I just give you a little teaser on that. That's currently in the no wait, no ads video that'll stay there at least till Saturday or maybe Monday. Sometimes I do the rough draft to six a.m. Saturday morning and then maybe I want to do another video that weekend. It depends how many videos I get done today. If I get two additional videos done today, then maybe I'll drop it on Saturday. If I only get one video done today, maybe I'll drop it on Monday. I had no videos done today. I'll definitely drop it on Monday. And then I had done this. The video that came out this morning, Jordan Peterson becoming a Christian isn't exactly what you think it means. And there's a video out there that algo served up to me. The Tammy Peterson Rosary testimony. You got to watch that video. It's beautiful. I know some Protestants will get triggered by it, but it's it's because it's a deeply Catholic story and it's told by a Catholic clearly. But it's a beautiful video and it's it's it's just lovely. And there are so many videos on YouTube about Jordan Peterson becoming Christian. I mean, it's so click baity and I get so tired of. OK, he becomes a Christian. And then what? Then all the Christians are going to fight over what branch of Christianity is in. So, no, I'm not done with questions. I'm just taking a long time on one question, which is what I always do with my questions. So now I'm going back over the questions. Um, um, I didn't. OK, yeah, see, Phlebas asked me to recap the video, so I'm back there. What about atheist Christians? How do they fit into this? I very quickly. I very quickly saw. Let me get rid of this. I very quickly saw in the randos conversations and then my first trip to Europe, especially because again, the dynamics in Europe, it's easier to become a Christian in America. It just is. I had many people coming up to me in Europe and saying things like basically they sort of want to be a Christian, but they can't. They're struggling with and I'm going to use this word, which I don't like. They're struggling with the supernatural stuff. And so that's kind of what the atheist Christians are. And, um, and, you know, is Tom Holland in that camp? I don't know. Is Douglas Murray in that camp? Probably is Louise Perry and Mary Harrington in that camp. I don't know. But and I and her see Ali, but she's in America, so it's easier to become a Christian in America. It just is. It's easier to be a Christian in America. I am now regularly in prayer for European Christians. Because it's different there. I can see that. And so I pray for you. I do they go to church? They should. I think there's going to be a lot of atheist Christians, but these are going to be different atheist Christians from there is a there's a minister in United Church of Canada who I did a couple of videos about her because of John Sook. She was an atheist Christian. John Sook considers these are different from sort of the deconstructing Christians who are they maintain some formal mainline Christianity, even though they don't believe in God. That's another face of civilizational Christianity. But I think whereas those people are sort of moving away, you talk about centered set and bounded set, those people are moving away from Christianity. These atheist Christians are moving towards Christianity. Thank you, Carlo Carlotta. Thank you. OK. I love the center. Those of you who don't know what's going on with respect to the denim stuff. It's just an in joke that we've been fighting on Twitter, the denim, denim wars. We've been having fun with it. Let's see. Oh, OK. I'll just pick the people who did you get a chance to explore Edinburgh much. Yes. I had an amazing host in Edinburgh who showed me all around. We went up to the castle. We walked through the streets. It was so cool. Edinburgh, I even though I can't say it, Anselman, I'm sure you could correct me. Anselman, I would have loved to have met you face to face. I wish you could have come out to the estuary meeting. They're working. They're working on starting an Edinburgh estuary. We had wonderful people come out. We had such a lovely meeting there. But yeah, I did get a chance to explore Edinburgh and it's totally cool. The castle and everything. Really cool. All right. Question. As someone who's experienced around evangelicals, I don't see hope for many in red states and over the next 50 years will continue to decline. South Africa is America's future for Christians. I don't know. I think I'm interpreting South Africa, not in terms of Christians have to move to South Africa, but in terms of the, you know, what sort of started out as the truth and reconciliation, you know, the moment with Desmond Tutu and all of that has not worn well. And there are a lot of tensions in South Africa, a lot of racial tensions. It's by no means sort of Wakanda hasn't broken out in South Africa either. And no, evangelicalism in America is a very large complex thing and there are many, many different kinds and temperaments of evangelical. It's a thriving ecosystem and I don't think it's going anywhere. Doesn't isolated civilizations lead to pagan city state? Would a Christian civilization require everyone to be interconnected so that the grand Christian narrative can be seen? See, this is the real question, because again, if you look at my Arc Day One video, I continue to have real questions as to whether you can sort of revivify the 19th century civilizational Christianity today. And I think, you know, so on the clip, I played a little bit of John Anderson, who basically says you can't go back. And he's right, you can't go back. Now, I think new attempts at it are going to be ancient modern. Well, some of the most interesting civilizational Christians today are those without civilization, such as orthodoxy and Catholicism. Orthodoxy and Catholicism know how to run civilizational Christianity because they did. Those also broke down and Protestantism is a direct result of the breakdown of Catholic civilizational Christianity. And it formed new kinds of civilizational Christianity. And I think we may in fact see some new types of civilizational Christianity, but they will be different. Now, I remain a millennial, not post-millennial, and I think all of our strivings in this age will never finally achieve what will only be achieved by the second coming of Jesus Christ. There, I said it. I still believe in the second coming. I'm an Apostles Creed Christian. What can I say? I believe in the resurrection of the dead. So, in this age, this age, I talked about this briefly in some videos. I think in this age, there's a limit to what this age can accomplish, which is why the age to come is coming. And it is deeply tied to the resurrection of the dead and a new heaven and a new earth. See, call me a fundamentalist. Question. Put your prophet hat on. Does Africa or Asia transition into secularism in the future like the West? Or if it overlapped to re-enchantment of the West? That's a super interesting question because Christianity is relatively new in Asia and Africa. Relatively new. Because, of course, it's gotten to Asia and Africa in very ancient forms, but it's getting in now in new Pentecostal and Catholic forms. One thing to watch will, of course, be China. So China has, and India really for that matter, China and India are both very large states that are also fragile states. And, of course, it was under the Raj that India was united, and then in the partition it broke up along religious lines. But I think, I don't know much about contemporary Indian politics, but it seems like Modi and that whole movement is trying to use Hinduism to hold India together, which makes sense. I mean, that's what religions do. If you play civilization, you know, in some earlier versions of civilization, that if you are religious civilizations, you can transition versus through governments easier because you have a deeper strata that holds your people together. So what happens when Christianity finally defeats communism in China? What will that look like? What will that version of civilizational Christianity look like? It will look different from the European versions. It will be Chinese. It will have some Confucianism in it. I don't know. What will African civilizational Christianity look like? I don't know. In other words, I know a bunch of you think that civilizational Christianity is just one thing, but no, there have been many civilizational Christianities, and we can see the three of them, Catholic civilizational Christianity, Orthodox and Protestant. So what will new versions look like? I don't think we have any idea, but I think they're coming. Jacob, if you didn't put question in, I'm not answering. See, see, knows how to answer a question. As someone who experienced. Okay, that was a question again. Question from Nathan. How do folks move forward from populism of evangelicalism when the alternative seems to be a pope who doesn't believe in Christian marriage? Yeah, you know, and, and let me say something about how these transitions happen. Remember, embody. We want what's best for you, and you're actually your body wants what's best for you. Evangelicalism is going evangelicalism and low church American Christianity emerged out of the front tier experience where I think Nathan hatch has this right. I'm sorry, not Nathan hatch Mark know where Christianity moved out over the West ahead of the church, and so the Bible became sort of this. Replace the institution. These transitions happen slowly, but evangelicalism is going to continue. It's kind of happening in some Anglican spaces. So, Chris Green, is that his name, someone that Nate Hile really wants me to talk to. He's a Pentecostal Anglican in the Bible Belt, the American Bible Belt, just just just just think about that. So, yeah, you know, Christian anarchism is going to have a piece of this. No, it's things are going to be weird. I think that will emerge. And so I don't know a lot about the Orthodox Church. I'm deeply skeptical about how organized it is, especially in America. The Roman Catholic Church which is the most organized institutional of the three is having another crisis. Major split offs. I mean the thing about the Roman Catholic Church and that's such a strong container that all of its dramas happen inside and every now and then you get a spillover. So the Protestant churches are a spillover that were enormously successful, but there are many other spillovers in that reformational period and they continue to be spillovers out of the Roman Catholic Church, but its container itself is super strong. Yeah, watching the drama of you guys. It's tough. Job, you're only on number two. See, the thing is the secret is you got to start with a really young wife. My wife was 21 when I married her she was turning 22 that month. 21 I think about that now it's like wow I married a baby, but I was only I had just turned I was only 24 turned 25 I just turned 25 so we were young. And the key is after baby number three you you you have child labor in the home and the older kids help with the younger kids and your home school. That's how you do it. That's how you do it. The church has survived bad popes. Okay. Any more questions. Any more questions. So one of one of these days you guys are going to start looking at these thumbnails more carefully. How much long do you plan on going to that. Grim Gris has a lot. Grim you haven't done a lot of live streaming in the last couple of days I've kind of been missing my savings throws. I plan to go till noon. Is PBK done with questions almost I'm about to drop the link is PBK going to post a live stream link. Scale scale scale down down down. Oh question Aaron. Oh guys we need more Aaron in this corner. You know got Aaron's whole family. I think Lucas I think there's a I think I think he sent me an email and I think it got lost in my email. I have to look for it. But what a wonderful family. Where do you think the Constantine Kissens of the world will end there right now in that atheist Christian phase. How must they have felt during the discussion of religious themes at Ark. I think a lot of them are. There want to be closet Christians. And I think they're getting more and more comfortable with it. That's the redo of a question. I have not gotten through Cortez in the Aztecs yet. I do. Sneaky gris just the letter. Do you hear God tell you to do things. Sometimes. It gris I can't drop the link down to the questions you keep asking me. What is your take on Eric Weinstein's freedom of religion versus jihad. That if you haven't watched the trigonometry video with Sam Harris and Eric Weinstein it's a must watch. And then the other question and answer one too. It's really hard. The more I watch Eric Weinstein it's really hard to think you any of us can actually sort of follow where he's trying to lead. I'll say that. Yeah, I think that's right. China would need a Christian Constantine. Which would be super interesting. And I'm not sure how that would go with the West. How do we help international Christian communities given the struggles you had in the DR. You know I think Latin America is going to be just fine. They've got huge part of the difficult they have huge issues with corruption and I think actually. I think the. The Protestant ization of Latin America will be a big help. And as what often happens with these reformation movements. They also tend to purify the Mother Church. Oh I don't know. The Catholic Church has survived a lot. I think it'll survive even Hank. All right good. Okay now let me. I'm going to drop the link. There's the link. This little this little heart thing is in the way. Can I move that. So there's the link. So come on in if you'd like. The Catholics to China. Look how good it worked to me. I don't know. There's a lot of them Catholics have Catholics have done quite well in America. That's a whole nother topic for discussion. All right the link is pinned. There's Sam. Hello. And Grimm Grizz. All the usuals. I'm pretty good. Hey Grimm. Sam. I'm super super. I get to the Denham's dinner. You can't hear. We hear you Sam. All the regulars. Even Dr. Evil and his familiar. You can you can still keep us in intimate mode. And Shane. All right. Everyone's everyone's coming in. All right well y'all are coming in. What do you want to talk about. Oh my goodness. Even Hank. That's right. Pope. Orgin the first. Whoa. I'm here baby. The first papal ball. Kale. Is is we're calling for a new crusade. Since both Kale and Hank are here. They have to tell us what they think of Bishop Strickland. You're going to have to do better with your mic Jacob. I'm going to disagree. And that's OK. Oh why don't we do the. I guess you love you love him right Hank. Actually I like I like Strickland a lot. But when you call the Pope a heretic and you you you poke you poke at him. You know what you're going to get his attention. You know it's true. I'm going to tell you I had a salesman who called me a jerk. You know how fast he was out of the out of the company. I'm like me me pushing him out of the office. It's it that that's how it works. It's called the hierarchy. And if you if you don't like the hierarchy. You know what. Become a Protestant. OK. You Catholics have your own channels on YouTube. That's OK. OK. We're going to we're going to take grins. And I have already increased the average IQ by 20. Go ahead. Let's go. Oh I'm here baby. I'm all whipped up. I've had a tough day. Oh great. We got Hank. We got Hank on. Well I'm avoiding grading. So you know. All right. So we're going to do the estuary protocol here and Jacob what do you want to talk about. Sounds enough comfort. OK. Jake wants to talk about fountain of comfort. Sam what do you want to talk about. I on her see a Lee. Do we think that maybe her Muslim background made it actually easier for her to be one of these Christian atheists who could convert. And does she match something of a pattern how women normally somewhat lead these conversion movements. Good topic. Good. OK. Grizz what's your topic. Richard Dawkins did write a letter to her because he feels so betrayed. And I did read it out loud with my voice on my channel and that link I sent you in the chat inappropriately that that that that there's that drama of this whole thing is a fascinating topic to me that the betrayal of the atheist poster child the other the other and and how we all get to watch that narrative as it unfolds being a draw. All right. My good Shane what did you want to talk about. There's been quite a bit of discussion about the sort of the ground of being having having a relational sort of primacy whatever that is like that all of the things in the stuff come after the relational interactions with each other. And I'm just wanting to it would be awesome if we could talk about what what the implications of that are as we identify ourselves as part of a body specifically a church like what is what is that what is that relationship supposed to be like. OK. I hope you all are taking your notes because you know you have to vote amongst these things. I got to I'm going to give you a pass right now Aaron because you just joined in. Hank what do you want to talk about. Actually what what Sam talked about but maybe a little variation which is that I believe that Christianity is getting a lot crunchier very quickly. Oh good. What do you want to talk about. I'm just here to chat. Yeah. All right. Eric what do you want to talk about. I vote with Graham. I want to talk about the Aon and we can tie that into like the whole civilization and atheist first Christian views on the world. OK. Aaron what do you want to talk about. I just really like I know that we've talked about it a lot but I want to get very specific on the relation between this little corner and whatever is going on at Ark like like are we do we have anything to do with that really or is it very separate like this is different community is it part partly the same like I'm really grappling grappling with it. Yeah. Oh that's a good one. That's a good one. I don't know if it'll win. Dolly what did you want to talk about. Hello. I'm not sure if this is going to fit in with everything but something that's been on my mind lately is like selfishness or whatever that is and how to handle that and then also the topic of like but like a better way it's like gossip and how to sort of approach that and handle that in order to try and like open up a new sort of space for communication again so without too much conflict in between. But anyway I know that's vague but yeah. All right. Now well now I'm going to I'm going to this is a speed estuary here so you used to go with something on the table Mr. Paul. I am not I'm going to pass because because y'all I had my chance. I had my chance at the table for the first hour. So all right. Now you have to choose and it's not the savings throw it's the topic shoes shoes shoes Jacob Fedorecchi shoes. I think the arc one is actually the better one. All right. Sam choose. I'll vote against my own and vote with Aaron on the arc topic. OK. Grizz choose. I choose how the gossip of the atheist lady getting on the arc sort of hits most of our bases. Ah OK. Shane choose. I'm OK with the arc. All right. Hank choose. I'm big on the arc of the competent. Kale choose. Who am I to object. All right. I think I think Aaron comes in late with a spell binder and sweeps the table I think here arc and the TLC with some AHA mixed in. All right. Engage. Can we call her a half for the remainder. Aha. Sounds great. Nice. So Aaron use your topic flesh it out a little bit more for us. Well I should start with giving proper credits to David or Dave we know from the Germany Festival because I was actually in an online estuary with him where everyone shared like super personal stuff and it was very much necessary to talk about that. But he brought up this thing that he was like he was looking at Pascho talking and being in front of this huge audience and then kind of inspiring them but also being from the different link and we followed Pascho for years now so it all makes sense to us but what is really going on him talking to these people so I also just want to know like how do we the way that we understand and understand Jonathan Pascho's talk at Arc is so different from I don't know how he is perceived by other people so I just I just want to get clear on this is just like whoa huge win for this little corner because you know we're getting the numbers now or is that like no we need responsible growth and we should be very concerned with some kind of I don't know anti-world economic forum taking this over or is it there's really nothing serious going on because maybe this is I don't know you know this is not maybe they're not taking it as serious as we are as we think they're taking it so that's just a couple of questions I don't really have yeah I just want to know from other people what they think. Could I come in here with a comment I think that the respect level within the conversations that occurred at Arc is similarly encouraging to the respect level that we see in rooms like this it is a phenomenon in and of itself and there's something precious about that because we're leaving a door open to heresy to in like to all of the things that aren't permissible in the sanctuary of church and yet somehow and I have no idea how to juggle this we have to preserve and protect the sanctuary of that whatever that is that is the united commitment that we have to a more specifically described ideal and so there's a weird duplicity there we're called to respect and love each other as part of that ideal but on some level we have to say to people that aren't participating in that respect and love you're not in. So when Paul and Rafe were talking I was pulling my hair out partially. You don't have hair Jacob. Yeah that's what makes it hard. Partially because we talk about the heresy and you know having a space for heresy but the one heresy that neither one of them seem to be able to actually countenance is Dennis Prager's heresy of oh we actually need to do something we actually need to actually come to a political real life policy type of thing and the only way you can do that is when things actually get real which is what Rafe and Paul in my estimation were chafing at against the most. I think that there is some reticence especially for people who sort of remember the George W. Bush mid 2000s of what can feel like partisan political capture and manipulation of a inherently religious movement and I think that there is fear of that sort of thing because I wasn't at arc but even listening to the videos I'm like okay we've got two Republican current or former speakers of the House and pretty clear right wing alignment of basically any of the political figures if they had previously held office of some kind and it did feel a little bit kind of partisan and then sometimes it didn't and I think that I don't think TLC is partisan but I have sympathy for what you're saying Jacob that there might come time when things hit the fan enough where you need to pick a side and do something and that will involve politics at some level. It's when the rubber hits the road and things become real that suddenly you get conflict and this effete spiritual Gnosticism I have to say of oh we're all going to talk about things at a spiritual level where nobody's ox gets scored and nothing real happens is it's just sitting around talking and yuck. Well honestly Jacob the issue is there's going to have to be a lot of talking because there has to be integration before you can act because you're having two sides of a coin who were at each other's throats just 20 years ago now saying oh my gosh look what's going on so you're what you're seeing is people who are realizing that there's a civilizational issue here and a sense making issue and but the you know I put out one of Paul VanderKlaes as a comment and I actually meant this the Rockefeller Republicans left the Republicans they're with the Democrats now because as an old line Republican Reagan Republican the Rockefeller Republicans didn't believe in anything except money in their country club okay and what they did is they moved over to the Democrats who basically said yeah we'll give the lip service to certain things but we'll protect your money okay and actually Eric Weinstein does a better job of describing it than I even describe it but I saw it okay and now what you're having is the Republican Party having what I call crazy time they're trying to integrate people who never would have thought about becoming Republicans you have the Democrats now having people in who their parents and grandparents were rocked Republicans okay I'm just giving a very very top 30,000 foot and now you have to have conversations what does this integration look like as to what action will occur oh and as we're in the midst of a civilizational sense making crisis where basically everybody's looking at stuff and there's nothing you can believe on anything okay I mean I was at lunch with an old conservative said I can't watch Fox they're all bullshit right I can't want I'm talking to liberals or say I can't watch I had a client who's Jewish who's a rock-ripped liberal from Highland Park or Sam knows what that means saying I'm done with my party they're giving me BS okay what happens when you lose your religion first there's anger there's bitterness there's hurt right anybody who's deconstructed out of a religion usually I mean when Trinity closed you know I sent out a thing to my classmates and people who graduated 40 years ago are still pissed off at Trinity College and all I said finally it was you know Trinity wasn't great but get over it okay okay do you understand what I'm saying I mean angry right so I'm done I did catch a lot of it as relates to the TLC and Peugeot I think the T I see TLC as a flotilla of channel and I think both Peugeot and Verbecky are admirals admirals of their own flotillas at this point but what Hank highlighted might might cue into the evolution of what the TLC is because those deconstructing from the world religion are going through deconstruction and we're well versed in what it's like to deconstruct from your faith around the TLC so the nature of and function of the TLC is probably going to remain that like a place where deconstructing people like wash up on the shore and figure out where they're going to go from there yeah I was gonna say with regard to the arc like I said I think it's fascinating like if you look from a 30,000 foot view at what Peterson was and he was someone who sold Bibles to the atheists and now we got aha coming in as doing the same and they're trying to get them on the arc and they're leaning into that symbolism and metaphor as if they have a symbolic wizard on staff it's sort of interesting but what just the fear is that they're just they're just hegelian dialectic for the wef they're like you know there's no other forum for rich people to go come collude and network and wield their power and they needed an alternative to what that other bald guy the wef has was selling. Blouse. Yeah. Meanwhile they also see that like Barack's success with Netflix and how it's been so normalized it's like it's a specific the people who own Netflix is not what's considered there's lots of Republicans with Netflix subscriptions and so that needs an alternative and now also sorry one more one more the emergence of the alternative media such as Rumble and TikTok which is not at all addressed I think we at the TLC level of things are more best suited to fight the information war at the line of TikTok and the other platforms than the arc people but I think things will get interesting when so Jonathan Peugeot calls out one of the elephants in the room and I would imagine Jacob there are a lot of people talking about a lot of specific political things at that conference if you go back and watch Schellenberger and many of those other people you can see a lot of that Hank is right in that the sense making a lot of people are still do in the sense making process and you're not going to get specific until you do that sense making you sort of have a degree of orientation I think with respect to the TLC Jonathan Peugeot is kind of a revelation there and I think a lot of the people when Jonathan Peugeot got up and talked a lot all of us knew that because we had seen lots of that before but for a lot of people they're like huh we thought we were going to talk about oil and nuclear and political stuff and he's talking Plato I think the real question that I have from Aaron's prompt here is what happens when all of those people at those other levels discover us and because we've sort of had our own nice little corner where we can do our little nerdy sense making things and what happens when someone comes in and says I want to I want to give PVK a big salary so he can bring our audience into our movement that we'd like to weaponize towards a certain end how aware is arc of us Paul they brought me there I don't think that you nice I think the thing you guys are is fear everyone there is there because they're afraid of something's happening and they don't know what to do about it and they need a place to talk about it so expecting something to happen after this first one I don't really think is a realistic expectation that this is the initial contact everyone is introduced to each other essentially and what will happen over the next year before the next dark or whenever that is is the thing that will happen and by the time there's a second arc and people have every you know reform these groups and reshared ideas that's what I think you'll start to see this interplay of actually trying to do things but right now this is just everyone terrified and trying to you know exchange language I think the biggest thing that was accomplished was Paul Vanderklee finally understood he was sitting around the big boys table sitting around what sir please say again the big boys table Kale what do you got I think I agree I think I agree Jacob So Paul I have a question so all of the other speeches that were there I think you mentioned like some of the political speeches and I think Fox News was like brought up was it like one on one with Fox News or do you feel that maybe the emergence of the conference created some kind of spark that showed some kind of promise in their speeches that maybe isn't there in the ordinary Fox News watching or was it just the same and was it just Peugeot who was different I'm just curious what the whole spirit of our conference was I think I well I don't I think the political speeches landed like a lead balloon and I think the reason was what Jordan Peterson said in 2017 about lying preachers the politicians are being exposed as liars they are saying things that are designed to create a following and they are not speaking what they actually believe and people get a sense of that and so I thought the much more interesting places of the conference were people who like Jonathan Peugeot I mean Jonathan was clear there at the arc stage it was it was harder to understand Jonathan there for that 12 those 12,000 people but on the stage at the 1500 Peugeot was crystal clear and I think a lot of people are like oh and so but there's a lot of elephants in that room you know you had the Weinsteins were kind of you know what Rafe said which was very interesting was he'd like a conference where the Weinsteins are on stage Weinsteins are not on stage because I think that goes back to Sam's point that this is we're still in the sense making phase and you have to make you have to do sense making before you proceed to application and this is also an attempt to have a coalition and so you know you can you get a whole bunch of dogs together and they're all sniffing each other and that's there's a lot of that going on there too because there are a lot of people in the room that usually aren't in rooms together myself included I go into a room like that it's like these aren't my people and a lot of the Peugeot artists are like these aren't my people but yeah I'd be really surprised if those political figures come back to the next year yeah but but so so it's the other way around the political figures are definitely going to be there see GBTV was there that's sort of Britain's Fox News they're having a lot of drama right now but also some friends of mine were there they were running the they were running the video work for the political and media people Australia was so much more interested in that conference than anyone else which was super interesting more than Canada more than the United States it was a little bit on the radar for Britain but Australia was feeling it I need some Kale we brought things to the table all I've gotten out of him was yeah Paul was a big dog what do you make of everything we've put on the table Kale give me some well you ever seen the movie Clue I kept waiting for there to be some sort of announcement now that I have you all here you know but I don't know it just it felt kind of duddish from afar you know I don't know I don't know I'm sorry Graham I'm not on today I don't know if you can get a sense of the place from watching the videos because the videos frame it in a certain way and what I'm trying to give you is a sense of now I can't escape seeing it from my own eyes within the room which is why I'm going to be doing these conversations with people who are in the room but different wherever wherever you came to that room from where so example I ran into you know who billboard Chris is yes yeah billboard Chris goes around children cannot you know he goes around and gets and just wears the sandwich board and people come up to him and attack him he's on Twitter a lot and then the woman who founded Moms for Freedom in America she was there you know what that organization is yep they had that trans thing yeah so they were hanging out billboard Chris and they were hanging out and so you know they sit down at a table with me and it's like how do I explain to you what I do so I usually give it what you get real good at your three minute elevator pitch for estuary and but you know it's I think there are a lot of people who are looking at this little corner and thinking what but then once they get it then it's like can I use that it was like how do you tell those people that their world is about to end that's what that's what Eric Weinstein is for because that's all he did was walk around and say he should have had a sandwich board saying the end is near that's what Eric Einstein was doing but that's exactly the guy that if I went there I would want to hear speak and have interaction I'm going to tell you something the most boring Peterson is when he had when he when he's interviewing politicians okay can I tell you I am completely and utterly bored okay look I know what trouble was when I was a politician because I I was all over the place because I'm sort of like this guy that likes philosophy and other things so I might my philosophy my thing is I'm not on your team I'm not on your team you think I'm on your team I'm not on your team and I think that the problem is that politicians get so many much in the talking points that you cannot have any in-depth conversation and so what it is is it's one dimensional and if you think about politicians wanting two things and you watch that you'll be fine they want power and they want money and if you follow those two things you know what most of what they do does not surprise now the problem is because of the power and the money you now have a West that's basically completely disrupted okay and so Jordan Peterson will have Mike Leon or have this guy on this guy it's like you know I don't need to be on the team okay and so Jordan Peterson will have Mike Leon or have this guy on this guy it's like you know I don't even I don't want to watch it's like yeah because it's excuse my language it's the same bullshit I've heard for 40 years politicians are to be expected to do politician things what I think is more important is this Kuiper quote There is not a square inch in the whole world whole of creation over which Christ who is sovereign over all does not cry mine There is not a square inch in the whole domain of our human existence over which Christ who is sovereign over all does not cry mine This wasn't some rabbi this was a Calvinist by the name of Abraham Kuiper whose name I only know because of some Dutch pastor who wastes my time talking about all kinds of weird things other than the gospel Jacob, you show me in such beautiful ways I just I just want to Yes yes and as sovereign over everything we are dang dang dang fortunate his commandment is to love each other Speaking of which Dolly why don't you segue to wash some of Mr. Fats out of our brain please Dolly What's Just just say something like you normally say so I like listening. Okay, I must throw something in here. Okay. Okay. I don't know why Luke Thompson comes to mind right now and mosaic vision. It's like, I don't know why I don't know if you guys have heard about that. Well currently it's come to the forefront of my mind. That's what I'm throwing in there. Go just have fun. Luke Thompson would be all upset right now. I don't know why he's watching this. He's probably got something to do. He hasn't showed up in the in the chat. So I want to I want to I want to I want to point something out here. Emily says this I finally thought of a question but it's too late. Not really. Which is which song from Les Miserables did Jordan Peterson introduce. It was the French Revolution song. Now the strangest thing was that the two major musical numbers that they had were one from Hamilton, American Revolution, and the other from the French Revolution. And it's like, and this gets back to some of what Hank was saying that Peterson sometimes is like with all of this one song and all of this with I mean quote Abraham Kuyper you know the name of Abraham Kuyper's Anti-Revolution Party you know what revolution Abraham Kuyper was against the French Revolution. Dom Dom Dom. The secularity of the French Revolution was satanic and the answer is God. And the the incredible thing was that Peterson at the end has this speech and then leads it up to and of course now they can't play that on YouTube because of copyright and algo, but he leads it up to and there's this song from the French Revolution I'm sitting next to Nathan Jacobs looking at each other like what the heck is going on here. This is the crescendo I thought we'd go with for all the saints or even that great Anglican hymn Jerusalem where you're going to build Jerusalem and England's Greenland and they go to the French Revolution and I thought I don't understand why you're picking the music you're what you're picking because when ministers are used to sort of taking thinky talky and music things to put next to each other you kind of want them. I mean Sam Tideman if he was the worship leader at the Ark would not have picked those songs. Don't we generally consider the French Revolution to have been a bad thing or at least not not particularly great and sort of an example of a woke revolution gone to its logical extreme, especially if you're in the process of reasserting civilizational Christianity. Go ahead, Eric. That play devil's advocate just for a second. Yes, they're trying to the people there are not. I mean, the Christianity was the undertone it wasn't the explicitness but they so they're secular people that are all coming together from different backgrounds who are all angry at the change in situation and that is a rallying cry. It's a song for angry men right now one of the lines from the thing. So they're trying I feel like they're trying to, you know, use music to rally all these angry people these diverse angry people into a, you know, a singular direction. And this is the first arc, so they don't know the direction. So they're just trying to gather the crowd. And, you know, everyone communing in this emotion, like a mob, but in a ordered and more loving way which is what music is. And then, you know, hopefully that that spirit then moves us forward to wherever this anger that we're all feeling about the collapse of society leads us. My guess. I would also love that point. Go ahead. Go ahead, Aaron. No, like, I'm also afraid a little bit of like let's say another case of what happened a couple years ago when Jordan Peterson went like far more political in some ways and for it like when when you have the whole daily wire thing right. And that's, that's when around the same time that people like David from rebel wisdom came out like very like, it's not for that reason. This was like, I've been building up for a while but it was like this moment like okay, you know we can support this any longer, and we have to do sort of our own thing separate from this and we're no longer covering Peterson stuff on the channel we're going to focus on this. And I think, I think it's a legitimate concern for people in this corner to be like okay, you know, all of us are doing this thing here together. And at some point some of us are going to wonder like, wait, is this, you know, being used for perverse like at some conference which is taking place like maybe a couple times, like, in a decade or something like that and therefore like for a whole new movement and then I'm afraid that we're going to lose a whole another group of this little corner, you know that no longer wants to associate with us. So I'm also curious, is that a threat, do you do you look at that as a threat or is that like no, like, it's too separate from it. I think, so we're all focusing on Jordan Peterson. The other people to focus on is, is David and Philippa Stroud, who none of us know. David and Philippa Stroud are known entities in the UK. He is a Christian minister and is a Christian minister running sort of a Calvinist network of churches. His wife, she has been a member of the House of Lords. She was canceled for saying some, for writing some things a decade ago that people didn't think was sufficiently affirming of gay people. And these are, and so this reassertion of civilizational Christianity is deep in them. And if you listen to that, that Dave Rubin conversation with her that I played some of, this conference just sort of emerged and then Paul Marshall, who gave one of the most interesting speeches there, which probably you haven't listened to, but you really should. He is also a backer. He's a very wealthy man. He owns UnHerd. He's been buying up news media things. Yeah, that'll get Grizz's attention. Who owns UnHerd? Paul Marshall. So it's super interesting because to pull off a conference like this has to be north of a hundred grand. So it's super interesting. So there is, there are anxieties about, and I'm anxious, if I'm protective of anything, I'm protective of this little corner. Because I don't want someone weaponizing it in service of some political ambition. And because what I want is... If you gave us more money, what would we even do with it? Exactly. Which is why I love it this way. I know exactly what I'd do with it. What are you talking about? It's hilarious to me that you said north of a hundred grand because Chino costs north of a hundred grand. That costs north of a million. Not in liquid cash though. Liquid cash. Learn to do economic, actual economic things. It's not just about the cash. You're talking about in terms of attention and the value of people's time and stuff. I was saying not in terms of hard cash. That's true too. Oh yeah. It's enormous. But Jonathan wanted to get in here so badly. So he is in now. Thank you very much. Yeah, I joined the stock. I can't hear you. Your sound isn't quite good. Oh gosh. Sorry. Stay in front of your computer. Forgive me. Can you hear me now? Yep. Yeah, I joined the stock. I had to do some bell ringing. I'm in the place of the world where I can do that. You mentioned Oxford earlier. I can't say that word legally because I'm a student. The other one. At Cambridge. At Cambridge. So, and on your point of... On your point of you talking about sort of, you know, the religious veneer, which of course is assumed in England, but obviously very suspicious in America because of course Christian nationalism and those sort of things. But the problem is if you want to revive English Christianity, you know, conformity to it, you need that authenticity that you were talking about too. Because, you know, when you go to chapel, you see the choir sort of, you know, crossing themselves. Do they actually believe it? They bow to the altar. It's just, you know, empty. So it's difficult if in the English context, definitely, because, well, the congregation is dwindling. And in liturgical sort of traditional churches, the big ones are evangelical churches. I'm part of an evangelical church. But I guess I wanted to say that if a big movement like Ark or whatever, you know, it has to be authentic. You can't just, you know, it has to be believed. You know, there has to be a vision that's believed, right? An end that's grasped. And I guess people are skeptical of that end of Ark potentially. I have a question for that guy since he's coming as a representative of that place over there. That place over there is supposedly ruled by a church that is headed by the king. And the king is deeply, deeply associated with the WEF and the Ark is in direct opposition to that. Is there sufficient religious counterpoint offered by Ark to challenge the Anglican Church or are they trying to subvert Anglicans into the Ark with their vague religiosity? And as somebody who lives under the rule of that king, how do those things affect you? Well, we had a little bit of controversy, obviously, when the king was crowned in some place, right? Because we had to swear to the king, didn't we? The king had to swear to God. And I guess how I see things is that the king is sort of a symbol. He has to live up to something that's higher than the self. And of course, you know, controversies of the king's personal life is very present. You can pick holes in the man. But I think the point is you have to you can't pick holes in the role, you know, but on your point of the WEF and all that sort of stuff, honestly, I don't know. I mean, Ark, I think, is trying to subvert the culture as it is. And in England, you can't separate sort of the Anglican veneer from the culture a lot of the time, because it very much is about love and tolerance, especially these days. You know, we had a recent synodical decision where, you know, same sex relationships will be blessed, you know, in this in the Anglican Church, you know, that's just been passed. So it's like, you know, there's Anglicans, it's very broad churches, you were saying, Paul, earlier. But I'll stop talking now. Hopefully there's some sense there. It's I and Hersi Ali in in her unheard interview, basically towards the end of it says, you know, what kind of Christian does she want to be? She wants to be like Queen Elizabeth II. It's very interesting. That's who she picked out. So, all right, folks are folks are folks are leaving. And I said I was going to close this at noon when Grim, you know, asked me what time would we be done? And I've kept the students 15 minutes later. Well, let me let me let me go once more. Oh, okay. Go ahead, Gris, you can go once more. I want to I want to bring to mind that it is called an arc and the visualization we have of an arc is in the flood and the flood of of of that the arc was extant in was of pro Palestinian protesters. In the streets. And as far as the Americans are concerned, NATO has been paying the migrants that are coming across the border. And Frank Herbert wrote about the Sardau car. And I'm concerned that in our insular, thinky talky bubble, there might be a tide that the people of the United States are going to be in. That while we're focusing on the arc, we're missing the flood that we're not yet familiar with the history of Mecca enough to aware that we're in. And God bless us, everyone. Bye. All right. You want a last word? Yes. This painting is by Karen Wong. And it's beautiful. And everybody should take a look at it. It is beautiful. All right, Jonathan Wesley, Tio wants to talk to you. So find Tio wants to compare notes with you. So, sure. Eric, thank you for joining. Thank you all for joining. Probably a good time to land the plane here. And, yeah, thanks for joining the live stream. And if you're watching this later and you weren't in the hive mind, leave a comment. Thank you.