https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TDRVgThhewU

 Well, we've already had a real treat from Paul, haven't we? And we're in for another one in a few minutes. And just before that, we're going to again return to the wisdom from thousands of years ago. One of the things that Peterson is encouraging us to do is to take hold of accomplishment, to do things, to not just seek pleasure, but to actually try and do things. And the teacher in Ecclesiastes tried this. He sought pleasure, but he found pleasure in doing things. And so we're going to hear what he makes of it. I said to myself, come now, I will make a test of pleasure. Enjoy yourself. But again, this also was vanity. I searched with my mind how to cheer my body up with wine, my mind still guiding me with wisdom, and how to lay hold of folly until I might see what was good for mortals to do under heaven during the few days of their life. I made great works. I built houses. I planted vineyards for myself. I made myself gardens and parks and planted in them all kinds of fruit trees. I made myself pools from which to water my forest of growing trees. I bought male and female slaves and had slaves who were born in my house. I also had great possessions of herds and flocks and more than anyone who had been before me in Jerusalem. I also gathered for myself silver and gold and the treasure of the kings of the provinces. I got singers, both men and women, and delights of the flesh and many concubines. So I became great and I surpassed everyone who had been before me in Jerusalem. And also my wisdom remained with me. Whatever my eyes desired, I didn't keep from them. I kept my heart from no pleasure, for my heart found pleasure in all my toil. And this was my reward for my toil. Then I considered all that my hands had done and the toil that I had spent in doing it. And again, all was vanity and a chasing after the wind. And there was nothing to be gained under the sun. Thank you, Matt. We're going to see a couple more clips. The first clip again with myself and John Anderson. The second clip is from the first Vancouver event where Jordan Peterson was having a conversation with Sam Harris being moderated by Brett Weinstein. And what had happened in that event, I'll talk more about the event as we get into this lecture, but they got almost to the end of their time and they didn't get to the question of God. Because where Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris can agree on the importance of free speech and in a lot of their political and social alignment, Sam Harris is sincerely bothered by Jordan Peterson. And he's sincerely bothered by Jordan Peterson because Sam Harris is losing his fan base to Jordan Peterson and the church. And it is all about God. And so here, Sam Harris wants to confront Jordan Peterson on his belief in God. And what kind of God does Jordan Peterson actually is Jordan Peterson actually talking about? Sorry, do you want to play both clips? Now I, as a Christian minister, found him intriguing immediately. And I found his answers with respect to belief in God, his relationship to the church even more intriguing, especially given the fact that one of the things that I noticed was many people after watching his videos were interested in the Bible, curious about Christianity, and some of them were even pursuing membership in churches. Do you have any thoughts on his relationship with Christianity and the church? And he's not an ordained minister or even a person who necessarily identifies with a church and his relationship with Christianity. He casts that in a very interesting light. How do you see that relationship? I would certainly I'd want to say that I have nothing I say does not in any way offend him or would not offend him. I respect him hugely. I think he's a very honest person. But I would say that the fact that he's talking from a deeply knowledgeable perspective about condition and he talks of Alexander Solzhenitsyn and the Russian greats, you know, recognizing that the dividing line between good and evil doesn't lie between one group and another struggling for power in the age of identity politics. It lies somewhere across every human heart. And we know instinctively that that's true if we have any reflective capacity about ourselves at all. So in naming that, in running directly counter to the modern culture, which says if you've got a problem, that's because you're being oppressed. And in fact, you happen to be an oppressor, in which case you're a terrible person. He's actually recognizing that all of us are at times oppressed. All of us at times can be oppressors. All of us would probably have joined the Hitler Youth. And it's a shocking thought, but we shouldn't cast stones so rapidly at others. We share our humanity and our weaknesses and our strengths. You know, we are, if you like, the glory and the scum. Every one of us, as Blaise Pascal put it. And he's sort of highlighting that and making it respectable to talk about the elephant's plural in the room that our modern, very superficial postmodernist society tries to pretend aren't there. So here's my question for you. Is, if we agree that there is some way in which religious texts carry some kind of value because they allow people to figure out how to navigate their lives in ways that might reduce suffering, reduce the complexity of the choices that they have to make, presumably you will agree that that would be consistent with an evolutionary interpretation. The fact that the stories themselves are functional would provide an advantage to those who were deploying them. Yes. So here's the problem. Isn't it then also true that those stories are responsive to past environments? And so the claim that these things might be timeless would be suspect. And in fact, you would expect a spectrum of durability. Some stories would be right in a brief moment. Yes. All that's true. All that's true. So far so good. Well, so far so good. This is actually, I think, quite excellent then because what we have is a recognition that there is something to these belief systems that has to do with practical realities in the past. And we also have an acknowledgement that we cannot trust in these things based on simple faith because even if they can be certain to have worked at some point in the past, we don't know what their relevance is to the present. Right. Okay. Fair enough. All right. Okay. So, okay. So, so I, that's, and I would say that's, that's two things about that. That's exactly why we're having this discussion. And you see what happens in the most profound of such texts is the idea that the process by which your knowledge is updated has to occupy a position in the hierarchy of values that supersedes your reliance on dogma is the fundamental claim. That's why, for example, in Christianity, the notion is, is that the word is the highest of values and that's embodied word. And that's the thing that mediates between order and chaos. And everything else has to be subject to that. And I would say that's not a claim that's unique to Christianity. So for example, you see- Okay, no, I think, I think because we're being told we're out of time here. So I want to give Sam his reaction to that as well and then we'll move on to Q&A. Well, I'm tempted to just ask Jordan a question here. It's hard to know what to say for tomorrow night, but I feel like we've got 3,000 people sitting here who would really like an answer to this question. You say you believe in God. You have been- No, I say I act as if he exists. You say what? I say I act as if he exists, which is a much more precise claim. Okay, so then what, but in this case, what- So you act as though God exists. And in addition, I've heard you say that I act as though God exists, that I can't really be an atheist. Well, so far, it seems that. We'll see. The night is young. So in that sense, I'm not really an atheist. I've heard you say this. Some of you is. Well, if I were really an atheist, I would be far more poorly behaved than in fact I am. So you would be more likely, like Raskolnikov committing murders and assuming there was nothing wrong with it? It would be more likely, yes. Yeah, okay. So- That's a big distinction. I need to know. That you would versus it would be more likely. What was that? That's a big distinction. That you would is very different than it would be more likely. Taking the safety off the gun is not the same thing as shooting it, right? Yeah. The temptations laid open to Raskolnikov would be more at hand, just as they were to him. So in what sense do you mean, what is the God that you act as though he, she, it exists? And what is the God-shaped thing I must have in my life to prevent me from being a quote real atheist? Well, okay. First of all, I have to point out that there's no possible way I can answer both those questions in two minutes. Well, it's the same question. I mean, what is it? Okay. What do you mean by God? Okay. Well, I'm going to tell you some of the things that I mean by God. Uh-oh. We do have to get to questions. Maybe we're going to do this tomorrow. Yeah, maybe this is where we start. Oh, God. Well, that was a pretty resounding no. It seems like that constitutes an audience question, wouldn't you say? All right. I tell you what. I tell you what. Let's- Okay. Let's do this, but let's be deliberate about time. Okay. Okay. Okay. Well, I'm going to read some things that I wrote because it's so complicated that I'm not sure that I can just spin it off the top of my head, and so you'll have to excuse me. And what I'm going to do is sort of paint a picture by highlighting different things. So now I already made one point here. I made the point that part of the conception of God that underlies the Western ethos is the notion that whatever God is is expressed in the truthful speech that rectifies pathological hierarchies. And that isn't all it does. It also confronts the chaos of being itself and generates habitable order. That's the metaphysical proposition. And that that's best conceptualized as at least one element of God. And so I would think about it as a transcendent reality that's only observable across the longest of timeframes, the longest of iterated timeframes to your point. So okay. So here's some propositions. And they're complicated and they need to be unpacked. So I'm just going to read them and that'll have to do for the time being. So God is how we imaginatively and collectively represent the existence and action of consciousness across time. As the most real aspects of existence manifest themselves across the longest of timeframes but are not necessarily apprehensible as objects in the here and now. So what that means in some sense is that you have conceptions of reality built into your biological and metaphysical structure that are a consequence of processes of evolution that occurred over unbelievably vast expanses of time and that structure your perception of reality in ways that it wouldn't be structured if you only lived for the amount of time that you're going to live. And that's also part of the problem of deriving values from facts because you're evanescent and you can't derive the right values from the facts that portray themselves to you in your lifespan which is why you have a biological structure that's like 3.5 billion years old. So God is that which eternally dies and is reborn in the pursuit of higher being and truth. That's a fundamental element of hero mythology. God is the highest value in the hierarchy of values. That's another way of looking at it. God is what calls and what responds in the eternal call to adventure. God is the voice of conscience. God is the source of judgment and mercy and guilt. God is the future to which we make sacrifices and something akin to the transcendental repository of reputation. Here's a cool one if you're an evolutionary biologist. God is that which selects among men in the eternal hierarchy of men. So you know men arrange themselves into hierarchies and then men rise in the hierarchy and there's principles that are important that determine the probability of their rise and those principles aren't tyrannical power. There's something like the ability to articulate truth and the ability to be competent and the ability to make appropriate moral judgments. And if you can do that in a given situation then all the other men will vote you up the hierarchy so to speak and that will radically increase your reproductive fitness and the operation of that process across long expanses of time looks to me like it's codified in something like the notion of God the Father. It's also the same thing that makes women men attractive to women because women peel off the top of the male hierarchy and the question is what should be at the top of the hierarchy and the answer right now is tyranny as part of the patriarchy. But the real answer is something more like the ability to use truthful speech in the service of let's say well-being. And so that's something that operates across tremendous expanses of time and it plays a role in the selection for survival itself which makes it a fundamental reality. Jordan if I can just cut in here with one question. Stop with that for now. So I was not hearing in that list of attributes a God who could care if anyone masturbated. I was not hearing a God who? Depends on what else is stopping you from doing Sam. Well, I'm sorry, but I missed that. I said it depends on what else it's stopping you from doing. Well, okay, so it's important to live. It's important to do something other than masturbate. Yes, which actually constitutes a problem for many people. Which is harder than it sounds. Yeah. I'm not hearing a God, a personal God who can possibly hear anyone's prayers much less answer them, right? And I'm wondering what percentage of religious people who would say, oh, yeah, I believe in God and it's the most important thing in my life. What percentage of those religious people do you think have in mind a God of the sort you just described? I don't know Sam. It's a good question because when I go talk to people, when I talk to people online and use exactly this terminology, millions of people listen. So it's not so obvious which what percentage of people see it this way. It may be that they have the intuitions, but they haven't been articulated well. I mean, this is the problem. This is what worries me about this. Yeah, I mean you could do the same thing with the idea of ghosts, right? So people traditionally have believed in ghosts. It's an archetype you might say the ghost. Survival of death is certainly an archetype. And we know what most people most of the time mean when they say they believe in ghosts. And I say, I don't believe in ghosts. And you say, no, no, you do believe in ghosts. Ghosts are your relationship to the unseen. That's a ghost. That's a ghost. So you have a new definition of ghost that you're putting in the place provided, which I have to say, well, of course, I have a relationship to the unseen. So I guess I do believe in ghosts. You know, you win that argument. But that simply isn't what most people mean by a ghost. Most people mean that simplified argument about my conception of ghost as an analogy for the propositions that I just put forward. This is what I see you do. Maybe you have more to say on the topic of God, but this is what I hear you doing with God. You have defined the God that most people believe in. And we know this is the God that most people. I was asked what God I believed in. Yes, no, but I'm asking you what percentage. Yes. But you by shifting the definition, you have robbed the noun, the traditional noun of its traditional meaning. And you're giving your imparting to people. Wait a second. Wait a second. I'm not so sure. What do you mean by traditional meaning? Look, it's one of the one of the elemental claims in the Old Testament is that you're not even supposed to utter the name of God, because by defining it too tightly, you lose its essence. And so let's not be talking about what the classical definition of God is here. OK, it's a historical nonstarter. OK, there's plenty of religions that can I check in with the audience? Is the audience all right with us continuing down this road? OK, OK, OK. So can I can I jump in here? You're sacrificing your Q&A. So yeah, that it is at the expense of Q&A. That's that's what you're giving out. But I think it's probably worth it. So let me say, Sam, I do not believe in a supernatural God, but the God that I heard Jordan just describe, I do not have any difficulty understanding why he might care if you masturbate. And I also don't have any trouble figuring out how he might answer prayers. Well, well, tell me more than. Well, I I can tell you, I can tell you, I can tell you how a prayer might be answered. OK, but these are specific. So you could let me do that. So it'll be interesting. So I'm not Jordan. We've not talked about this. If I heard an answer from him that actually would satisfy me as to what the mechanism of action might be, that that that'd be pretty interesting. And if he can tell me what I heard, I think it would it would suggest that that we're not just making up stories here. So you might like this. You may be doing but well, it's possible. OK, so imagine that. OK, so let's imagine that hellish situation that you laid out. OK, but but let's let's put the extra twist in it, because one of the things that we both decided, I think, was that you also have to build in the intent into that. So let's say the hell that we're talking about isn't the victim of the terrible massacres that you laid out in the jungle story, but a perpetrator. OK, so someone who's actually acted in a malevolent manner, truly malevolent manner. OK, or maybe perhaps we wouldn't have to take that extreme case. We could say, well, perhaps you've decided that any of you, you've decided that you've seriously done something wrong. OK, and that you you want to get away from hell. You want to make things better. OK, so here's here's an exercise you can try. So what you do is is is you sit on the edge of your bed and you say, OK, what I did was wrong. And you have to really believe this, right? So you've thought about it's killing you. It's killing you. It's now you're penitent and you're confessing, let's say, and you're confessing to yourself as much as to anyone. And you say. I really want to know what I did wrong. And I really want to know what I could do to put it right. And I'm willing to accept any answer that will manifest itself to me. Try that. See what happens. That's a prayer that will be answered, and it won't be answered in the way that you want it to be answered. I can bloody well tell you that. OK, but but that. Well, what are you communicating with? What are you communicating with? That is something that that is a process that I'm familiar with. It doesn't require any supernatural explanation, and it certainly it certainly doesn't require that we imagine that any of our books were dictated by the creator of the universe. I didn't say that it required any supernatural information or that it required the book. I was asked to provide an instance of prayer that worked. And that's what I did. I didn't do anything other than that. That's that's fully understandable in terms of human psychology. And it's not understandable because we don't know where the answer comes from. Well, we don't know where anything comes from. That's true. Yeah. OK, so. So, yeah, but that doesn't that doesn't open the door. We one one thing we can know with absolute certainty is that whoever wrote the Bible didn't know either. And there's many other things he or she didn't know, like everything else. We know scientifically, right? It's not it's not so obvious what people know. No one even no one even knew the brain was involved in any of this. Right. So, yeah, but they probably knew about as much as we do about how the brain was involved in it. But we've already we've already. How many of you have seen that clip before? OK, good number of you. What is going on in that clip? I. When I saw this, I immediately thought about. God, number one and God, number two. Third slide. Third slide, two more good. Jordan Peterson could be the most consequential person in the history of Western belief since Charles II. And if there's anything being a pastor will teach you, it's that people in church often imagine someone has done something bad or the church is doing something bad. Pastor, you need to get on the pulpit and tell people what to do. And they will stop. I just laugh. That doesn't work because we could simply wrap up church very quickly by saying, OK, be good. Don't sin. Amen. And the third slide. Number four. Be good. Don't sin. Amen. And that would solve everything, right? People don't work that way. People's beliefs are seldom linear. Someone demonstrated and proved X to me, and therefore I believe it and I will rationally apply it to my life. It does not happen. Persuasion is far more complex than we've known that all the way back to Aristotle. Next slide. Jordan Peterson recommends this book, The Metaphysical Club, often. And The Metaphysical Club makes a very important point that what Darwin actually contributed to the conversation was not somehow an idea that, well, species evolve. That was assumed. Vastly in the 19th century, many, many Christian scientists believed that God was involved in the process of slow change in the world. Slow change in the world that brought about the world we have today. The contribution that Darwin made was offering the assertion, introducing the assertion that evolution could explain origins without a governing mind. That was Darwin's contribution. Now, when I listened to Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris, and I listened to Sam Harris' rebuttal, Sam Harris says, that's not the traditional God. I thought, Sam, you're completely wrong. That, in fact, is the traditional God that Jordan Peterson just described. Now, most of you probably listening to Jordan Peterson's words says, what is he talking about? It's so esoteric. It just rambles on and on. And I was talking to Matt, and Matt was saying, who has time to listen to Jordan Peterson? Hours and hours and hours of videos. And I often tell people, I want to learn about Jordan Peterson. Well, watch Maps of Meaning. And they pull it up. And it's like, that's like 40 hours of video. Yep. And that's why the people that often listen to Jordan Peterson are computer programmers, painters, long-haul truck drivers, people who have time and they're looking for good content to listen to. Other people that have, you know, jobs where they can't listen to things in the background, read 12 Rules for Life. That's just a little sampling. Try Maps of Meaning. God number one and God number two. I was talking about this when I started delving into the Peterson-Harris conversations. And these are not two gods, but two aspects of gods, of God. And they are, in fact, two aspects that have been around for a very long time in Christian theology. God number one is his immanence. The apostle Paul says in Acts 17, quoting a pagan prophet, in him we live and move and have our being. God number one may be conceived of as Elohim. If you can watch the Bible Project, they've been doing some good little videos on God. God number one is the ground of all being, not an object that you find in the world. C.S. Lewis riffing on Dorothy Sayers made the observation that God, our relationship with God, is something like the relationship of an author to the characters in a book. And I often use in my videos the illustration of, if you asked Frodo to find Tolkien, where could he find him? Well, he won't find Tolkien in Middle Earth, but then again, you find Tolkien everywhere in Middle Earth. This is God number one. He's immanent. He's... Isaiah goes into the temple in the book of Isaiah. He goes into the temple, and the angels are there, and they cry, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. We'll get into that in a minute. The whole earth is full of his glory. His fingerprints are everywhere. Next slide. We find him in Romans one. The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of people who suppress the truth by their wickedness. Since what may be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them, for since the creation of the world, God's invisible qualities, his eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly seen being understood from what has been made so that people are without excuse. Find God number one in general revelation. God number two, however, is his transcendence. The whole earth is full of his glory, but holy, holy, holy, three holies. Now the Hebrews used three, repetition three times to express the superlative. God is as holy as it can be. Well, what do we mean by holy? He's separate. He's above. He's different. He's transcendent. This is the source of all consciousness. The willful choosing agent who acts in history. He transcends and governs the objects of the world. Jordan Peterson lays out God number one. Sam Harris objects and says, you haven't talked about God number two. You haven't talked about the traditional God. Oh, why does Sam Harris think that God is merely transcendent and not imminent? And if you can begin to answer that question, and you're going to have to go back to the Protestant Reformation and even before into the Middle Ages to figure out why and in what process these two things got separated and what that has done in our culture. C.S. Lewis and his book Miracles talks about colonizing. And in fact, my mind when I was just born and laying in a bassinet and trying to figure out my hands and figuring out how I could get my thumb in my mouth. My mind was colonizing my hands. Now we might say, but your brain colonized your hands. No, my mind has been colonizing my brain, which has colonized my hands. We're going to get into this a little bit more deeply. What are the challenges in knowing God? This obviously as a pastor you run into. God is both obvious and hidden. As the imminent author, he is always present. Can you find Lewis in Narnia? Well, you find him all over the place. But Lucy, where would Lucy find Lewis? Well, maybe in the professor. But is Lewis in there? Dorothy Sayers actually at some point falls so in love with one of her characters, she writes herself into her stories. I got picked this up from Tim Keller who noted, well, isn't this a picture of the incarnation, the word becoming flesh? As a transcendent agent, we are not able to force his hand. My theological tradition is Dutch Calvinism, which majors in this idea that try as we might, God has no need that we can leverage against him to somehow bend him to our will. He is holy, holy, holy, but the earth is full of his glory. We are subject to his will and we hate this. I in fact think that since the Enlightenment, this has been the center of our objection, and that center goes all the way back to Genesis 3. Because we simply hate the idea that a conscious, willful agent has made decisions about us and for us and against us that we have no power to defy. We hate it. We are dependent yet upon his will and we hate this too, because we have his transcendence in terms of that consciousness that we have in this gift. And so we experience it. I love in the book of Ecclesiastes where God has placed eternity in our hearts. And this I think in terms of the book of Ecclesiastes is what drives the book. Because the assembler is looking for it all. And can he find it in pleasure? Can he find it in projects? Where can he find meaning when everything is vanity? And when Warren suggested, what's a frame that we could use to look at Jordan Peterson? I said the book of Ecclesiastes is perfect, because it's all right there. Now, Darwin and God number one. Essentially what Darwin said is that there is no imminent God who made all of these objects. I can imagine processes that run on their own. And if you read Charles Taylor, what Charles Taylor does in his book A Secular Age is he debunks what he calls the subtraction story, which is basically what you'll hear Sam Harris and a number of other celebrity atheists promote. That basically says, well, we were all naive at one point and young and stupid. And then we grew up to realize that the world is demythologized and de-enchanted. Stuff just runs out there on its own. But once the world is in fact no longer enchanted, now that we with the gift of transcendence and consciousness can now colonize the world and bend it to our wills. If you read Tolkien, that's essentially Sauron. Charles Taylor notes, okay, that subtraction story is nice and it makes a nice short story, but it just isn't true and it just doesn't line up with the history of the situation. There's a key element in there Charles Taylor calls providential deism. That before we believed there was no watchmaker, we believed there was a watchmaker who wound up the world and it went on its own. And we could step in and start tinkering with the gears. First, before God was completely absent, God was a step away. And it's actually between the watchmaker and no watchmaker that Darwin comes in and says, we don't really need a God to explain origins. And what Christians have been doing for a long time is trying to attack Darwin's position. And what's been interesting is that many Christians who have been working this for a very long time haven't had the same effect as Jordan Peterson, which is really interesting because Darwin, in a sense, has won the argument out there in the secular world. And everyone's just kind of said yes, except for some Christians over here who continue to fight the fight. Now, Jordan Peterson assumes Darwin. That's just what he does. Darwin was right. But Jordan Peterson also notes that there are two ways of conceiving the world. One way is the world as a space of objects, which is fundamentally the materialist frame. That what the world is is, well, we're in this room and we have all these creatures that are carbon-based, have skin, and I can run through and I can touch all of you. And you have processes going on in your brain and these brains are producing the consciousness. And that's what the world is. That's Sam Harris's world. But you can also conceive of the world as a forum for action. Well, suddenly, if you walk into the room and if there were a Bengal tiger in the back, I wouldn't pay attention to any of you and none of you would pay any attention to me. We would all look at that Bengal tiger. Why? Because our brains, according to Darwin, according to all of these scientists, have had millions of years of development so that actually what's most important in the world is not all of the stuff in the world, but the threats and opportunities. And that's how we arrange our lives. The world is a forum for action. So the basic premise of his book, Maps of Meaning. You can already begin to feel the imminent transcendent tension in this conceptualization. So Jordan Peterson does four talks with Sam Harris. In order to achieve our smaller than total experience of transcendence, acting, choosing, and governing, we need an a priori sorting ability. And in fact, Jordan Peterson spends eight hours trying to talk Sam Harris into this, and Sam Harris just never seems to either get it or admit it. Because the truth is, actually, I just had this experience this morning. Warren and Elaine are hosting us in their lovely home, and we're sleeping in the spare bedroom. And while we were getting ready to leave, I stood up in that bedroom, and I saw a lovely school hanging on the wall that I think was probably from your school that had put it there. And I thought, I've been staying in this room for two days, and I never once saw the wall hanging. Why not? Was it not there? I was there the whole time. Why didn't I see it? Same reason that if, well, we're in Australia, so if we walked in this room and there was a saltwater crocodile in the back, none of us would pay any attention to each other, and we would all look at the crocodile. This is how we work, and this is how, in fact, our bodies have worked for a long time, because the saltwater crocodile would trump no matter who else was in the room. The world is filled with way too much data for us to comprehend, and so what we develop is a filter which turns into a hierarchy which prioritizes our attention, and that, in fact, is what governs our consciousness. Now, again, where do you get this from? Well, you can read maps of meaning. That'll take you a while, or you can sit through 40 hours of video. That will take you a while, and even then you might have to listen to a few times, but this is what he's saying. Here we see Jordan Peterson says, God number one, but you say, now wait a minute. Darwin said we didn't need God to account for the objects in space, and Jordan Peterson says yes, but we need at least this concept. Is it ontological? We'll get into that question. He stays agnostic in there. That basically functions as God for all of human beings. We might not need him for the stuff of the world, but we need him to act in the world. And suddenly, well, you might say, well, he doesn't quite lay that out that way. Ah, but remember what I said in my first slide? You thought we were reasonable. You thought I would stand up here and explain something to you, and then you would act reasonably after that. Oh no. This little transcendent consciousness thing you have in your brain, that's just a little bit of your brain. And in fact, your eyes are seeing all kinds of things, and your brains are picking up all kinds of things. And there's way, way too much information to funnel that through the consciousness. If there was a loud bang right now, all of us would flinch. We wouldn't stop and say, oh, I heard a bang. I wonder what that is. Maybe I should act. No. If I would take something and throw it at you, you would duck. Why? Because your brain is always on the alert, and we know this. Well then, what is God? Now if you go back and listen to that video, it's in the first Vancouver thing, and you listen to it carefully, but what Jordan Peterson is saying, he is saying, Darwin says we don't need God to account for the stuff. But there is this idea of God that we must have to account for how we act in the world. And that's why you, Sam Harris, to your great offense, act as if God exists. You can't help it. Jordan Peterson asserts the idea of God is foundational to the psychological stability of liberal western freedoms. Now one of the things I've learned here is that this word liberal works differently in Australia than it does in California. This has been interesting. Without God, and this is essentially what Jordan said in this little run up to Sam Harris, and he said in many other places, without God, and I put it in quotes because Peterson will say, well, it's a conceptualization, there is no free will or responsibility which will yield his sacrament of meaning. Without the idea of the image of God, there are no human rights. And this is why if the Samago Dei, if we lose this in the West, all of these lovely ideas that we have about rights of oppressed people, ironically, it all goes away. And we revert back to something like, I was just talking about the parable of the Good Samaritan the other day. We read that story in such a Christian fashion, and it was offered in such a Judeo-Christian context where everyone was assumed to have the image of God. If a Roman was going down the road to Jericho and saw a person lying on the road, he would keep going. And if Jesus asked, well, why didn't you stop? Why should I? This entire idea of compassion for victims all comes from Jesus. It all comes from the Samago Dei. Without God, there is no idea of the future or a belief in sacrifice for it. Jordan Peterson did a little Easter thing, which again was rambly and esoteric and hard to get through. But when I listened to that, I thought, yeah, this idea of the future, so obvious to all of us, and the connection to the idea of sacrifice. What makes us think if I sacrifice today, I will reap the benefits tomorrow? Now, as I mentioned before, I grew up in a context of a great deal of chaos and people would say, well, why do those poor people misuse their money so terribly? Why do when they have a little bit, they spend it right away? Well, maybe because in their lives of chaos, they know that they're not going to have it tomorrow anyway, so they're going to spend it right now. Well, what makes you think that if you save it, you will be blessed in the future? God. Without God, you don't get human reproductive hierarchies based on competence. And you might say, all this is new to me. Yeah, it is. All of these ideas, Jordan Peterson will say, came to us psychologically through the Bible as a culture. Now, again, people are just listening to him ramble, and then they find themselves quite mysterious to themselves. So I had a picture of Job, my friend from the Netherlands up. I met him in Southern California. He had to come down there for a conference, and I was down there to help a friend of mine start a meetup and keep his meetup going. And so I'd spend days with Job, and Job said, I can't for the life of me figure out how I'm sitting here in Southern California. Hanging around with pastors. I'm an atheist. He's been going to church for a few months, and the pastor of the church said, would you like to join the church? And he says, I don't really think I should. I still don't believe in God. But I think this church is good, and it's a good thing. And I'm certainly far happier, and my life is far better than it used to be. So I'm going to keep coming. But I still don't have this figured out. And I thought, yeah, that's the way it works sometimes. Jordan Peterson is making this argument on Darwin's shoulders. I find again and again many Christians trying to attack Darwin. Peterson, in a sense, just leapt over Darwin and said, OK, let's start with Darwin. You still need God. Jordan Peterson is making this argument on Darwin's shoulders. Jordan Peterson is making this argument as someone who doesn't identify with the church. So people can't just say, ah, he's one of these crazy Christians. He isn't. And he says, you still need God. So Jordan Peterson says, you need God, number one, to have the world we enjoy. Sam Harris says, that isn't the God. Number two, I've been protesting since 9-11. Jordan Peterson says, you and everyone in the West who embraces enlightenment values actually lives psychologically as if this God, number one, is real. And if you stop, you'll lose this world that Sam Harris is desperately trying to save. And again, we hear this and people hear it. And they might think, oh, that's interesting. But their mind hears it. God, number one, see Romans 1. The God that you see in the Axial Age. How many of you are familiar with that term? OK, a few of you. Watch John Vervecky's videos. The Axial Age is at the end of the Bronze Age. All of these cultures around the world begin to conceptualize. Well, this world is life is short, brutish, and hard. Surely there must be a place where things don't decay. Surely there must be a place where tears are wiped away. Surely there must be a place where streets are paved with gold. And you hear this as a Christian, you say, oh, yeah, that's in the Bible. All around the world, different cultures are beginning to conceptualize of, if everything is so hard down here, maybe there's a place where everything is right and good and normal. And the world gets split. This is the God Darwin said we didn't need for the material world. The God Jordan Peterson says we need for the psychological world is God, number one. God, number two, the Bible calls the living God, the relational God, the God who comes to you. The active personal agent in the world. And Sam Harris says, no, that's not the one I believe in. And Jordan Peterson says, yeah, but you still believe in God, number one. What's actually been happening in the West since then, Kant, Schleiermacher, Boltman, Barth, fundamentalism. The West had so many sunk cost in Christianity for the last 200 years. We've been trying to save the church from the demise of God, number one. God, number one, has receded in history, first with providential deism, later with Darwin. So then how do we compensate? Blow up God, number two. One of the best illustrations of this is Charles Colson. Charles Colson was Richard Nixon's hatchet man. And while he was totally loyal to Richard Nixon, he and did Richard Nixon's dirty deeds. He was having a conversion experience. And his wife said, you've always gone to church. And Charles Colson says, yeah, but now I believe in a living God. And in the 1970s in the United States, people were born again. Jimmy Carter got on the cover of Time magazine for it. God, number two, expanded to compensate. Schleiermacher called it a feeling of absolute dependence. You see it in the New England Transcendentalist. It's a personal relationship with Jesus. But why does Jordan Peterson have this evangelistic impact? There's a fun YouTuber called Mr. Plinkett. And Mr. Plinkett does Star Wars, does movie critics' videos on YouTube. And he continues to make the point that bad movie making, we don't notice it, but our brain does. And this is exactly what's happening with Jordan Peterson. People haven't noticed God, number one, and God, number two, but their brain does. And then suddenly, mysteriously, just like if a crocodile showed up in the back of the room and all of your heads would turn, people begin to think, maybe there's something to that Bible. Maybe there's something to this. I should go look. You see, we think in herds, and Warren mentioned Jonathan Haidt. Before I was reading Jordan Peterson, I was reading Jonathan Haidt, his happiness hypothesis, which is his first and probably best book so far, although his latest book is quite good too. We think in herds, obvious when you look at different cultures. And Darwin's suggestion caught on. Our Roman one bias was at work. And even if we consciously miss the heart of the assertion, we pick it up from each other. Dallas Willard made this point. When you go to the university and everybody sneers at a certain idea, that's far more convincing than a rational argument. We believe in groups. If something similar happened, is something similar happening when people listen to Jordan Peterson, but you only notice it if you slow down the tape? Why do I go to church when I'm an atheist? Hmm, something's happening. Your brain knows it. Your consciousness just doesn't yet. James Fox Higgins, he's a YouTuber from North, I'm dyslexic so West and East are always hard for me, Northwest Australia had a YouTube channel where he was one of these rationalist atheists arguing against Christianity and supernaturalism and all those things. He reads Jordan Peterson, he completely flips, goes to Jordan Peterson and says, You're my great gateway drug to Christianity and Jordan Peterson in a playful tone says, Oh no! And he says, From nihilism! And Peterson says, Well that's definitely a step up. And Higgins says, again flipped. And now thinks Jordan Peterson is a dangerous man. But Higgins is still a Christian. Once we see God number one, God number two comes into play. We have a love-hate relationship with God number two. God doesn't possess his power but resist his will. We see this in the Prodigal Son. Dad, I want your stuff but I don't want you. Which is exactly what we said in Genesis 3. And actually the heart of pantheism, as C.S. Lewis notes, is we want God to be all imminent and no transcendent. Because actually, and we see this in the movies all the time, the movie Avatar, James Cameron gave up the script when at one point all of the little blue, big, giant blue animal people were losing. And the pantheistic God starts fighting for the world. No, that's not what imminent does. That's what transcendent does. We love God to be purely imminent because then the world is a colony we can plunder. If God number one is impersonal, if God is impersonal, all imminent God number one, our God number two-ness governs. So Jordan Peterson sets the table. He undoes Darwin's implicit destruction of God number one while at the same time using Darwin. He validates the Bible using Darwinian conceptions. People's brain pick up on this and they are looking for the rest of what the Bible has to say. That's my thesis. We've got a little, we've got five minutes for questions. And you'll have more time to discuss than when we break out in groups. Any questions? I know that's a lot. How are you? Yes? I was just really struck by the whole thing when you're talking about sort of an aspect when you're talking about what we know here and now. And that sort of really played into the whole idea of how blindness is about history. And I wonder whether this is kind of like a really major, major theme. I mean, I've never been interested in history, now I'm from the am and now I'm like, wow, it's so interesting and relevant. And do you think this is like a major theme that we're kind of really showing a lot on the history and the psychology and the history and all these things that we're not really aware of? One of the insane things that has happened as a result of Jordan Peterson is all kinds of people are now suddenly re-engaged in the kinds of things that they usually thought were dull. People are trying to read Dostoevsky. People are trying to read Nietzsche and Kierkegaard and Piaget and Plato and Aristotle. And so I just opened my church up to these meetups and you've got people who didn't even go to college and they are now trying to pick up these books. And part of this, as I alluded to in the first thing, in the first talk, is YouTube and audiobooks. Peterson is very much a product of this revolution because a truck driver, well, doesn't have... I started playing with YouTube because I very quickly realized that maybe a handful of the people in my church actually read books. But you know what? Almost everybody watches TV and YouTube is almost TV and actually YouTube is beating TV because you can self-select what you find. And what we've seen in this revolution is that a huge number of people are getting an amazing education by clicking on this medium that we thought was for cat videos. And when I started this, I thought, well, YouTube videos should be two or three minutes long. And then I found myself listening to two hour, two and a half hour Jordan Peterson videos. So then I thought, well, what if I talked at my computer for two hours? Would anybody listen? And they do. So you're exactly right. What is happening? Who knew? We were told, Peterson says this all the time, we were told the public was stupid. Not as stupid as we thought. They will engage in the great ideas of history and the great conversations of history if they can fit it into their lives. So you're right. Yes? It seems to me a lot of what Peterson is talking about in terms of the human and God, it has a lot, well it's kind of described in the wisdom literature of the scriptures. Does Peterson interact with that resource, that wisdom literature? What does he say about it? Jordan Peterson, when he started his biblical series, told us that he was going to go through the whole Bible. In 15 lectures, he managed to skim Genesis. And when he said, I'm going to go through the whole Bible, I laughed because as a pastor, I have some experience in trying to go through the Bible with a group of people. He has said almost nothing about wisdom literature, little bit of something about Job, but hardly anything. He has mostly focused on Genesis and then he'll dip into the Sermon on the Mount now and then, but has hardly touched on it. But the connection with wisdom literature, as we've noted here, is there. Yes? I'm going to try and phrase this question. I've been trying to phrase it in my mind, but maybe if I speak it I can get it down. Given what you said about Darwin being central in Jordan Peterson's framing of what he's doing, and if you see what has happened from a Christian point of view as a back hole, and you're seeing a bit of victory here because people are taking the Bible seriously for a change, to what extent will it also seem as a pyrrhic victory? Because in order to achieve that, a lot of people who don't like Darwin are having to accept that as a central part of how that victory has been achieved. Peterson's relationship with Darwin is interesting. Partly, and one of his more controversial aspects among his atheist critics is his embrace of really a Darwinian epistemology, which says that we can only know that which promotes survival. Most of the atheists are dealing with epistemological framework, which is much more object correspondence. The Christians come along, and this actually gets into the third lecture, because a Jordan Peterson fan says, I want to learn about the Bible. Where can I do this? Well, maybe a church. So he picks a church at random. He goes to an evangelical fundamentalist church and says, I think Darwin is true. I think Jung had some cool ideas. What kind of reception are they going to get in an evangelical fundamentalist church? They show up in a mainline church and they say, I've been listening to Jordan Peterson. And they say, oh, the custodian of the patriarchy? So your question is really excellent. I don't think Christians are going to have, I think people on the more conservative end of Christianity are going to have an easier time. And the question you asked earlier about the Orthodox and also it's true of the Roman Catholics. A lot of these issues come to the fore in the Reformation and the Enlightenment, which is really a product of the Reformation. The relationship between the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox with Darwin has been very different from the relationship between Darwin and the churches that were the products of the Reformation. And so actually there's a lot of complexity beneath this. But I tend to think I was just talking to Matt. People often have the idea that when you walk into a church, everybody in this church believes the same thing. And if you're a pastor, you laugh because you know that when you look out over your congregation, they believe in radically different things. And even the elders of your church sometimes will stand up and spout complete heresy and they don't know it. And nobody else in the room knows it. So the church is nowhere near as monolithic as people imagine. And so then you have the question, well, why does this thing actually work at all? And there's sort of the mystery of grace often.