https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TkVez8yB2BQ

 Hi, this is Paul. Last year, it was about a year ago, when, what was the day? It was two years ago. It was July 13, 2019, Bishop Barron and Jordan Peterson recorded their first conversation. It was a fairly good conversation. I didn't do a full commentary on it, but what struck me listening to their present conversation is there was a fair amount of repetition between them. Part of what has shaped my philosophy around conversations has been some of what you can see in this conversation. Bishop Barron is to a degree familiar with Jordan Peterson, and Peterson is to a degree familiar with some aspects of Roman Catholic theology, and perhaps Jordan has read some of Bishop Barron, but they're not terribly familiar with each other. Part of why I think the conversations from two years ago and now are quite similar is because they're not that familiar with each other. At the end of the conversation, Bishop Barron notes that he and some of his friends have been praying for Tammy and Jordan throughout their illness, which is a lovely thing and a good thing. It's interesting watching this conversation noticing how much both of them are sort of ... It's a getting to know you conversation in a way because both of them are sort of running through their stock elements. In fact, there's a portion in this conversation where Bishop Barron repeats almost verbatim what he told to Cosmic Skeptic in an unbelievable podcast not too long ago. But it's a good conversation. It's worth listening to. It's worth commenting on. So let's get started. So why do you think that people have written to you and to me suggesting that we converse? Because you're both high status people that have large followings and your work intersects. Your take on this. It's surprising to me in some sense because it's not really my bailiwick, although obviously I've been putting ... And that comment sort of surprises me. My nose in there anyways. I think for a number of reasons people see the work you do as at least opening a door to the religious dimension of life or a deeper dimension of life. I'll tell you a story. I got up in front of the bishops of the United States because I was chairman of our committee on evangelization. And I talked about why we're losing a lot of young people. I went through some of the statistics and then ... And you can find him telling this story in a number of different times and places too. Reasons why we're losing them. And then I gave various signs of hope. And one of the signs of hope I gave was I called it the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. And what I meant was this. I told the bishops, here's this gentleman gets up in a pretty non-histrionic way and speaks for several hours in some cases about the Bible. And young people all over the English-speaking world are listening to him in theaters and by their millions on YouTube. And I said, you know, I'm not here to endorse everything that Jordan Peterson is saying, but I think that in itself is a sign of hope. And so that became a source of some conversation among the bishops. But I do think it's a sign of hope. And I said to them, and it's really in some ways to our shame, that you are making the Bible more compelling and appealing in many ways than we were. I think if I went back over the conversation two years ago, I think he gave almost exactly the same talk. And so again, it's not really a criticism. It's sort of natural to the platform. It's natural to what's happening here. But it sort of shows a lack of at least progress in terms of their conversation and their relationship, which is, you know, it would have been nice if there was more, but there isn't. So there it is. Yeah, so that's our bailiwick. That's our profession is the Bible. But you were opening the Bible up in a way that young people especially were finding very compelling. And you were indeed, I think, thereby opening a door toward a richer and fuller understanding of the scriptures. I think that's part of it. But I also think it's the opening to the realm of objective value. Now this here we're going to get more interesting because, okay, what do you mean by objective value? And of course, if you use that word objective in a modernistic frame, it has a particular understanding. In other words, let's say maybe a shared communal value. And in fact, Jordan's going to kind of lean into that in a little ways, but not go too far into it. So I think as I read you and listen to you, you talk a lot about the objective realm of value. That's not simply a matter of my subjective whim. That, you know, I'll decide what to do. Now I'm recording this on Tuesday. I am going to release the commentary that I did on the Russell Brand conversation today, Tuesday at noon. I usually don't release two videos in the same day, but the one I released at 6 a.m. was the Clay Lybolts CRC one. The interest in that video will be quite a bit less than interest in Jordan Peterson video because the Clay Lybolts Reformation scripture reading conversation is sort of directed to the Christian Form Church. And that's just a small piece of my audience. But this question here, I've been doing a lot of thinking. It came out in the conversation I did with Jonathan Pigeot and Andrea with the banks. The question that we're dealing with is, okay, objective value. How can we ground value? What can we ground value in? And if you go back, Renaissance humanism in many ways attempted to ground value in the text when to a certain degree that failed because the Protestant Reformation did not the Roman Catholic Church or lead towards any kind of consensus. Then the attempt was to ground our knowledge of reality in empiricism and rationalism. And so we worked on that for a number of hundred years. And we're sort of coming to the end of that. We're coming to the end of modernity. And so part of what we're going to do, Rafe holds onto these videos for a while. I just had a really terrific conversation yesterday with John Vervecky and Rafe Kelly, which will be out probably in a few weeks. But part of what we get into there is pluralism. And the massive pluralism that globalization has yielded and that the internet has really fueled is this in some ways crisis over, you know, they're phrasing it here, an objective value system, which isn't a bad way to say it, but at least a value system that can transcend the inherited value systems of the plurality of the nations, let's say. And so it is an attempt for human beings to try to cooperate and agree and work together on a global scale. Now towards the end of that Russell Brand-Jordan Peterson conversation, there was an interesting section about, you know, Brand was a little bit, was cynical on sort of the state of the world. And Jordan Peterson made the comment, I think rightly so, that no, what we're really trying to do here, even with this conversation, in any conversation is to try to grow in knowledge and come to agreement so that we can move forward, at least on the good that we know. So this question of objective value, again, if you're really interested in this and you're interested in Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance and Pirsig's work, you can go to a quality, I always think existence or experience, a quality existence with Sevilla King and take a look at her channel because she has focused on this for about as long as I focused on my channel. And she's she's gone through Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance and Lila and, you know, really opened, you know, opened up my understanding of of interpreting this conversation through the lens of value. So now Bishop Barron is a bishop, and that means something. He's not a local priest. He's a bishop, which means he's in charge of things on a little larger level. And for those of you who don't know, Bishop Barron isn't just a very well spoken Roman Catholic clergy on YouTube that is quite popular. He's also a serious academic with with real philosophical credentials. And so he's a you know, he's a big hitter in this sphere, not without controversy, of course, because what would be without controversy in the Roman Catholic Church. But so so now we're going to start into the section where we're going to talk about objective values and we're going to talk about morality. And there's a fair amount of repetition again. Jordan Peterson is going to pull out some of the usual things he pulls out. For those of you like me who have watched many hours of Jordan Peterson video, a lot of it will be repetition to a degree or another. It's repetition to Bishop Barron. I don't know. But I think actually they do get someplace in this conversation and it is worthwhile sort of walking through and taking a part. I make up my values as I go along. But there's something about value that's not simply a man. And this also again, it's it's interesting to contrast this sort of back to back with the Russell Brand video because Brand, of course, has a strong streak of romanticism, which, as I talked about in the commentary on that video, tends to focus on the subjective. And obviously, in this frame, the objective is a ground upon which a community can can gather people together and work together and pursue some common goals. A matter of my subjective whim, that I'll decide what to do or I make up my values as I go along. But there's something about the tradition, something about what's been given to us, an objectivity to moral value, aesthetic value, intellectual value. And see, to me, that's I mean, it's a good way, a gateway drug to religion, because God, I would say, is the ground and the source of objective value. And when you sort of hyper subjectivize the whole operation, that becomes questionable. So I think your work there and I think in Russell Brand's case, then it sort of becomes also individual to has sort of primed the pump for a deeper exploration of God as the source of these objective values. There's a couple. Now, thinking about this from an apologetic perspective. Obviously, as Charles Taylor noted, the asserting the existence of God is not axiomatic in the secular frame. So his his pursuing the argument in this way is very traditional, especially coming from Roman Catholic position. But I don't know how convincing it's going to be. And part of what lingers in the back of my mind listening to this, these two is Bishop Barron will again and again talk about what an effective what an effective evangelist Jordan Peterson has been. But I don't know how much Bishop Barron is borrowing from Peterson in terms of learning from the Jordan Peterson experience about what effectiveness might look like besides, let's say, being in YouTube and being being nice. Well, thoughts I have about it. But I remember it's almost as if we need a third category. Interruption there. But but and this is part of the reason I'm really looking forward to Jordan talking to John Vervecky because John Vervecky's work is all about looking for sort of a third category. The intersubjective, how the objective and the subject sort of work together in between the story, a couple of thoughts I have about it. But I remember it's almost as if we need a third category, subjective, objective and something else that is an admixture of both. And I think, you know, the subjective and objective in some ways is a function of the modernist frame. And as we are moving out of modernity, and again, I think Peterson is important transition figure in terms of that moving out of modernity, because as Jonathan Peugeot, in another respect, said, you sort of have one foot on both continents and you're getting stretched as these as the land masses are moving apart. I mean, there's things I come across information in the biological sciences, particularly. Now, the biological sciences in this, again, are really important because so you've got modernity, you have this attempt to see the world through monarchical vision, attempt to see the world as a world of objects, attempt to see the world as a static objective place, and science attempts to give certainty of knowledge by presuming the world is that way. Of course, post post modernity comes in with a deep amount of cynicism that says, oh, you know, calls BS on your monarchical vision and says you can't really see the world that way because you are a person seeing the world. And so you you're just fooled or pretending or lying or all three because again, we have these two level theories like Daniel Bonnevec in that one series on 20th century thinkers talks about. We have all these two lever theories that say, well, either you know you're a racist or you don't know you're a racist and you're racist anyway. Post modernity sort of plays that trick on everything. And so so Peterson, you know, knowing that now says, okay, well, at the same time, we all need to know how to act. And so that's going to then intersect with these values because values and actions are deeply connected biologically in people. That's a lot of what his work is about lobsters maps of meaning that the, you know, meaning becomes this internal gyroscope. If we can't see the stars, this is the way by which we can sort of do some dead reckoning in terms of choosing what is right. That's that's the heart of what he's doing with this stuff. That speak deeply of all sciences, particularly there there's things. Plus the biological sciences are also attempt to get around cultural plural cultural pluralism because post modernity will say, well, all of this, all of these cultural values are formed by you can depends how cynical you want to be formed by the past winners of these cultural values and they get into the cultures and that's where all this sin comes from. And so what you really have to do is get rid of all of that self-serving biases and then you'll have a world free of bias and depression and all of these things. But of course, if you sit down and think about post modernity long enough, you would say, well, please tell me what pure person can actually sort of fulfill the modernist vision and see the world as it is and be an impartial be an impartial broker between all of these pluralistic systems. And so one way that I think Jordan Peterson has been successful is he just as empiricism and rationality tried to get underneath the turn to the texts in the reformational period, Jordan and evolutionary biologists tried to get beneath cultural pluralism to go down to the biological layer to try to find a grounding for how we should act. And that's really the source of what he's about to go into right now, which is all the stuff he usually talks about at this point in the conversation. I come across information in the biological sciences, particularly that speak deeply of an intrinsic morality. Okay, an intrinsic. So see, in some ways, and this is part of the struggle that Jordan and the IDW people have because they continue to refer to objective science, even though Jordan has a lot of understanding of why that isn't objective and he's about to say it. But they continue to try to look to science because to try to get beneath cultural pluralism and what would be a layer beneath cultural pluralism, it would be the biological. And if we can find sort of the evolutionary, and this is always going to ask Bishop Barron about the Roman Catholic Church and evolution, if you can get down to the evolutionary level, then at least to one degree, you can have a degree of at least enough certainty so that perhaps on the basis of science and evolutionary biology, you can find consensus around the world in terms of what we should do. And you can scale up from that level. And you see this, you can look at the work of Franz De Waal, for example, who's a Dutch primatologist, and he's been studying the social interactions of chimpanzees and chimpanzees share a tremendous genetic overlap with human beings. See how he's laying the groundwork for something that's going to outflank cultural pluralism. From an evolutionary perspective, we diverged from our common ancestor with chimpanzees, something like seven million years ago. Our cultures also share, or our biology also shares properties with that of bonobos. Is it bonobos or bonobos? I don't know. Someone should tell me. I'm going to talk about the chimps for now. De Waal has been interested in what makes a chimp leader. So chimps organize their societies essentially in patriarchal fashion. So okay, now we're getting into how we should act and how leaders should act, because a big part of the, well, at least the crisis in American politics is what kind of leader do we need? Do we need a leader like Joe Biden or like Donald Trump? The top chimp is male. That doesn't mean there aren't high status females. There are, but the fundamental power structure appears, let's say, patriarchal. And it's in the popular eye, it's easy to assume that the top chimp is the most physically intimidating. But that's actually not the case. What De Waal has shown was that, is that alpha chimps who maintain stable sovereignty, let's say, are more engaged in reciprocal interactions than all the other chimps in the troop. Now again, he's told the story a lot over maps of meaning, biblical series. But it's also interesting that he continues to refine it and sharpen it, especially to this conversation. So they're very generous and reciprocal. They play fair. Now you can get the odd situation where a chimp troop will be ruled by a tyrant, but the structure becomes unstable and the tyrant chimp tends to be overthrown by coalitions of other male chimps torn to pieces. And so then if you think, well, maybe there is a pattern that constitutes, this is the crucial issue as far as I'm concerned, is there a pattern of behavior that typifies stable sovereignty? OK, now again, he's talking biologically. He's trying to get underneath cultural pluralism and say at the biological level, is there a stable pattern that actually comes up through animal inheritance or other species of animals? Animal inheritance all the way to human beings. And I think that's in some sense the fundamental religious question. Is there a pattern of behavior? And just with that little move right there, he's now implying, well, religion comes up too. And so religion, instead of just being an element within cultural pluralism that causes division, maybe in fact, there is something basically religious about human beings that you're not actually going to get around. Now, again, you've got some of his listenership that is deeply skeptical about evolution and animal inheritance within humans. And you've got others, other of his leadership that is not at all skeptical about that. But his movement right there sort of brings in both groups. ... behavior that constitutes stable sovereignty. And if so, what does it consist of? Jak Panksepp has looked at rat behavior and rats, juvenile male rats, engage in rough and tumble play. And when you pair them together, if one rat is 10% bigger than the other, he can dominate the lesser rat. And so they do that and they establish their relative dominance. And then if you repeatedly pair them together, which is a crucial issue, it has to be repeated pairings. The lesser rat has to invite the dominant rat to play. So that's his role. And the larger rat agrees and plays. But if the larger rat doesn't let the little rat win 30% of the time across repeated play bouts, the little rat will stop playing. And what I read that it just blew me away. It's so significant because it shows imagine that part of what morality is, it's morality is precisely that pattern of behavior that serves to keep repeated interactions going. And those repeated interactions might be across days or weeks or months or years or decades or centuries or eons, tremendously long time span. And so what you get is the emergence of a pattern of behavior that's stable for the individual and stable for society. And that as that's instantiated more and more deeply, it becomes something we can observe and something that we adapt to and something that then becomes part of our central nature. See, now again, we're trying to get underneath cultural pluralism, underneath religious pluralism, and try to have something that goes through all the way up to us through animal inheritance. Now part of what's interesting in this is, okay, what are the two agendas that these two are bringing to the conversation? What does Bishop Barron want out of the conversation? Well, maybe for Jordan Peterson to, I don't know again, know if Jordan Peterson's been baptized as an infant in the United Church of Canada. I'd be really curious to know if that's the case or not. But, you know, to have Jordan Peterson join the Roman Catholic Church, that would be his goal. And it's an absolutely legitimate goal. I suppose if I were talking to Jordan Peterson, my goal would be for him to be baptized into the Christian Reformed Church and if not the Christian Reformed Church, at least another Christian Church, if he's not been baptized or at least joined as a member. That's sort of part of the trade. Now, of course, Bishop Barron isn't reaching for that. He's just trying to move the ball towards the goalposts here. And obviously in a conversation like this, both are speaking not just to each other but to their broader audiences. But what is Jordan Peterson's interest here? Probably to some degree or another to try to introduce, because he doesn't have a lot of certainty that Bishop Barron has necessarily heard this before, but to try to introduce some of his thinking and to influence Bishop Barron to try to probably incorporate some of these ideas into Bishop Barron's theological mapping of the world that could in fact produce, be fruitful for Bishop Barron and maybe for the Roman Catholic Church. I mean, this is a good faith argument. I think both are sharing information that they believe the other will find beneficial and will be beneficial for their causes, even if their causes are not completely identical. So just that thought in terms of, and I think about that as I watch a conversation like this, what do each of these men want out of this conversation? What's their goal? Again, the goal might not be explicit in their mind, but it might be somewhere else in their consciousness, Congress, that this is why I want to talk to Bishop Barron. And for me, that's the way into the, that's the bridge between biology and religion right there. And that's it. Okay. So I, and again, why they're going to do a lot of talking in this conversation, as they did a lot of talking in the July 2019 conversation about, you know, why Jordan Peterson has been so effective in terms of motivating people to have renewed interest in the Bible and renewed interest in religion. I think part of Jordan's effort to get beneath cultural religious pluralism at at least a universal common human nature that extends up into religion. This isn't totally different from what Jonathan Haidt does in his work and his, his moral taste buds theory. But this is compelling because I think part of the deep, I think part of the deep, can't decide if I'm hot or cold here, part of the deep skepticism and unbelief that they're going to talk about a little later comes from the idea that certain sources of knowledge, such as scientific knowledge, are more reliable than religious knowledge, because there is, I think the assumption of many that religious knowledge is sort of like hot house tomatoes and that it sort of works within its own little realm, maybe within the church, maybe within this little bubble of religious people, but out there in the bigger world where we don't have these religious frames hemming us in, I think this is a vestige and a haunting of modernity because we have this bias towards imagining we're seeing the world as it is, that that larger frame is necessary if you're going to have any credibility, that that sort of information, that sort of knowledge is preferential because in our highly cosmopolitan urban areas, you're going to talk to people of enormously diverse backgrounds and if you can have something that is at least biological underneath, then you have a greater hope of certainty and you have a higher form of human knowledge. And because it looks like there's an evolved ethic that even goes beyond human beings. Okay, so a little pause there. Peterson's like, okay, here's some information. Now what's Peterson's goal? Is it implicit? Is it explicit? In a sense, what he's giving Bishop Barron a challenge and say, okay, you've got your Roman Catholic schtick here, all right. You've got your program. It's a deeply enduring program. It's the most popular form of Christianity in the world, your significant figure. Here is what I see as in some ways, not necessarily a challenge, but a piece of information that needs to be integrated into your system. Why else would Jordan be telling Bishop Barron this? And then the question is, and Rick and I are always playing with networking here because, and then we look at those little lights on the back of a network cable, are these things talking? And so Jordan is looking and he's going to listen and Bishop Barron's now is going to respond to this and part of him is going to respond to us saying, I'm a good faith partner. I've heard what you said. I'm going to try to at least interact with what you've said and accommodate it. But at the same time, I'm not going to sell, I'm not going to give up the shop here. I'm not going to sell the farm. There are elements of this that might be challenging to us because of course each religious tradition one way or another wouldn't be a religious tradition unless they said we actually have a compelling, dominating, credible offer to make to the world with respect to what is truth and what is religion and how does this all work? Yeah, no, I wouldn't deny for a second there was a biological ground for a lot of this business. But I'm with Lonergan, the great Canadian philosopher. I don't know who that is. I'm going to have to look that up. The condition for the possibility of real objectivity is a properly constituted subjectivity. So I like your opening comment about something that bridges the two. We don't just live in the other subjective and objective as though they're discreet, but it's a properly constituted subjectivity, which means one free of various prejudices, one free of various fears, one free of games of self-denial. And this is sort of a verveckian anti-BSing your system. All that that can properly intuit the objective value. And objective value does indeed come up out of the physical to some degree. I mean we're embodied creatures. So the biological plays a role in that for sure. And behind this is also sort of the vervecki-pegeau continual conversation, vervecki-eminence, vervecki-emergence, pegeau-eminence. I think too it goes beyond it. I mean it goes beyond simply a question of survival of the individual or even of the species, but certain values, you know, of the tree. And what he said right there is really important. It goes beyond survival of the individual, the species, because of course the morality. One might ask, okay, what morality is at play within a Darwinian process? The morality at play is sort of a, to pick on Brett Weinstein a little bit, is sort of a world-dominating thing that the thing that rat morality is trying to ensure are more rats. The thing that chimp reality is trying to ensure are more chimps. Now arguably rats have been a far more successful species than chimps, interestingly enough. And human beings have been a far more interesting species than chimps. And one could argue more successful even than rats, the most successful biological creature on the planet. So Bishop Barron just tiny little push back there and say, okay, survival, but mere survival alone doesn't satisfy us. And they're going to get into that quite a bit later. Peterson's of course going to bring up Dostoevsky. Truth and beauty and the good, certain values, you know, of the truth and beauty and the good. In other words, human beings want a lot more than just survival. That transcend that, although they're grounded in it for sure. Well, this is one of the things I really wanted to ask you about, because I do think in evolutionary terms and across the time scale that evolutionary biologists and physicists have come to accept. And so that's a universe that's about 15 billion years old on a planet that's about 4.5 billion. And with life being three and a half and mammalian life, say, being 60 million years. So, okay, so what system is most credible? The longest system? That's my time span. The biblical time span is much truncated in relationship to that. And that truncated sort of an interesting word choice there. That sets up a certain tension between the biblical stories, certainly if they're read as objective truth. And what he's done sort of also is sort of implicitly set up part of this, again, in terms of our modernistic biases. Well, certainly the most, the level beneath the pluralism, the oldest level, that certainly that has a credential to it that a mere 15,000 year old tradition won't have. But there's a nice little trick in there because don't forget the subject who is looking at saying, okay, the 15 billion and then the 4.6 billion and then the, you know, a hundred thousand, you know, few hundred thousand years. The subject looking at that is a part of that equation too. But the Catholic Church, from my understanding, has, and this comes from the Pope himself, the Catholic Church has already accepted the basic tenets of evolution. But- That's pretty low resolution. I don't know. Yes. Is that wrong? Sure. Oh, no, absolutely. Yes. Okay. So- It's very low resolution. There's no nuance or what do we accept or what don't we accept. That'll sort of be played out as we get a little further into this. So, but that begs the question because for me, and I'm sure this is part of the sticking point for young people and maybe for people in Western culture in general, is that it's easy to say that evolutionary theory is being accepted, but that still begs the question. It's right. Okay. So fine. You can look at the span of life over three and a half billion years before you get to human beings, but our religious stories talk of a reality that looks like it's about 15,000 years old. Okay. There's a challenge to the religious frame and saying, well, especially for Peterson, for whom longevity of a belief has a real value in a Darwinian world. So, and again, this is basic to a lot of Jordan's biblical series. Well, if you, the better ideas will be the ones that have been determinative over billions and millions of years, 15,000 years, you sort of have a problem, don't you? Something like that. Right. And so, that I'm not blaming the church for that, obviously. And I think the story, nice little comment to sort of, you know, make sure that we're all good partners here. We're all doing this in good faith. The stories in the Bible are far older than five to 10,000 years. I suspect they were part of an extraordinarily ancient oral tradition. And that's going to make a lot of biblically conservative people feel heard. It stretches back tens of thousands of years, because that's the rule rather than the exception. But, and I don't know to what degree the Catholic thinkers within the church are working constantly to attempt to reconcile these two viewpoints apart from saying that they they do accept them both. And that's a really good question. Yeah, but I don't think they're, I think they're apples and oranges in a way. I mean, I don't worry too much about that issue. I'm not trying to read the Bible as a scientific text. It's not about the evolutionary process. And a little deflection there. It's a theological and spiritual text that's discerning truths that are, I think, available within our experience. Theological, spiritual, discerning truths that are available within our experience. Now, I agree with him. But part of what has made Peterson Salien is his, his ability to sort of lean into and challenge sort of the party line that, well, here's, here's, here's the truth that we have. Now, what's interesting about this video, there's a lot of interesting things about this video. One of the interesting things about this video is that a number of questions are raised about science and religion and about the viability of religion. And Jordan will, the video begins by Bishop Barron basically saying, boy, you're teaching the church a lot of things. We have a lot of things to learn from you. Jordan's about to bring to the fore a lot of his common points about these things. And there's sort of, you know, on one hand, Bishop Barron isn't just giving away the store, doesn't just caving in. There is resistance, but I don't see from Barron, again, and this is my initial comments about status and how well they know each other and how well they know each other's bodies of work, I don't see a lot of reason to believe that Barron is listening to Peterson close enough to be able to actually integrate some of the elements that Peterson is bringing and that Peterson has reliably brought to the conversation. Because of course, and again, this is a good faith conversation. I think both people were quite satisfied with the conversation. But where does this conversation go? How much new stuff does Jordan Peterson walk away from this conversation with? How much new stuff does Bishop Barron walk away from this conversation with? Now, it's always really hard to know because actually in the process of a conversation, our other consciousness congress persons are taking in things that the conscious partner is busy managing the mouth and managing the next point and doing all of that. And so there is an impact back there. But again, there's a lot of little moments like this of, okay, well, let's see how well we two can dance. And it's not a conflict between them, but they're still pretty awkward dance partners. But there are discrete moments there. I mean, the scientist who talks about evolution, fine, I've listened to him or her. The Bible's not concerned so much with that. But it's giving us a theological interpretation of history and indeed of the cosmos, but not in scientific terms. So it has... And again, I mean, I would make that exact same point that he made there in terms of the interest of the Bible. The Peterson's question was, to what degree is the Roman Catholic Church wrestling with this? And I would have to say many Roman Catholics are of course wrestling with it and many people are wrestling with it. But in terms of an agentic being, a hyper object, let's say in Vervecki's terms that the Roman Catholic Church is, how well is this integrating up into and out through this massive, massive ancient organism? It has implications for our understanding of the cosmos for sure and of nature, of human nature, but it's not done in a scientific manner. So it just predates, as you say, I mean, any of what we'd associate now with the scientific method, the last biblical text is around the year 100 AD. And so it long predates that preoccupation. So to me, it's like kind of an apples and oranges issue. But it's not a scientific issue. To me, it's like kind of an apples and oranges issue. And it's I think a lot of that religion science stuff, in that sense, is an early 20th century preoccupation that we should just get beyond. Now, again, I agree with Baron on that. But Peterson's going to push back and I think rightly so here. Right. But I don't I think that may be the case. But I don't think people have gone beyond it. And I also think that and this pertains to something we also talked about discussing, which was the continual drain from the church, the Catholic Church, which was a continual preoccupation of their first conversation two years ago, perhaps in particular, but perhaps not in the West of young people. And I think part of that is their inability to make intellectual sense of everything that they're faced with a religious tradition and a scientific tradition. I think Peterson is dead on right here. And especially on the biological front, but not only that, they don't know where to place these things in their in their view of the world. I think that's partly why my lectures, because you doubt that had become popular, because I am trying to do that. And no, I'll say this. You look at the surveys, there's a lot of surveys now that ask young people, precisely that question, how come you left? And people speculate, Oh, it must be because of the scandals or because, you know, they had a bad experience in church or something. Number one reason across many years and all the surveys is, I don't believe the teachings. And then to specify that religion and science seem to be at odds with each other. So for young people, the scientific way of knowing is the way of knowing. Okay. Now, I think everybody's right right here, but I wish they would push it a little further because what Peterson notes and what now Bishop Baron concedes is that there's a plausibility issue and that plausibility issue is in terms of the mapping. Now, the point Bishop Baron is about to make is an excellent point. And it was one I would make too, but. Bishop Baron's sort of deflection on this question initially is what people watch and it's exactly not what Peterson has done. Peterson's, as I've mentioned when I was doing the commentary on the biblical series, I talked about Concordism. Concordism, I think is a vital element of a person putting together a mental mapping of a plausibility structure because what they're trying to do is map the things in the text with the things in their world. Now, Bishop Baron a few minutes ago made the comment there's theological and spiritual truth that people can relate to. That's true. So that's a mapping. That's a mapping and Concordism is our mapping and Concordism is are sort of the same thing. So they can say, okay, I see this in the Bible. I see this in my world. And once I see this in the Bible and I see this in my world, now I know how to act because I can look at processes or in Canada processes that happen in the Bible and I can, at least with a degree of confidence, attempt to transfer that knowledge and teach me how to act in this world. All right, so that's where mapping comes in. That's where morality comes in. That's where a degree of Concordism comes in. Now, quite popular, okay, back to some church history stuff, at the end of the 19th, beginning of the 20th century, especially after Darwin did his work, and again, Darwin was not by any means the first one to introduce evolutionary ideas to Christianity, but Darwin seemed to propose, or at least where the zeitgeist went at that time, was an increasing confidence that there could be a plausible process that didn't require telos or agency, the kind of agency we usually reserve for conscious beings in order to achieve the kinds of diversity and complexity that we find in the natural order of the world. So there's a split in the church. Both modernists and fundamentalists agreed that the Bible remained a guide to moral behavior in the world, but as a guide for mapping history and science, modernists rejected it. Now, what fundamentalists did was looked around for elements in the natural world that would validate, so a remapping, a new Concordism between the natural world and the Bible to reestablish the credentials of the Bible for natural science and for history. And to a degree this, well this does continue with fundamentalism. Creation science is essentially that effort. In terms of the historical front, that's a continual process, I think and to a good degree because the writers of the biblical text assumed that they were in fact relating to history. Now that gets into Barfield and Lewis and questions about, well, what how did they imagine history and how did they imagine that related to it? So, okay, back to Concordism. A lot of what happened, I think, in Jordan Peterson's biblical series, which was the reason it got traction, was because he was basically mapping the biblical text onto a much more updated biological picture of human inheritance and especially through an existentialist lens. Okay, I think that's why, it takes me years to figure this out, that's a big part of the reason why the consciousness congresses of Jordan Peterson's listeners heard this and said, pay attention, what's he saying? Pay attention, what's he saying? And that's part of the reason why Jordan Peterson's work resulted in a new credibility for the Bible and that new credibility attracted the attention of traditional Christians who were feeling a little in the wilderness really ever since the 19th century, continuing to work on that. And so when Jordan Peterson steps up and does this, now suddenly he is seen as a natural ally to a variety of people who very much wanted to find new validation for the Bible in the world. And so that Concordism that Jordan Peterson was doing, that mapping that he was doing, basically scratched an itch of a lot of people who were hungry for a map and Jordan Peterson says, actually this is the map we've always used and you should probably take a look at this. And then Jordan Peterson sort of succeeded where the seeker movement succeeded back in the 80s and 90s because what the seeker movement did in church history was the seeker movement, if you look at seeker sermons, when I talk about the seeker movement I'm talking about Protestant churches, but Catholics picked up on this a little bit too, Protestant churches in the wake of guys like Bill Hybels and Rick Warren, the church growth movement, Donald McGavern, they basically said people need credibility, people need validation for the Bible and so what seeker preachers did was forefronted wisdom and they said, usually some fairly conservative values, usually sort of updated around the edges to sort of satisfy more contemporary sensitivities, but they basically said, you know, here is wisdom, be faithful to your wife, be more conservative with your money, raise your children with traditional values, this will work out better for you. And generally speaking it does because they heard that message in the church. The church and the Bible received a certain amount of validation and vindication and the programs that these churches were offering also helped, there's celebrate recovery, how to get off drugs and alcohol and porn, there's all of this stuff and that was the most successful church growth strategy in North America for a generation and continues in certain parts of the country to be valid, but that again in some ways continued to maintain sort of the Cold War alliance that the Bible is a credible guide to moral behavior and it was the new atheists that really kicked the legs out from that and when they began to say, no, the Bible is an immoral book and an immoral bronze and iron age God and so the Bible is not a guide for moral behavior. Meanwhile, Sam Harris is being faithful to his wife and so then the weakness and thinness of that pretty much got exposed by Jordan Peterson. So it's sort of scientism, at least implicitly, that religion and science seem to be at odds with each other. So for young people, the scientific way of knowing is the way of knowing. So it's sort of scientism, at least implicitly, holds sway in the minds of a lot of young people. And I think that's valid, but I think it, again, it doesn't fully address the plausibility questions because the scientific mapping has so governed plausibility in this culture. So it's a fair point, but I don't think it's a sufficient point. So once you make that move, knowledge equals the scientific manner of knowing, but then the Bible is non-scientific, therefore it's, you know, old superstition, bronze age mythology, etc. And see what you were doing, Jordan, I think, you were doing what a lot of the church fathers did with the scriptures because the church fathers are very interesting. People like Origen and Augustine and Chrysostom and those people, they knew fully well in the third and fourth century that the Bible should not simply be read in a sort of, you know, straightforwardly literalistic way. Augustine knew that very clearly. Origen knew that clearly. I think this is an excellent point, and I think he's right. What he doesn't lean into far enough is that what the church fathers did was established in some ways a concordism between, you know, much slower moving culture. The heights of, again, I talked about Justin Martyr a little bit in one of the conversations I had yesterday, had a few of them. What the church fathers did was in some ways map Christianity onto the larger cultural map and demonstrate the plausibility and the viability, of course, not without detractors and competitors. That's part of the reason we have writings from the church fathers, is they were writing against their adversaries. They were advocating for the church and Christianity, that Jesus fits into this. So I think Bishop Aaron is right that what Peterson was doing was analogous to what the church fathers were doing, because Peterson was once again asserting a remapping of Christianity onto the dominant conversations of our environment and doing so in a plausible, compelling way. I think that's true. Now we have some of our differences why I'm not, although Protestants sometimes, my father used to wear a black shirt and a clerical collar, and you know, sometimes I feel in my sloth in terms of what clothes do I want to wear. If I just wear the same clothes every day, it'd just be easier. Okay, Paul, don't distract your audience while you distract yourself. The same process is happening in the Protestant Reformation. It's a big part of what happens in Protestantism, because part of both the benefit and the liability of what happens in the church in the Protestant world is a greater openness to redefining. Now part of the problem with redefining is you get things wrong and you start throwing out babies with bath water, and so change is always a difficult thing. But you can't make this point about the church fathers and not also assume that is the ongoing task of the church to continue to delineate and work through these issues in any contemporary space, because if you don't do that, you lose your plausibility structure. And again, as Carlos Erie in his book, Reformations, noted, at least in certain segments of Europe during the Protestant Reformation, the church had already lost the war, and these other issues such as clerical abuse, simony, absentee, bishoprics, a lot of which that the church very much addressed in the Council of Trent, those were a lot of the issues that were brought up, and a lot of the reasons that during the period of the Protestant Reformation, the Roman Catholic Church lost so much. And they talked therefore about the different senses of scripture. What you're doing, I think, in a lot of your lectures is what Origen would have called the moral sense of the Bible, the tropological, to give it its kind of technical term. Now, I just released my conversation with Clay Leibolt. Clay Leibolt made this same point, which is very interesting. And then at the end of that conversation, I sort of pushed back and said, this process we are always doing, the tropological, because it's always, in a sense, in terms of your sermonic structure, the application of the sermon. And of course, the Church Fathers did that. Of course, Jordan Peterson did that. Of course, ministers do that today. But the tropological, we always have with us. And it's a function of the mapping of the ancient received material with the present culture of the day and fitting it together in a compelling plausible picture, a plausible map that people can not only say, do what you say, do this, don't do this. But once their map is put together, they can then use that map to make decisions with the variety of things that come into their life. Not that you give them a list of rules, do this, don't do that, but you give them a map by which they can figure out the way to San Jose. The biblical texts are about the moral life. Now, we might say today the psychological life, or what makes you psychologically healthy or more productive. And that's a really nice turn that he made there, because what psychology, at least the social science, is a relatively modern thing. And so he sort of backfills psychology into Augustine and the Church Fathers, which is exactly appropriate. Some people make the argument that Augustine is the first, is actually the developer of psychology. But we got Socrates and Aristotle and Plato. But yeah, it's a good point. It's a good turn. They would have said the moral sense. They knew all about that. And so the texts begin to open up in these marvelous ways. So Noah and the ark, Jacob and wrestling with the angel and the latter going up to heaven, et cetera, et cetera. If you start fussing about the literal truth of these stories, you're going to miss these really deep spiritual insights. Which the church- And so he's making a really valid point against sort of the modernist, fundamentalist fight that that was a distraction. Fathers knew very well, and I think you were in your own way tapping into that. And the fact that young people were responding to it, see, I think it's very encouraging. That's why I told the bishops, it's a positive sign that you were getting the audiences you were getting around those. Well, the problem with the scientific viewpoint, technically speaking, is that it's amoral. And again, this is where Jordan Peterson is really good. This is a point that he's made a lot of times that you don't- science doesn't tell you how to live. To a degree, it can inform your map, but should is what you take out when you, you know, close, cover your eye of the manifest image. Within it, within its own, within its own confines, by definition, it strives not to address issues of value. Now it can't help it because scientists have to investigate some things and not others. So value enters into it, but by its own nature, science can't answer and tries not to answer questions of value. Now it gets more complicated when you look at work like the primatology I discussed earlier, the origin of morality in animals and game playing, say among rats, that starts to move into the domain of morality to some degree. But the problem with science is that it doesn't- it strips out all subjective meaning. It's designed to do that. And that leaves everyone at a loss about what to do with the world of value. And I do believe that stories in particular address the world of value. That's their function. And the world of value is the world that we act in. They're guides to action. We're gonna have to get into this. I've got to go right now, but I'll be back. That's the beauty of recordings. Okay, I'm back. I'll go back a few minutes because I have to remember what I was doing. We're talking about values and Peterson was mentioning how science strips out all the values. And then we're going to get into story. Among rats, that starts to move into the domain of morality to some degree. But the problem with science is that it doesn't- it strips out all subjective meaning. It's designed to do that. And that leaves everyone at a loss about what to do with the world of value. And I do believe that stories in- I don't know that leaves everyone at a loss with what to do with the world of value. It's just that science won't necessarily be terribly helpful in informing you what to do with the world of value. ...particular, address the world of value. That's their function. And the world of value is the world- And that what he said right there, stories, it's their function to address the world of value. I think that's right. I have to see if my mic got turned down. And I think part of- so I've talked a lot about narrative lately. I mean, part of how stories function is- I mean, it was Peterson who said, our ideas die so that we don't have to. We try out things, we play with things in stories, and we play with outcomes. And it's really rather remarkable when you think about what we're doing. It's very similar to children playing. My wife sometimes posts pictures of when my kids were small, and that brings up memories of their playing. And they have little stuffed animals out, and little figures, little cars. And they just go through, and they play store, and they play these little stories. And what are they doing? They're just going through how the world works. And as they're going through these stories, they're always checking. They're trying to tell realistic stories, but they're still playing with ideas. And they're always checking, does the story feel realistic? And I think in some ways, holding things out there for us to see, and having a story out there for us to play with, and having the sense now, does that story feel realistic or not realistic? Now, again, we're doing this on a on a distributed cognition level with fiction, with movies, with everything. We put it out there, and then we ask ourselves how we feel about it, and we listen to ourselves, and we talk about it. So I think Peterson is right that this is all getting into the world of value, and we're always checking with each other. And again, we, was it in the, I've watched so much of Peterson the last couple days, was it the Russell Brand, was it the Russell Brand video where, you know, we outsource our sanity to each other. And so in some ways, all of this fiction and all of the storytelling is sort of like having cooperative dreams out there. And then we talk about it, and we look for other signals in terms of, you know, did this movie get a lot of views? Is this movie very popular? Who likes that movie? Who doesn't like that movie? Do you like that movie? Do you like that story? Do you read this book? Do you like that novel? We're always doing this together, and what we are doing is in fact, communally negotiating the world of value. That we act in, it, they're guides to action. I come across it all the time in my work on the internet. So I have, you know, dialogues with people that interact with my videos. And now he keeps calling, talking in this video about calm boxes. Is he meaning comment sections in his video? I guess so. I've just never really heard calm box as that type of thing. I always wondered if he has some other communications box that he works in. They'll say things like, well, the scientists give us access to the truth, period. The scientific method, that's how you get to the truth. And I'll say, so Hamlet tells you nothing true. Plato tells you nothing true. And so again, Hamlet and Plato, these are all us sort of having public dreams together and then doing public dream interpretation together. T.S. Eliot's poetry tells you nothing true. I mean, who would believe that except the most ideologically scientific person? Because my fear is a lot of young people are in the grip of that. They're in the grip of a real ideological science. They don't know how to think their way out of it. Well, what's interesting is that on one hand, it's a category problem because they certainly participate in the stories. They certainly watch Netflix. They certainly watch YouTube. And I think Peterson's right here. He says they don't know how to think their way out of it. They're doing it, but they don't understand what they're doing. And so they just abandon the attempt, but it leaves them nowhere. What you were doing, though, is you're showing a way out. And there is a way out. And it's by introduction into the great masters of these texts to show you how they function. That's what a good preacher ought to be doing. You know, so let me throw in. I wish he had continued on that because part of the problem that preaching has had and I'll turn my criticism to my own side is we have sort of and this is a bigger problem of 19th century and 20th century biblical studies. Jonathan Paget had a rather harsh tweet about biblical scholars. Not unfounded. I don't know if I'd be quite so harsh, but the preacher, I think, needs to take and the preacher has to study the text with all of the tools available. But the preacher does need to take the story and integrate the story in the text and help the people bring it down to their lives and not just stand up there and say, do this, don't do that. Another objection, and this is another stumbling block, I think. And I think this emerges in postmodernism in particular, because the postmodernists, there's reasons for their manner of thinking. So one reason is, so artificial intelligence researchers discovered in the early 1960s that perceiving the landscape was much more difficult than anybody had ever suspected. Originally, it was sort of felt that objects were just there in some simple way and the complicated computational problem would be how to move among the obvious objects. But it turned out that it's really, really difficult to perceive the environment. There's an infinite or near infinite number of ways that you can perceive even a finite set of objects. And that means there's a multitude of potential interpretations for every set of events. And so that was a radical discovery in the computational world, but the same discovery basically occurred at the same time in the world of literary analysis for the same reason, is that every text is susceptible to an inordinately large number of interpretations, and it's not easy to identify the canonical interpretation. Now it might be interesting to ask, what do we mean by an interpretation? And I would say that the interpretation is in some ways connected to this concordism that we have, the story out here, and then I have my life. I dealt with this a little bit with the Clay Lybol conversation because at the end of the conversation, I made the point that the interpretation that is happening even in the most biblicistic churches is still that sort of communal conversation that he was talking about before. And again, this gets into Vervecchian relevance realization. The proper interpretation tries to understand what in the nature of reality, what aspect of the narrative is relevant for the relationship that we desire. Part of the problem about not, and again, I don't, Rafe will release those conversations when he's ready, but I had the conversation in real time and Rafe opened up that conversation with a, I always take notes on my, I often take notes on my conversation, with a book by David Abram that I'd never heard of called The Spell of the Sensuous, and he opened it up with a statement that said, the problem with the way of knowing that doesn't put you in right relationship with the surrounding world. And that's sort of what we're talking about here in terms of the correct interpretation. We're looking for which story actually governs, and you can see that playing out in the political sphere. Was it the story that, let's say the 2020 election was stolen, and therefore the Patriots needed to stop the steal? Or was it the story that the prima facie legal story on the election given by the elected representatives was the truth, and in fact those who are saying we need to stop the steal were the ones who were actually evoking the steal. Which, and again, we're not talking about a text that was written thousands of years ago, of which you know, we only have limited numbers of copies and we have a great number of questions about the historical context around that. We're talking about things that happened just a few months ago, that were, you know, has just a near limitless amount of data around them. So these are really difficult questions. And maybe the canonical, it's not, text is susceptible to an inordinately large number of interpretations, and it's not easy to identify the canonical interpretation. Now, I have to, oh. Critical Drinker just did a very interesting video about why canon matters, and I thought it was really quite a good video talking about this idea of canonicity, and it might be a video that I give some further treatment, but Peterson is using that idea in this. And maybe the canonical interpretation isn't canonical, it just serves power, for example, and that would be, you know, religion as the opiate of the masses, or religion as a political tool. And I think that takes things far too far, but there's a real problem here, is that if you divorce the narrative from the objective world, and say well the narrative is valuable because it gives us a guide to value, then you have another problem, which instantly, which is, okay, which narrative, and how do we make a hierarchy of value among narratives? We would say Hamlet is deeper than Harlequin Romance, but trying to specify why that is and what deep- Did he look down on the desk at his current Harlequin Romance he was reading? Do you think Jordan Peterson reads Harlequin Romances? I kind of doubt it. Means is very, very difficult, and you might say well the Bible is the deepest of all narratives, but that still big begs the question. Well, compared to Buddhist writings, say, compared to the Upanishads, or compared to any long-term complex mythology that's developed over thousands and thousands of years, what makes it canonical? Why is it preferable to Shakespeare, for example? And so, well, so perhaps I could get you to address that, because that's a vicious problem. There's a lot there, and I'll start with your opening remark about postmodernism, because I quite agree with you. I'm not simply anti-postmodern. In fact, I wrote a book called Toward a Post-Liberal Catholicism, where I took in a lot of the insights of the postmoderns, one of which is, as you quite correctly say, a sort of legitimate perspectivalism that we never get reality, you know, too cool. I just open my eyes, there's reality. Again, that's Lonergan. It's only a properly constituted subjectivity that opens the door to the properly objected. I think I know what he's saying there, but I'm not really sure. I don't know who Lonergan is, and these, think about that one. But one of those ways of properly constituting your subjectivity is to put your subjectivity within a community of discourse. So it's never the case that I simply intuit the way things are and end of the argument. No, as Lonergan says, it's not the cojito, that was the trouble with the Enlightenment. It's the cogitamos. It's always we think, and that means I have my perspective, I bounce it off your perspective, you bounce off somebody else's. We have a disciplined and structured conversation, and in that process, all the different aspects of the real begin to emerge. Or like, my intellectual hero, John Henry Newman, said the contents of a real idea is equivalent to the sum total of its possible aspects. Which are nearly limitless. This is one of the most interesting parts of the video for me, because part of the long-standing fight between Roman Catholic and Protestant is the degree to which the church magisterium determines the interpretation of biblical texts. Now, I want to be as equally critical, or at least critical to both Protestants and Catholics on there, because in a sense, Protestants like to say the church does not stand above scripture, but in practice, Protestants don't simply leave scripture, they don't simply leave people out there. Now, in terms of, well, you just interpret scripture any way you want. Confessionality is the means by which groups lay their cards on the table and say, these are how we're reading scripture. And churches, different Protestant denominations, tend to create traditions around that. Now, a big piece of this is, of course, the Protestant Reformation, where Luther sort of breaks it open with a perspective that, well, it's the scripture and the conscience and rationality of the reader, and at least Thomas Mann, fatal discord, sort of presupposes that Luther perhaps thought then everything we would all agree, which of course people did not. But what Bishop Barron articulates here, to me, sounds almost Protestant. Now, again, I've got all of these books behind me when I'm working on a sermon. I, in fact, consult biblical scholars and consult the history of interpretation and consult church fathers and consult a lot of, in other words, I, in the quiet of my office, have a conversation with a lot of dead people via books in order to get an understanding, okay, what does this passage mean? What does this say? How can I communicate it to the people? What's the relevance realization by which I do this? But what Bishop Barron doesn't say here is, the church decides what it means. He does say that, but, well, the church has community through this discussion, decides what it means, and it sort of sounds like we come into this community and we converse with the church to decide what it means, and not rather than, well, the church distills this down and then this is what it means. Now, again, Protestants do that too, but they don't always admit that they do it. But I found this particular passage to be very interesting, especially because, so the church has sort of this communal conversation about the text and meaning and value and how we should live. Peterson has sort of this Darwinian approach to assessing value. It's sort of the Lindy effect. How long will it go and the oldest things and we can sort of find the truest things and the deepest things. So I found this section to be one of the most interesting portions of the conversation. It's about 1870, he says that, which is really the total of its possible aspects. That's about 1870, he says that, which is really an extraordinary thing because he anticipates in many ways the phenomenologists. You know, when they talk about walking around an object and to intuit its essence thereby. And the walking around is not just I walk around, but you're walking around and someone else is walking around and we're all exchanging our points of view. And again, I'd bring this into line with Catholicism, which has always stressed the communitarian element. This is a big fight in the tradition of it. Is it the pope? Is it the conciliar movement? You know, this is an ongoing tension within Catholic tradition. Does, you know, God through the pope or does it the community of the saints that does this? So, okay, good bishop. I don't know. We know precisely in the community of the church. Now, linked to the Bible, the Bible's ever like, just open it up. You're a single subjective. And this is sometimes a slam on Protestants. And sometimes it's exactly appropriate because I see it happening all the time. And sometimes I'm guilty of it. Viewer, now you take in its meaning. Well, no, we've always said the Bible is read within the church in this long interpretive tradition where I'm bouncing it off of Augustine's perspective. We've got it from Origen, who now throws it to Thomas Aquinas, who now brings it to Newman, and then through preachers and teachers, through the saints. So, you've got the technical intellectual interpretation of the Bible. Then you have the saints, who in many ways, they embody the Bible. I love that line. That's a great line. So, I'm going to read a lot of the biblical stories in light of Francis of Assisi, in light of Teresa of Calcutta, etc. So, I like that side, if you want, of the postmodern, which is much more tuned to the communal way in which we come to know things. The big question you raise at the end, we could spend some time with that, how do you make ultimate judgments and determinations like this one is right? Well, you hinted at it a bit there by saying, well, look, many, many people worked on this for a very, very long period of time. And in some sense, it's a living document. Now, see, right? It sort of took the horizontal communal, or communal through time, of course, where we're conversing with dead people through the books. And now, Jordan Peterson is going to reshape it into his Darwinian truth. Yeah, right. Because it does have to be, the Bible just doesn't exist as a book on a shelf. It's a pattern of meaning within a context, and the context has to be taken into account. So, you say, well, there's a powerful context for its interpretation. It's also a fundamental text in that the Bible is implicit in all sorts of other great texts like Shakespeare, or anything that's a product of Judeo-Christian culture, that's a deep product, is deeply affected by the Bible. So, it's there implicitly, whether you like it or not. And so, it has to be taken seriously, I would say, even if you don't believe it. But then, to the degree that you believe the central axioms of Western culture, you have to wonder how much of what's biblical you do end up believing because of its implicitness. Oh, yeah. I mean, it's all through the Western culture. Interesting little pause right there. Culture for sure. And the question of belief, you know, in some ways is the most fundamental question in all of theology. Before we get there, but again, back to, I'm watching, thinking about this conversation, because I do a lot of conversations like this. And, you know, partly, if they don't know each other real well, what these conversations can tend to be is we've all got these sort of set speeches that we have, and we sort of trigger one or another one of these algorithms as we go. And I think this is part of why the Peterson-Pageot conversation was good. And when it's particularly good when Peterson is talking to people that he's developed a relationship with, because you can, instead of just continuing to trigger the set speeches that you have with each other, you can sort of get digging in and really break away some new things. We call it belief, you know, in some ways, the Western culture for sure. And the question of belief, you know, in some ways is the most fundamental question in all of theology. We call it fundamental theology. How do you articulate the meaning of belief? And, you know, for the best people in our tradition, belief is always on the far side of reason, not the near side of reason. And again, this is right from cosmic skeptic. Again, this is another speech that, and again, that's not a critique. I'm a pastor. I talk for a living. And those of you who have listened to tons of me know I have these, you know, it's like you get to a certain point, it's almost like I press the button on that tape. Old school, all right, let's hit the, I click on that icon and I trigger that little talk that I give. And that's a mistake that so many people make today, young people especially, faith or belief. Oh, those young people. If they mistake for credulity or superstition, something sub rational. And our best people, of course, have always repudiated that. Authentic faith is on the far side of reason. So reason's done all the work it can and should do. But then there's this moment when the claim is made, Deus dixit, right? That God has spoken. Now, do I believe that or not? I think it's precisely analogous to coming to know a person. You know, this, this, this portion here is, it's tricky because there's a lot here. So I know something about you just from watching you over the year. Again, this is right out of his conversation with Cosmic Skeptic. He's probably given this routine dozens of times. And I can Google you and I can read your books and I can come to some sort of objective knowledge of you. Now in this virtual means, I've met you. And so my mind is working trying to understand where you're coming from. But let's, I mean, project into the future. If you and I met in person, you and I eventually became friends. And at some point, you spoke a truth about yourself that I could never have gotten on my own. I could never have gotten it from any objective source. You revealed something to me, right, of your inner life. And at that point, I've got to make a decision. Well, do I believe that or not? I can't prove it. I can't ratify it. It's congruent with everything I've known. It's really kind of a complex and subtle. I mean, it's a good argument. I'm not critiquing the arguments. It's very interesting. So that's one test I could give. If you told me something that's just wildly incongruous with everything else I know about you, I'd probably not believe that. But if you tell me something that's congruent with what I know, but goes beyond it, and I have to say at that point, okay, I have to believe that or not. I think faith is like that in a way. So the Bible I can approach in all kinds of different ways. But the claim being made at the heart of the Bible, of biblical revelation, is Deus Dixit, God has spoken, God has said something in this text. Do I accept it? And that has to be a decision that's born of something beyond reason, not opposed to it, but beyond it. So that's, I think, where belief in the religious sense comes in. Beyond is interesting because it is, you know, there's a part of relevance realization that's in there, and it's part, congruence is a word that's obviously key to that. It's in keeping with what we know of the person. So I have, I understand that argument, but I have trouble with it, I would say. So we could talk about faith a little bit, and this is groping around in the darkness. It seems to me that gratitude is a form of faith. It's like a decision in some sense, because you could look at the world and you could say, well, there's plenty of reasons to be grateful and there's plenty of reasons not to be. And so the evidence doesn't necessarily support one interpretation or another, but a decision about whether or not to be grateful is going to affect the way I interpret the world and also perhaps the way it reveals itself to me, and the way I act in it and the consequences of my action. So I would say it seems to me to take faith to be grateful, and that seems to be a worthwhile faith. It seems to me to take faith to operate always when we don't know what we're doing, and we usually don't know what we're doing. And so part of the reason that you have to have faith is because you're actually ignorant, and it fills in the gaps, right? Because otherwise you'd be stuck with a never-ending regress. You just ask why all the time, and then you could never act, because the why has to end somewhere. And I think virtually by definition, it ends with an act of faith. That might be akin to your idea about faith being beyond reason. It's like, well, look, if I ask you why you're having this conversation with me, you'll give me a reason, and if I ask you why that reason is valid, you'll give me another reason. And if I do that five or six times, you're going to run out of reasons, but you're still having the conversation. So that means you have faith that the conversation can go somewhere good, and that's not actually a delusion. No, no, and actually you're moving toward God, and I think that's a classic route in our tradition, and just the way you were doing it. Why are we having this conversation? I can give these particular reasons, but then ask the why again, ask it a third, a fourth, a fifth time. Finally, I'm going to get to something like, well, because I want to be happy. You know, what ultimately motivates the will is some desire. This, I don't know why Bishop Barron turns the conversation in the way he does at this point. It's really rather peculiar because it sort of bogs down for a little while here, and happy is, I don't know if happy is the right word, but I'm seeking satisfaction. I think that's a better word, and I'm seeking, because again, part of what I've been talking about a lot lately has been we desire something that we know not what, and it's more than what we've ever known, but we still are drawn to it. By happiness, well, what's happiness? Well, keep pressing that question. It can't be something simply in this world. We all know that doesn't make us happy in the way that we're seeking. It's something like the sumum bonum, right? Something like the ultimate good. I want to be happy in the fullest possible sense all the time, which is why, you know, Teilhard de Chardin said this, that I wouldn't get out of bed in the morning unless I believe in God. And that's what he meant, was if you do that kind of horizon analysis of every act of the will, even the simplest, like getting out of bed, you finally come to the sumum bonum. And I'm trying to think how this really, why he would make that turn right there with Peterson. Let me walk through that. Okay, let me walk through that, because I think that's a useful thing to think about. Technically, I've thought about identity in this regard, because identity is a nested structure. It's also a lens through which we view the world. And so, if I'm sitting at my typewriter typing, you might ask me what I'm doing, and the answer is, well, I'm moving my fingers up and down. But then that's true. And the next answer is, well, I'm producing words on a page, but I'm also producing phrases, and I'm producing sentences, and I'm producing paragraphs, and then chapters, and then a book. And then you might say, well, are you writing a book, or are you being a professor? And I'd say, no, well, I'm being a professor, pushing my fingers up and down on this keypad. And then you might say, well, what's professor nested in? And the answer to that would be something like, well, good citizen. And then that's nested in good man. And then that's nested in, well, then that's right where you start to encounter what I think are something like religious presuppositions. It's like, well, what exactly do you mean by good man? And I think psychologically, I think, well, that means to act out the mythological hero. And that's exactly the point where that identity touches on something that's, I think, indistinguishable from religion at that end. Now, I'm not sure what that means about God, per se. I would say this, that God, in our great tradition, could be defined as the- See, and I knew, well, how are you defining God? And so I understand why he goes here with this. Good in its unconditioned form. So all the things you've been raising here, so the why, why, why, I'm answering with some kind of good, with a conditioned good. The very fact that I can put it in a wider context means it's conditioned. It's good, I'm seeking it, but it's not the ultimate thing I'm seeking. So unless we have an infinite regress, which I think is repugnant to reason- And immobilizing. You know, there are people who have neurological conditions that put them into an infinite regress, and they cannot act. Right. So if that's repugnant, both, let's say, epistemically and psychologically, we have to come to something that's properly called the unconditioned good, good in its absolute form, that which is desirable simply for its own sake. So Aquinas will say God is called good because God is the supremely desirable. What do we desire, Thomas says, some form of actuality or being? That's why we call God the fully real, that which is most actual, octus purus, right? But I like the analysis that comes not so much cosmologically, but psychologically, from what motivates me. And finally, unless my life just sort of founders into irrationality, I am motivated. Well, I think so, because, you know, I would also say, well, let's reject that argument and say, well, you're not nested in good man, good citizen, hero, and then beyond that, you know, cosmic hero. And I think psychologically speaking, the figure of Christ is, if nothing else, a cosmic hero. It's going to be very interesting to see where he and Vervecki's conversation goes with respect to hero. And I'm not saying it's nothing else, but it's at least that. Well, what would the alternative be? Well, you wouldn't be doing what was good. Well, then what's on the outskirts of your value structure is something that's adversarial, something that's the opposite of good. And maybe you're likely, in fact, your psyche is not pure and you vary depending on your faith, I suppose. But there's no escaping being nested in some sort of transcendent structure like that. And then I think of it this way. So you have these outermost reach of your identity structure, which is something like whatever the idea of good man is grounded in. And I do think it's grounded in this hero narrative. But then I look at the hero narrative and I think, well, that's a biologically, that's a- Now, before he goes there, I mean, remember earlier, narratives are grounded. What do narratives do? Narratives are the way by which we understand value hierarchies. An emergent, and I think, well, that's a biologically, that's an emergent narrative. It has evolutionary roots. It's something like man has discovered that his goal is to move into the unknown to confront what's predatory and dangerous and to garner something of great value in return and to share it with the community. And it's an ancient, ancient story. It echoes through the Old Testament continually. It's even there. It's even there. It lurks underneath the accounts of God's creation itself. And that means that that outermost rim of identity is something that has an evolutionary origin. And then you think, well, that means that it has to be connected. It's connected with reality in some fundamental sense. Does that demonstrate the existence of God? Well, that's a different question. But you can push, you can make a logical case for the necessity of that hypothesis of goodness to that point, as far as I can tell. Well, stay first with your example of someone, let's say, who's really wicked. And there are wicked people. We can analyze that psychologically or- Two of them are sitting right here. Well, yeah, I mean, because it goes right through the human. Calvinists. As Sol Janitsyn said. But Thomas Aquinas says a wicked person, even the most wicked person, is seeking at least the apparent good. So something that appears good to that person. Now, they could be totally mixed up about it. It's not in fact good for them, but at least it appears good to them. So even the most wicked person, Thomas says, is incoherently seeking God, because it's always some good. And now he's got the wrong sense of it. But he's still being drawn and motivated by this first cause of the will, even the most wicked person. See, but I think that's a sign of hope. That means grace is always possible. Now, read whether it's Dostoevsky or Flannery O'Connor and people that talk about the most wicked types. But they're sometimes the place where grace breaks through, you know, because they are seeking God in their perverse way. So in a way, he's got us coming or going, you know, whether we're Mother Teresa or we're a wicked Dostoevsky character, we're all seeking God in some way. And I agree with you about the Bible. The Bible Well, see, I'm not that optimistic, because I think thatI don't think that all evil actions are misguided. I think thatand I think that's best illustrated in the story of Cain and Abel. And I took the story of Cain extremely seriously. I think it has unbelievable explanatory power. It's quite staggering that the power of that story, the explanatory power, especially for how short And I don't actually like this part of the conversation so much, because it seems Bishop Barron was playing this tape here and now Peterson's about to go off and it's Cain and Abel. I don't know that they're really connecting so well here. It is. You know, Cain is resentful. He has his reasons. His sacrifices were repudiated by God for reasons that aren't made clear in the text, which is a great ambiguity, because often our sacrifices are repudiated. And Cain is bitter, and no wonder, and he has Abel around to rub his nose in it as well. But Cain's reaction is, I'm going to destroy what God values most. And thatnow you might say, well, Cain is conflicted and ambivalent about that, and I believe that, but I don't think he was seeking the good when he struck down. He was shaking his fist at God. Indeed he was, objectively, but he was seeking at least the apparent good for him. In his twisted mind, he thought that was the good. I don't believe it. I don't believe it. I think you can get to a point where you're so resentfulI really believe thisthat you're so resentful that you will do harm to yourself as well as everyone else. No, truly. But a suicide is seeking at least the apparent good. A suicidal person thinks my non-existence is a good thing. So they are seeking the good, but in a twisted, misguided way. And to me, it's got metaphysical roots, because I would hold to the classical view that evil is a privatio boni, right? It's a privation of the good. So good is always more fundamental than evil. It has to be. They're not co-equal principles fighting away. So I'd repudiate any sort of Gnostic or Manichaean system that I believe that too. I thought about that a lot. Jung is being accused of Manichaeanism, for example, because he took evil so seriously. Who has? Sorry, I couldn't hear. Carl Jung was accused of Manichaeanism. But, you know, he took The conversation sort of loses a little something in this. They're sort of both talking and they're not connecting. Evil extraordinarily seriously, which is something that's definitely worth doing. So look, you look at examples like the Columbine killers. Well, you know, the suicide could have come before the murders, but it didn't. And so I don't I even see maybe in those situations the desire for non-existence, not so much as seeking of the good, but a desire to punish God for the inadequacy of his creation. Yeah, it could be. But at least in their mind, that's a good thing. So that's the Cain connection, that the resentmentthey're both sort of stubbornly holding to their position against God and getting back at God. Sure, I see it in the pastoral life all the time. It's a justified thing. They think God deserves it. Because look at what's happened. But God has His coming or going, because that is in fact a quest for God. That's right. I mean, even the most resistant sinner is in fact under grace in that sense. That's why I've always liked both Origen and C.S. Lewis say this, that it's the love of God that lights up the fires of hell. Right? If someone's in hell, it's the resistance to God's love that's lighting up the fires, that's causing the friction. And so God has you coming or going. I mean, is God present in hell? Sure, because whatever is has to be grounded in God. And God's even present in the fires of hell because it's the resistance against God that's causing them. So I think it's a metaphysical statement and a psychological statement about the primacy of the good. But it's a source of hope. And a lot of my pastoral workand you as a psychologist too, when you go into people's pain in a very deep way, and priests go all the time to these limit situations where people have lost loved ones, they're facing their own death, they're facing tremendous failure. That's where priests go. That's often where grace is going to break through. Well, there areI've encountered situations as a clinician where religious language is the only language that can be used to describe what's happening. And again, a point that he made with thein that one conversation, Dave Rubin was there, made that same point. I say these things sometimes, you know, 40 minutes in, just to sort of log it in my brain. And sometime when I need a clip or something, I need to reference Peterson. Here he is making that statement. That's quite interesting. It's difficult to relay those experiences outside the specific framework of the occurrences. Yeah. The conversation's just sort of loses, kind of a lull. Conversations have that. I always think of, you know, Hagel said, to know a limit as a limit is to be beyond the limit. And I think that's true here. So whether it's the physical sciences or psychology, our reason comes to a certain limit, but then it recognizes the limit as a limit. And that's to be already beyond it in a way. And they often That's a really smart saying. I'd never heard that saying, but it's really pretty smart. Hagel's saying I'm talking about religious questions as limit questions, or it's a limit situation. When I begin to ask the meta question beyond questions, or I come to a meta experience beyond any ordinary experience. And that's why, again, priests tend to show up at those limit cases. That's when we're looking into this abyss. And it is, from our standpoint, rather abyssal. I mean, what is it that stands beyond what I can know and control? And there's thisI mean, there's a kind of leap that that abyss is something loving. What stands beyond what I can control is a force of love that's actually summoning me. And that's whereyou go back to what I said about Deus Dixit, God speaking through the Scriptures. I think that's what it means. The voice from the cloud is a symbol of it, you know? When someone hears the voice of God, it's coming from the abyss. It always is. Job, you know, the voice comes out of the whirlwind. So your eyes are closed, and you can't see anything. But from the whirlwind comes the voice. And again, that speech is so important, because, Job, where were you when I did all theseI mean, what do you know about what is going on? You know nothing about what's going on. But from the abyss beyond reason comes the voice. And the Bible witnesses to that stuff all the time. And boy, it happens in people's experience. I mean, you and I both know that. When you come up against limits, what comes out of the abyss is a very interesting thing. Well, one of the ways that's interesting to think about this, I think, is that, well, let's assume that at the outermost limits of your identity, you don't make the assumption that you're involved in an enterprise that's good, nested inside a being that's good. Let's say you take the opposite approach to that. What happens to your behavior? And what I believe I've observed, and I tried to document this particularly in my book Maps of Meaning, is that you start acting in ways that make everything worse very rapidly. So I had a debate a while back with an antinatalist, David Benatar, and he believes that existence is so rife with suffering, conscious existence is so rife with suffering, that it would be better if it just didn't exist at all. And Dostoevsky's Ivan makes that case in the Brothers Karamazov. Brilliantly, brilliantly, he tortures his brother Alyosha, who's the novitiate. And it's a very interesting book, because Alyosha is nowhere near the rhetorician that Ivan is, but he is the most admirable character in the book because of the totality of his personality, not because of the brilliance of his rational mind. It's an amazing book in that regard. But the problem I had with Benatar's hypothesis wasn't its axiom, because I think you can make a strong case that there's so much suffering in the world that the question of its validity is a valid question. The problem for me there is that if you do that and you start to act that out, things appear to take a vicious turn very rapidly. You start working against everything that's alive and striving. Yes. No, quite right. There's a lot there. I was thinking of, as you were talking, Dante's image of Satan at the pit of hell, not in a fiery place, but in icy place, much, much better symbol of stuck. Surrounded by the betrayers. Yeah, chewing on the three great traitors. But his great wings, he's meant to fly, he's meant to fly up into the presence of God. But all they do is he's beating his wings. And that's our earlier point about he's seeking God. I mean, Satan is seeking God. You have to. That's the way the will functions. But all he's managing to do is make the world around him colder. So as he's beating his wings, he's creating the meteorology of hell. So that's what happens when someone gets really stuck. They are, in fact, seeking God. That's a good image. Bishop Aaron, very determined to win this point. And he cries from all six eyes. He's got six eyes and he's weeping and he's drooling from the people he's chewing. And he's stuck and he's making the world colder. It's a beautiful picture. Good old Dante. It's a beautiful picture of what happens. It's really useful, too, for listeners to realize. If you look at, this is my opinion, and you can take it for what it's worth, the images of Satan in Paradise Lost and in Dante's Inferno are unbelievably instructive. If you start to understand that what these thinkers were trying to do was to produce an imaginative representation of evil and evil as an embodied and transcendent being. Now, what's interesting about this point to me, Peter Craeft makes this point quite often that it's often easier, now if narrative is sort of this communal dream that we're having, it's often easier, especially lately, for people to come up with anti-heroes. James Gandolfini in The Sopranos. And Peter Craeft's argument is that it's easier for us to do this for evil and it's even more difficult for us to do it for good. Now, that's interesting in the light of Peterson's fascination with hero stories, because of course the hero was good, but having someone be, it's often the case that if the character is too good, they come off as dull in our collective dreams. The psychological rationale for that, I believe, and it has something to do with our ability to communicate, which you referred to earlier, is that the evil we do is informed by the entire human race's conception of what constitutes evil. And stretching back- That would be the sum of, and again, it's amazing that, I mean, when you have a picture of how we actually work, it's amazing that anything works at all, because we've got all these stories out there and it seems we have all these mappings in here. I mean, it's almost Bitcoin-like in this register, this register that's just sort of out there in the public domain that anybody can look at the register, but it's just code to us, but it's mapped in all of us and it's almost a mesh network. It goes from one to the other and one to the other, yet it's not copied perfectly on each other. Every copy that we bear is unique, yet it's just an astounding picture. Back from the beginning of the time when we began to communicate, so for example, you see this quite clearly, I read the Columbine killer's notes in quite a bit of detail and it's saturated with satanic thought. And- And Paget was going to do his video on Little Nas and I'm really looking forward to that because I liked this section of the video because I, you know, all of us have been immersed in storytelling that deals with the satanic. And I never, you know, I never thought too much about, well, where does this imagery come from? How does this imagery work? So I'm really looking forward to it. I read Jonathan Paget's piece on it, but I'm an auditory learner and so I'd much rather see Jonathan Paget's video on it. So I'm anticipating him making this video. The reason for that is that that sort of thought is part of the culture because we've come to represent these transcendent figures of evil in poetry and in movies. And it happens all the time in movies with characters, say like Hannibal Lecter and in horror movies and the Milton's Satan, who's often viewed at least by some as a revolutionary hero, seems to me to be something like the rational mind. It's what happens to the rational mind when it places its presuppositions in the place of God. That because Satan seems to presume that he can replace the transcendent. That's the very modern rationalism Satan. By his own presuppositions. And I think that's my reading of that is that's actually what happened on earth. Not long after Milton wrote when these totalitarian states emerged, it's something Solzhenitsyn commented on it, where the presuppositions, the utopian presuppositions of man rationally thought out were seen as sufficient to represent everything, the totality, to eliminate the need for something transcendent. And the consequence of that was that they produced something that looked an awful lot like hell. And Dante did that more psychologically. And so Milton being the great poetic genius that he was, had a poetic sense that that was what was coming down the pipelines. I wonder if you read your countryman Charles Taylor, much the Canadian philosopher, because Catholic too. Taylor said that we in the west, not to brag, so let's say Western Europe, America, Canada, Australia, we might be the first civilization ever, ever to think you can find real happiness apart from a transcendent reference point. And everyone in human history has felt something like the alluring darkness beyond what I can control and know is necessary. A relationship to that realm is necessary for happiness. We're the first- Well, and Taylor of course has, you know, I love his use of the word the imaginary, because in some sense that's what it is, because we have to hold it out there in front of us, so to see it, because again we can't, we only see out. And so we sort of keep putting stories up between us, and these are sort of waking dreams between us so that we can see this, and in many ways those stories have become sort of the transcendent in this secular frame. First culture ever that said, no, I don't care, I'm indifferent to it. But that does produce versions of hell for sure, because something will take the place of the transcendent point of reference. Well, it seems useful even from the perspective of humility. I mean, I don't know if this is a reasonable thing to say, but a tyrant who believes in God is likely preferable to one who doesn't, because at least in principle the tyrant is held accountable by something that isn't him. He's under God. That's right, and he would get caught, at least in principle again, in the operation of his own conscience. Don't you? I love the fact in the scriptures, they're very unique this way. They do not apotheosize their leaders, and it's very different from so many other ancient cultures. Apotheosize, there's a six dollar word. In cultures where the kings become like gods, then there's the Bible. I mean, the Bible is bluntly honest about its leaders and its kings. Even the greatest, even David, murderer, adulterer, Solomon, Saul, the whole realm of them. That's a brilliant insight of the Bible, that all these people are under God, and they're under judgment. And that's a liberating idea, and when we lose that, the leaders do become apotheosized. Well, you saw that in Rome constantly, in ancient Rome. That literally happened. And there's always a proclivity for that to happen. That's the imperial presidency. Right, and I think it's very important. I always tell when I'm preaching on this subject to Christians, the fact that Jesus is called the Son of God, it was so important because it was dethroning the Roman claim that the emperor was the way to Osteu the OO, so one of the titles after Morland. Julius Caesar is divinized, and his son, Augustus, becomes the Son of the God. So when the first evangelists were saying, I've got good news about Jesus, the Son of God, they were saying, right, it's not Caesar. He is not the Son of God. This one whom Caesar killed, by the way, he's the Son of God. But the Bible's always making that move of knocking our own pretensions off their their pedestals. That's an amazing observation, actually. And it is one of the things that is extraordinarily striking about the Old Testament, is that it's so sophisticated psychologically, because what's happening there is that the idea of absolute sovereignty is disconnected from the person bearing the sovereignty. The first biblical lecture goes into this. At the very least, again speaking psychologically, what you have is the representation of God as that which is sovereign. And now each individual can be a representative of that, and can have that operate within them, but they aren't that. And that, well, as I said, at the least that's a brilliant psychological innovation. And the fact that the biblical characters are so realistic to the point of Dostoevskyan painfulness. You know, Abraham doesn't leave home until he's what, 80? 75 or something. He's a late starter, right? Late starter, late bloomer, that Abraham. Even marries his half-sister. Won't even get out of the house to find a woman not member of his family. His life is just one god-awful catastrophe after another for the first while. It's like, you know, you have some- Because he doesn't believe. Contempt for him, let's say, because he's hanging around his father's tent, and then he does finally pay attention to the call of adventure, to God's voice, and he goes out and encounters tyranny and starvation and corruption, and he makes all sorts of mistakes. And it's easy to- I'm not sure that's exactly how- Well, the Abraham cycle is, in fact, God makes a promise, and Abraham keeps trying to make the promise happen for himself instead of receive it by grace, receive it by faith. Contemptuous, I think, of the biblical characters because of that, but it actually speaks to their intense psychological realism. And it's so useful for people to see that because Abraham, for example, is blessed by God, despite the fact, despite his evident character flaws. And that's- Well, despite the fact that he keeps trying to- Again, the promise given to Abraham is that he will have a son by his wife Sarah, and at each turn Abraham and Sarah try to secure that blessing for themselves, and God keeps saying, no, it's not Lot, no, it's not your servant, no, it's not through Hagar. And then the three come, and God says, Sarah, you will have a son and name him Isaac, and of course she laughs. That's the story. That's the case for the patriarchs in general. And then for David- It is remarkable. Right. A descendant of yours I'll put in the throne that will last forever to David, who was a deeply flawed character. What I find cool is that even before you get to the human characters, go to the very beginning of the Bible and you have a dethroning of the cosmic pretenders to the absolute. So in the creation account, sun, moon, stars, planet, animals, the earth itself, all the things mentioned were worshiped in different contexts. So the author is saying, no, no, no, no, they're not divine, they're creatures. But then he turns it around beautifully, but they have a purpose, which is to give praise to God. So they're not God, they should be dethroned from that. But now they're given the privilege of praising God with their manner of being, led by the conscious creature, human beings, who Catholics know this, whoever comes at the end of a liturgical procession is the one that leads the prayer. So Genesis, the opening verses sound like a liturgical procession, you know, the first is, then that. Well, that's good. I didn't know that. So, hey, two points for Catholic liturgical processions. Sounds like a good thing. Evening came, morning followed, and the fourth day, and it's like a steady procession of liturgical actors. The last figure, the human being, is the one now that will lead the chorus of praise. To my mind, it's the master theme of the whole Bible, if you want, is we're rightly constituted when we give praise to God and can lead all of our creaturely brothers and sisters in the right praise of God. Sin is bad praise. It's without fail in the Bible. They went after false gods. They went after the gods of those people. They abandoned the teaching of the Lord. Bad praise leads to the disintegration of the self. So that's now in the psychological order. And that's really- Well, praise- And go back to the Peugeot conversation. How much did Peugeot hammer attention and worship? Now, I've got to wrap this up, and I'm just trying to look for a good breaking point, but they keep going. So at some point, I'm going to- This might be a good transition, because now we're going to sort of switch over to the praise thing. So maybe I will just end it here. So this will be part one. I'm about halfway through, let's say. So there will be a part two. There's some good stuff in the end. I kind of looked at sort of between 30 minutes and 54 minutes. It sort of seemed like a lull in the conversation, but it's going to pick up steam. So I will post this tomorrow morning. If you like it, leave a comment, give a thumbs up. Get done with this. And I did the Russell Brand thing last night, and that was an hour and 40 minutes. And just kind of- Luke noted in the timestamp that I yawned. Yes, I do read the comments. And Philip, no, I'm not deleting your comments. I never delete comments. I only delete the Spambot comments. So if you're trying to post links in, sometimes the automatic spam protection won't let you post a link in. But anyway. So why do I do these commentaries? Well, partly because I always listen to them one run through and think, oh, I got some things I'd like to say about them. And so then this gives me a chance to say about them. But it is these are, you know, I obviously don't do commentaries on every video that Peterson does, but I do find these helpful. And some of you, probably nobody who watches these videos knows this. It was 15 years ago or so when I sort of did a deep dive into Tim Keller, I didn't have YouTube or anything like that. That would have been an interesting thing to do commentary on Tim Keller sermons on YouTube. But his sermons weren't really on YouTube then either. But one of the things that I did was I did a digestion of his sermons and I would do that on my blog and I would list all the comments and I would sort of do write ups on different sermons as they would come through because I actually found that helpful in terms of you watch a conversation like this. And I mean, both men are so brilliant. I mean, those of you, obviously many of the people who watch these videos are Peterson fans, but Bishop Barron is a brilliant man. I mean, he's got stellar academic credentials. He's well spoken. He's extraordinarily well read. You know, he's, you know, I would, I could, I could hope to be like Bishop Barron someday, but, and some of you say, yes, Paul, join the Catholic church. I hear you, Hank. I hear you. I'm still CRC. Plan to be that to the end. But it helps me to slow down, listen, digest, and apparently you all like it too. So, you know, if y'all like it and I like doing it, then it's, it's a worthwhile thing to do. So again, I do feel tremendously indebted to, to you all for, for listening. And if you got to all the way to the end on YouTube, you can see like the, the, the drop off of people, you know, the first minute or so it's like, because people click on it's like, Oh, is this interesting? No, this is crazy guy with this big beard and he rambles and he never gets to the point. I don't want to watch that. But then, you know, those of you who hang on to the end, well, well, here's the end. So leave a comment, like, subscribe, all those fun YouTube things and Lord willing, I will do commentary on the other half of the video. So thanks for watching.