https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4J2pFByKXaI

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a little video on Jordan Peterson's agendas because I think one of the ways to understand him is through his agendas and he has a variety of agendas that he's working on and I just wanted to quickly run through them and do a little short video. His world-saving agenda, his lifestyle agenda, his learning agenda, his professional agenda, his political agenda, and what's next. His world-saving agenda to help individuals reach their full potential and you can see that through his book 12 Rules for Life, his book tour, which is really a sort of individual-saving evangelistic crusade where he's barnstorming all around the world and giving talks to audiences of 2,000 to 3,000 to 5,000 people and giving them his advice, encouraging individuals to step up, sort themselves out, do what's right. The VIP meet and greets that happen after where he just has 30 seconds or a minute to receive thanks from individuals and this is an inspiring thing for him. This is in many ways I think the center of his vocation, how he feels and his calling. The Future Authoring Program, the Big Five, online, all of this is part of his world-saving agenda and he's trying to save the individual. In a sense, he's a therapist with a fire hose. His lifestyle agenda. So again, we all have these multiple agendas and they work in our lives and I think early on somebody who knows him talked to me about this is kind of he and his wife's last big thing. They've had, like many people, they've had episodes in their lives where they've focused on one thing or another and this is a big adventure for them. He and his wife seem to be having a good time. They're having the wildest ride of their lives. They're going all over the world. They're making more money than ever. I'm sure it's taxing and demanding on him, but that's part of the adventure. It's uncertain where it will go. That's part of the adventure. He's riding a wave and he's going to ride this wave or this train as far as it'll take him. Learning Agenda. Now I think this is different and if we look at the Sam Harris conversations, I think that was more in line with his learning agenda than the book tour is in terms of his world-saving agenda and the adventure aspect and the life and the lifestyle agenda. So in his learning agenda, what he's really doing is natural theology. Even if he's not talking in those terms, that's the type of thing he's doing now. Natural theology is the attempt to find God from below. You're excluding divine revelation and this is very much in keeping with the secular sphere and you use reason, science, empiricism and history to discern the meaning of life or the reason for being or the goal of existence. I've used this slide before and I'm going to continue to use it. You have reason in a sense from above. You have science, experience, empiricism from below. You have the past, its record, history. And in other words, you're trying to complete the box. You're trying to complete the rectangle here and have the full picture of what human life is. And this is his mental agenda and he's trying to use Sam Harris as a conversation partner and I think a very frustrating conversation partner because Sam Harris' agendas are different. Sam Harris has an agenda with respect to Islam, an agenda with respect to religion and Sam Harris really isn't into the mode of trying to figure out what the world is. Sam Harris pretty much has his table set. But Peterson continues to have a learning agenda. He's a lifelong learner. You answer the really big questions such as why are we here? That's the tell-offs. That's the reason for the purpose and trying to find God and figure out God from below. Now his natural theology I think explains his conversation partners. His dead white men partners are better than his living ones. And I think we've seen that through Nietzsche, Dostoevsky, Solzhenitsyn, Kierkegaard, Jung. Those have been really the fruitful conversation partners for him. And his complaint against Sam Harris is that he doesn't pay attention to the heavy hitters. His living partners are determined agnostics and atheists. And while this protects the natural theology project from revelatory contamination, they are also proving not terribly imaginative nor helpful. They're too shy and reactive of religion. And really there's been some interesting work done in this field, but none of them seem to be terribly aware of it or to bring it into it. Now he's had little conversations with some philosophers, but what really what he needs is more extended conversation. And I think part of the difficulty is the question of who is available to him of a certain status. I think there would be scholars and theologians who could be available to him, but I think the difficulty there is that they simply are not aware enough of his agenda. In terms of the status hierarchy, there are different hierarchies. And although he's way up kind of in this, he'll talk to Dr. Oz, he'll talk to Sam Harris. Brett Weinstein is between jobs, the intellectual dark web group, people who've kind of come up on the Internet, but in terms of academicians who have regular jobs and are working on books, he's not been able to get in sync with this group. Now I think that would be a tremendously interesting group for him to pursue. But at this point, the multiplicity of his agendas is keeping him so terribly busy that I don't think he's going to get in terms, I don't think he's going to get on sync or in pacing with them. Will he be able to find better conversation partners? Will he expand? I don't know that he's going to have the time. And this gets into his professional agenda. To remake the university, he keeps giving teasers about this, but given everything he's doing, given the enormity of the task, giving little indication that he has an institutional temperament and orientation, I've got real doubts. In my conversation with Ron Dart, you know, Ron Dart ended it by saying, I hope he doesn't leave the academy. I'm finding it increasingly hard to imagine that he stays if Hollywood calls. All these other agendas have come together, and because our lives are really kind of the coming together of all of these agendas, and I don't know where that's going. So what's next? More books. So he talks about the fact that he's got some book contracts, but writing really isn't his strongest suit. More 12 rules talks, more biblical lectures. Everybody's waiting for the biblical lectures. We'll have to see. But, you know, there's a certain amount of exhaustion with respect to the hardcore Jordan Peterson fans and the material that he's already put out. More material. Take some time and find some new stuff. I think that would be good, but I don't know apart from the biblical material and even how that would go at this point. I'm not really sure. The balance between new material and new audience is part of what's killing him. He wants to, not killing him, but he wants to expand his audience, but in order to expand his audience, he uses the tried and true, and so he's not putting out new material, and so there's an attention deficit for the people who have heard all this stuff before. They sort of move on, and now with many, Jordan Peterson has kind of become a pole around which people are finding themselves to have good conversation, but is Peterson actually putting out anything of interest or anything new? More money, and I think to a certain degree he's cashing in on the ride, and this is where the multitude of agendas that he's looking at really come together, because what his life is going to be is kind of the center of all these agendas, how all these agendas can work, and that sort of dictates where this is going. Again, I wanted to do a real fast video. There it is on Jordan Peterson's agendas.