https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=EXNOv3JX5lM

 Yeah, I'm glad you sent me a note and I just reread your email a second ago and why don't you tell me a little bit more about yourself. Looks like you have a Dell computer. How do you know that? Probably from the software. Anyway, yes. The camera angle. Oh yes, I have to look down. Oh yes, I know. It's terrible. Under the screen instead of over it. I'm looking over you, Paul. That's right. That's the way to intimidate someone is to look on top of their head. That's right. Yeah, well, who am I? Well, I live in Montreal. My name is Renaud. I got introduced to Jordan B. Peterson really at the beginning of what was happening with the change. I saw his first video pretty much a week after he released it, denouncing Bill C-16. And then I got interested because I was interested in the culture war. And I'm kind of a weird and weird position is probably I'm the prototype of your regular viewer. I'm from home on my computer. And sometime I do keyboard monkey stuff and I listen to podcasts. And it was kind of following the culture war that point. And Jordan B. Peterson comes in. And then Jonathan Peugeot is conversation and really got my wheel turning and then is conversation about God and biblical series. So all of this kind of been really interesting for me. And basically, it came to a really good moment in my life. I became Christian about like a two years prior to that. So it really helped me make even a little bit more sense about what happened to me because I had a kind of a story of transformation through that. So yeah, that's how I discovered you. I found that there's an interesting synchronicity wherever I'm kind of having questions and you're just talking, you just have those long talk and I listen and it's always very, very interesting thing to work on, to think about. So yeah, that's the short introduction. Okay. Well, what's on your mind? What did you want to talk about? Well, I wanted to run some things by you and get your feedback on it where I'm trying to make sense of kind of my story of transformation that happened to me as a synthesis between Jordan B. Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot and Romans 8. Okay. Because I was raised Catholic by my mom. My dad was kind of agnostic so it was never really something part of his life. But my mom for her was very important and went through the sacraments and her best family friend was a priest and she died when I was 11. Shortly after that, I watched a science documentary about near-death experience and it was kind of dismissive of people experience trying to explain that with brain chemicals and just, you know, I just kind of said that's it. We're just animals on a little dust ball and yeah, and then kind of took a left turn from there. But maybe because of the imprint of Catholicism by 18 or 19, I still had this sense of the mystical, the sacred or whatever and got interested into New Age stuff, Vedanta, Buddhist meditation, read the Tao Dai Jin and different sacred texts. But at one point I just had to get a job. You know, like I read this thing, it's like if by age 25 you don't quite know what you want to do, there's a high chance you probably never know so you better, you know, get down to business. So yeah, but then somehow at age 29, I had a prompt thing to say, hey, you know what? I should read the Bible. I should just start from page one and move forward and just not with an agenda, just say, hey, this is an interesting text. It seems to be pretty core to like the one of the oldest book we have around. So let's get cracking and loved it. But then I got it, Matthew on the Sermon on the Mount and it was like, okay, now I'm going to pray. I don't know if this, you know, God exists or anything, but I'm open. So God, if you're here, just show yourself. And it was interesting because I'm in Quebec. I don't know if you know anything about this kind of Christian situation in Quebec where it was probably the most Catholic place on earth. Like on the same level as Poland would be, right? Everything, every social institution was Catholic. The government really didn't have much space. Basically education, health care, all those things were Catholic. And in the 70s, there's called the silent revolution and people just stopped going to church. Really? Yeah. So we'd say evangelicals about 1% of the population in Quebec. The church are being sold either as tourist attraction or, you know, breweries and condos. So it's a very, very secular society in Quebec. What made it, what turned it so quickly? I think there's the spirit of the 60s and the 70s where there's an opening to the world with an overbearing, like when every social institution is Catholic, where even if you want to do a radio show, it has to be approved by the Bishop of Montreal, people just had too much. And whenever Catholicism was in power in Quebec, it was everything. All of people's life were guided by the religion. So people just stopped going or some of them moved towards Protestantism. And it's interesting because my, I'm kind of going on a tangent, but I think it's important to kind of know that background of Quebec where actually we're sending, in the United States, they're sending missionaries to Quebec because that's, there's not a lot of Christians here. But my wife, her grandfather was made the cover of Life magazine, I believe, because he was, he came in the 60s, beginning of the 60s as a Baptist evangelical and he was giving away Bibles in Val d'Or up north and he got imprisoned for giving away Bible. Not in the Soviet Union, but in Canada. In Canada. That's why he made the cover of Life magazine because he was saying, hey people, you got to read the Bible for yourself. And the priest was not happy about it and the police just took him and for disturbing the peace. Oh yeah, yeah. So there's this thing also, the broader context in which I live with my Catholic background and my wife's family, who their heritage are basically the one who established the Baptist evangelical church in Quebec. So yeah, so basically to go back, I read the Bible and then there was this transformation that happened over a six to eight month period where I look back and say, I'm not even the same person. Like there are things that are so radically different in my values and the way I act, the way I speak. I was kind of, what is this? What happened? Right? And the classic answer is the Holy Spirit. Right? And somehow I'm never satisfied with that. Like, okay, but what are we talking about here? Like how does that work? And that's kind of how I kind of with listening with Jordan Peterson and Peugeot and came up with this theory and I would just want to write it by you to say what you think about it or if you think I became neurotic or something. Well let's hear it. So Jordan Peterson talks about Greek gods as some spirits in some way or psychological that are eternal, that are present everywhere and that they're not located in a single individual and it's kind of diffused. Right? And Peugeot talks about principalities and powers and how spirits, beings, it's not easy to contain. Right? So basically what I think happened is that we're all made of a multiplicity of spirits, you know, different part of us that wants different things but it's kind of made somewhat coherent by our identity or a hierarchy of identities so that it keeps it makes sense because otherwise you become schizophrenic or you start adding split personality. You need to have a unifying principle or an identity and that from downstream from identity comes values and beliefs and action so that basically from there things flows downward. So that's why sometimes you see people say, they say I am this and they really kind of act out from this I am, this primary I am and the gay village it's kind of self-evident, you know, when their primary identity is I'm gay, it really, they dress a certain way, they act a certain way, same thing with policemen. The whole cluster of things come around it. Exactly. So now when I read Romans 8 it talks about there is the spirit of flesh and there's the living according to the spirit or living according to the flesh. And that basically by moving my identity, my primary identity as a Christian, somewhat it changed the relationship with all of those other things and that basically at any given moment I can be rooted in a spirit or in the flesh and it's kind of this move from Adam to Christ that we have to kind of contend with but whenever there's like a spirit of let's say depression that comes over that I can recognize it as a like a thing that I can face that it's not I am depressed but here's the spirit of depression that I have to contend with that I can have a conversation with or even release or deal with and then once and if the Holy Spirit as with a big S now maybe the same idea as a little bit of Jordan P. Peterson how an individual, well like you have the spirit but it acts out through multiple people simultaneously like rage but now you have this the spirit of love, the Holy Spirit that acts through people in strange ways that we any individual doesn't necessarily know that they are being moved by it. Does that make sense? Oh yeah, that makes sense. The thing people are going to get hung up on is the word spirit because I've been so busy lately I haven't had enough time to make a lot of videos but I've still got all the usual things running around in my head and if I don't get them out on a video they either float away or it's I was just thinking yesterday you're basically so let's locate this conversation we're basically in the in the area of we call it anthropology we call it theological anthropology what is a human being? Right. A materialist framework would say would basically the materialist framework basically assumes that the material strata is the foundational strata and experiences like you just described are based upon derivative from the this level of experience and so brain chemistry would make all of this sense and Peterson rightly points out that you're probably it's just increasingly doubtful not only Peterson but a guy like Thomas Nagel you're probably just not going to get there. There doesn't seem to be enough in the material level to really get us all the way to explaining everything that we're seeing and a lot of the things that you just described you could call them spirit you could call them pattern you know Jung would talk about archetypes archetypes are essentially patterns they're they're great big patterns that was so we went to the the Peterson book tour thing in San Jose last night a group from my Peterson meetup and we met with some of the other people that I've and meetups that I've encouraged around and you know we were driving home and we were talking I was just I was just pondering how you know a lot of culture war stuff comes up. Spirit is a really you can you can understand why that word has been so useful for so long because things come through us our culture in waves and we experience that sometimes like fashions and fashions are kind of a superficial clothing thing that just kind of floats through parenting styles ideas about children ideas about me I mean just all these things just come flowing through the culture and we pick them up and and they're there we're not terribly conscious of them they're they're definitely communal they possess us in a way they grab hold of our lives we don't quite know what they are and so the real question the real difficult question is what is exactly a human being and I think you're the the framework that you just described I think is coherent in that well we're not quite sure what we are but we certainly are possessed by many spirits and certainly in Paul's in Paul's framework the know as Paul sets out in Romans and a lot of his other books he we are admonished to for example put on Christ and and the metaphor there is clothing we put him on we are we're acknowledged to live by the spirit and not by the flesh so the sarks and and flesh for Paul I mean these for Paul sarks and flesh is a complicated word it has it has meanings at different layers it can kind of be our our physical nature it can be our our desires that seem to be connected with our physical nature and again all of this stuff for Paul and then for conversations ever since Paul gets connected to all sorts of philosophical spirits that are moving through yeah and there's so many moving pieces yeah that it's hard to get a handle on because you you read I like I read from the Syrian and there's this famous land prayers like delivering me from the spirit of a slot and an idleness and all those things where and and you read in the Bible and there's like this Leviticus situation where some man he doesn't know if his wife cheated on him and he has the spirit of jealousy and they have to go through this whole ordeal to define whether or not she is pregnant with someone else and from the temple and this this term is used again again but then at other place where to have spirit and mind so they're not quite the same and what we mean by this right what do we mean by by spirit and and how do we because a lot of people would see spirit and it's like a ghost you know floating around and and in and in some way we can understand where this vision comes from with the culture and everything but it's it seems to be a very useful way to face some of the lesser patterns of our lives in my opinion rather than seeing those things as my identity or mine that they are there are me per se I am depressive then he said no this is the depression it looks a whole lot like other people who are depressed what is this how do I engage this thing and it seems to be a little bit more helpful to have a conversation than than trying to to fight yourself in some way yeah and that but then it see so so for a long time you know but some say before the scientific age we didn't have we dealt with this in a sense all with software okay let's think about it that way it's changed about it we dealt with it all with software and the spirits and the patterns that's all in a sense software and in the site after you know this this scientific revolution that we've had we started monkeying with hardware and we had always known hardware I mean you cut someone's head off you know their spirit lives so so there's always been a hardware software inter interchange but we got we've gotten you know in a sense we've gotten so enthusiastic about our capacities with hardware we tend to be blind to the limitations of those one of the one at James I did a conversation with James number of months ago he's a member of my meetup he's he teaches teaches psychology at a community college nearby and he so he has a PhD in neuropsychology one of the one of the jobs he had after he you know when he was in school or after he got out of school was he would when they would do brain surgery you know they would open the skull yeah probe the brain you can see these on TV shows they probe the brain and they keep the person conscious so they have a sense of you know what they're sticking their needles and and you know one of the things that he talked about he might have even said it in the conversation that we have he said it a number of times at the meetups is that that for him he was raised a Christian but that for him was a profound experience because he would see you know okay so that the top is open the the skull is exposed you'd look in there and you'd look at a brain that was horribly eaten by cancer and and as someone with the scientific background he had he'd look in there and think this this person should not be capable of having a coherent conversation but there they are yeah and so for him that kind of that really disrupted his materialist paradigm that he was having and and so in this of course gets into the cut the question of okay what what of us remains after the body yeah so so okay so Romans 8 those who live according to the flesh I have a little screen here so I can't pull up I can't pull everything up those who live according to the flesh have their minds set on flesh desires and I really do want to pull up verse 9 for those who live according to flesh sets their minds on the things of the flesh but those who live according to the spirit set their minds on the things of the spirit right or to set the mind on the flesh's death but to set the mind on the spirit it's life and peace yeah so so Paul I just wanted to kind of get a peek at the Greek so Paul you know Paul sets up this contrast and again spirit is some people read that say oh spirit is anything no it's Paul is definitely talking about the spirit of God the spirit that was sent by Christ so and so Paul does set up this this contrast and so conversion would be just like you described yes yeah it's it's God's spirit God's spirit moving on you working in you dislocating and you know when I worked with Haitians when we I've mentioned this in a few times when we when the pastors would baptize Haitians they would this is very ancient orthodox Roman Catholic baptism was in many ways an exorcism yeah and so the Haitians they would go down into the water and the spirits are in the water and they would they don't want to leave last week I preached on Jesus casting out an unclean spirit from a man in the synagogue and and so and then the man convulsed yeah Jesus confronts the spirit and so the Haitians are in the water and then the pastor grabs the person and puts them down again they just keep talking you're gonna drown the gonna drown the evil spirits out of that guy and and then finally they they just relax and you know the ideas that the Holy Spirit has now taken up residence and the other spirits have to leave so I I don't think the the challenge is talking about it in that when you use the word spirit now it sends us off in all kinds of different directions it's not the right word according to the culture let's say like in our culture it's not necessarily the best term to use to to to try to talk and actually it segues perfectly into kind of the second thing I wanted to talk to you about where I would I'm very curious about your thoughts about this neo-sacramentalism especially with my background coming like I realize how much Catholicism left an imprint on me now I go to an Anglican church an Anglican Bible church right here in in Poinclair and and how much well it's a very Protestant Anglican church and I realized wow I never actually left the Catholic church as a you know as a Protestant and when I was a kid I would see the Lord's Supper and I had this strong sense that there's something real happening like it's not arbitrary it's not a an expression of our inner feelings there's a seriousness about what's happening here and it's not a cracker like because I can eat crackers all day or this is just a cracker it's not just a cracker or you know the baptism is not just me taking a bath you know or with a prayer before and I'm curious how because it seems that in the kind of the Protestant because in Quebec whenever there's a Protestant church it's a very very very conservative Protestant church those who actually still believe there there seems to be like a like it goes towards the extreme either we have very liberal or very conservative church and there's very middle ground between the two here I guess the same thing in Canada in general it's an interesting thing but it seems to be a separate wanting the separation between heaven and earth in some way that like form are suspicious and we don't want to do any form or liturgy because there there may be a trap there kind of thing and I was curious what are your thoughts about this sacramentalism to actually worship with our bodies and really have an embodied worship and really curious about what what you think is going where this idea is going with Jordan Peterson I was going in evangelical world I've seen a few young church in Ohio started to have the Lord's Supper every week and that's and a little bit more liturgical I was just curious about what are your thoughts around that well that's that's in California I think that's definitely the wave of moving towards more self-conscious liturgy moving up the higher church weekly communion many of the church plants that we planted in Sacramento started sort of as seekerish Willow Creek model low church evangelical seeker sensitive and those churches at least in the Sacramento area those church plants have all been on a path towards weekly communion remembering your baptism and you know upping the sacramentalist and I mentioned this book a couple videos ago by Len Vanderzee actually the video I released today my conversation with with father David in Dallas I was just listening to it yeah he he was he was worshiping in the South Bend Christian Reformed Church when Len Vanderzee was pastoring there and Len wrote this book because Len was this he saw he basically saw the drift in the CRC moving towards a Zwinglian assumption about the sacraments and wanted to say now wait a minute is this actually true to our tradition and his answer was no that Calvinists you know John Calvin stuff gets so complicated so fast Calvin Calvin so so here's here's the here's the question and like we've talked about before what what is the relationship between the material layer we'll call it that and the patterns so the the video I did which you know I say I love all my children the same but I don't love all my videos the same they're not my children the video that I did when I was really puzzling through Peugeot and Peterson and pattern and with with John Verveckis treatment of Aristotle and and formal cause you know Aristotle's idea of form that was really that was at a moment when I was starting to piece this stuff together it's it's abundantly clear to me that that which is most real engages every layer is a metaphor that we're using we shouldn't forget that it's a metaphor layer of reality because even if you look at the Aristotelian forms there's not a formal layer to share it just is and and that's how reality is so here's here's something interesting the the Protestant Reformation was a pushback against what the Protestant reformers saw as corruption in the church with respect to the idea that you could manipulate God by manipulating stuff okay and the Protestant reformers were standing on solid biblical ground with respect to that you can look at for example in the book of Jeremiah where the the the the citizens of Jerusalem citizens it's not a great word the the dwellers of Jerusalem were basically saying God will not let this city be destroyed because his temple is here and in a sense they're trying to hold the Lord of heaven and earth hostage by hanging on to this physical piece of property and and the word of the Lord comes to Jeremiah and says if you think you can if you think you can manage God by managing stuff buildings wafers people if you think you can manage if you think you can handle God in this way think God has a handle you are woefully mistaken and and you are going to curse the day that you wandered into that territory and the Protestant reformers heard this and they they had a sense of this when they were looking at some of the corruption in the church now even Roman Catholic historians of that period no one will deny that there was corruption in the church in the Middle Ages there's and it's complex right it's that's right so it's like which language are we talking about which place in Europe you know like the Catholic church in Quebec that's right 20th century that's right is that the Catholic church it's really complex right so the the reformers come up with these ideas like the invisible church and and people are right to push back on that idea because what we're really looking for is thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven the the reunion of heaven and earth that's the dominant biblical theme and and so one way to understand that is the union of spirit and matter and understanding matter to be this this this layer here so so in the Protestant Reformation you have this just fracturing of the church in thousands and thousands of pieces and this is and the Catholics are right this is a horrible thing and the Orthodox are right that this is a horrible thing starting with the break with the Catholics I mean Christ wants his children to be one well Christ wants all of it to be one too so yeah so so now in a sense Protestantism swung so far and Peugeot talks about this in a question and answer I think in December or January Protestantism swings so far to get gnostic that suddenly we just oh God isn't interested in stuff no that's not true he is interested in stuff you just can't use stuff so so then this neo-sacramentalism is in a sense to say let's get the alignment and so what happens in the Eucharist what happens in the Lord's Supper is is this alignment that's happening between heaven and earth now this is not this is not our servant we do not colonize God in this way and it's exactly that move that Jeremiah and the prophets push back against you cannot colonize God God colonizes you and that's the idea of eating it right that's right that's right but and and it becomes and it becomes part of us so so so you know things moved so gnostic in a sense that they got disconnected from material reality things got so spiritual that you lose the narrative thread so then you tend to swing back and okay so let's get back in touch but we're always on this line that you can't hold God hostage by you know taking a gun and a wafer it's like okay God you know if you don't if you don't give me the lottery numbers the wafer gets it um no no no no but but then your question of conversion so you like the Eucharist your stuff and and this material layer of you your um you know so if you read a materialist like Jonathan Haidt and his happiness hypothesis he talks about the big the um the cortical lottery that we're wired in from the beginning and so and so this is for me why we whatever we do we can't lose both books and by both books i mean the belgian confession the the book of nature so the roman catholic roman catholic formulation would be the book of nature and the book of grace uh the heidelberg the belgian confession would be to be more general revelation and special revelation it'd be matter and spirit you can't lose both books and and so in a sense the Eucharist continues to be the place where you're going to have conflicts because it's right there that it all comes together and the same in you yeah now here's an interesting thing i've been wondering because because i kind of stand outside of a tradition per se i'm kind of like an orphan and and being like i'm not raised evangelical i was raised catholic but i'm not like i'm not roman catholic i like to think that i want to be as catholic as i can um i read apologetics from you know evangelicals catholics orthodox and even uh looked into a little bit of the coptic and one observation that is really difficult to shake up is i look at some contentious thing uh in the old church let's say the coptic the orthodox and the catholics and i see them in different language different time the infant geography they're separated by so much but if they were allowed to talk long enough i think this would be even a possibility of reconciliation between them yeah yeah sometime i look at the and i said like the reform the what sprung out of the reformation sometime goes so far i'm like how do we get those things back together and it's very difficult to like and one example is the communion saints right um the this idea that we are what a part of a mystical body of christ all together through all history so we're praying together we're worshiping together we're all one thing right not just here and now but throughout all history um and it kind of links with my mom being dead is the the person ito says no there is no relationship between you and your mom she is over there and there's you here and there like she cannot pray for you for say or there is no relationship between this in this body let's say it's one body and um since in theologically we're in the same body of christ but say a prayer to the saints for them to intercede in your behalf all those things that's out of table and it's like there is this world over there and this world here and there is no communication between the two that um we can be part of and it's it's a very difficult thing when you think about the people you know that passed to actually say yeah the only next time there's going to be a relationship between us is later on yeah does that make sense like it and in the the other system it feels like actually there is a there is a relationship it's not the same but there is still this connection happening and that's one place like in what way is it a communion if we're not in communion and it's it's that's a that's one thing it's like sticky point where um i know that with my pros and friends it's i should not go there it's a it's a dangerous thing to talk about because of course we're not supposed to summon the dead we're not supposed to you know talk with the dead uh that's not that's not a good place to go so i'm curious to to hear your thought about this how um how does how does one deal with this this separation between heaven and earth um i i wouldn't say that protestants i wouldn't say that protestants disregard the communion of the saints in fact the i mean basically what keeps theologians writing books are all these kinds of questions because there's lots of tiny little distinctions and issues floating around that what theologians are is in some sense um theological accountants and so we say well there's this truth over there that you and your mother share the same communion and protestants most presidents part of i speak for all protestants yes but but this protestant doesn't deny that okay by any means you and your mother are part of the same communion okay so that's one question and protestants would say great cloud of witnesses jesus says jesus says you know he is the god of abraham not the god he was the god of abraham isaac and jacob so abraham isaac and jacob are still i mean jesus makes that point part of so again it's helpful to understand the move the protestant reformers made and why they made it what the protestant reformers basically did was in terms of the hierarchy of authority they placed the old and new testaments up at the top over and against some of the other elements of the tradition now they did not wish to disregard the tradition they just said that scripture has priority and and there are there are those kinds of conversations within the orthodox and the catholic as well because as soon as you have as soon as the body of literature gets large enough you're going to have to prioritize because even within scripture it's multi-vocal and there's different voices saying different things so how are you going to suss out that okay so let's let's talk about our relationships with the dead protestants would say the the dead are with the lord they they continue to be conscious the so you've got that now the question is well how do we relate to them you've you've also so you've so so on one hand you say the debtor with the lord on the other hand you say well we've got the strong we've got these strong prohibitions in scripture against a lot of traditional practices of communing with the dead involving seances trying to communicate so on and so forth now i as a pastor know full well that in many many cases good protestant people talk to their departed parents and spouses and children on a regular basis and have experiences of getting communication back the other way that is just common to humanity and the church for the most part doesn't the church for the most part is it's kind of similar to what the roman catholic church does with a lot of relics it says they're out there we're not going to weigh in one way or the other on this the protestant reformers got uncomfortable by some of the practices that they saw that they felt again practices in that time period that they felt again were were were inviting christian people to do things that were spiritually hazardous and and again most protestant reformers were pastors and so their their their reformational attempts were an attempt to try to actually address certain church practices and so protestants traditionally have have not denied that our loved ones are with the lord have not denied even necessarily but then the question lots of questions arise that we can't answer that's true does your mother watch over you well on one hand a lot of people think about that and it gives them a lot of comfort and they like that idea but the more you think about that idea other problems arise like well and you know when does your mother watch over you what is your mother thinking would it make your mother sad to watch over you and watch the kinds of things that you would struggle with does your mother have spiritual powers in order to aid you and there's a lot of these questions that basically the protestant reformers looked and said we don't know how to answer these and so we are not going to have it be a part of the church yeah and we are not going to in a sense put energy into that or feed that you know feed that wolf because we've seen it get out of hand and and so that that kind of then becomes a posture that protestants have taken up now basically protestants want to say we don't know which again is similar to okay the shroud of turin the roman catholic church continues to maintain the shroud of turin fascinating piece of cloth they sometimes let people study it but if you're lady of guadalupe and lady of guadalupe you've got all of this stuff and so the roman catholic church has kind of been like they do send though um investigator yeah yeah to weed out the um the clear frauds the clear frauds right like okay let's get rid of the frauds because that that would not look good on us um but i was i was thinking about this topic of the commune insane because i went to poland in november and i was there around the time of tucin um well around halloween so on the 31st the first and said all saints day um and i was looking into the christian origin of halloween because i got a little nervous when i went to a oh we're gonna have a hallelujah party and i was like and um and the the idea is that we basically by laughing at death we show that we conquered death and we were over there and we saw the cemeteries and they were like we there was so many flowers and and candles and people visiting their grandma the mother their little child going to the to the cemetery paying homage and this you feel that there is still a relationship happening while here it's it's completely desert especially we're in a secular society even more where we hide it yeah as much as possible while uh let's say in the catholic you'll have like the casket of the front open you know like uh we have a got to all saint joseph where like there's literally the heart of the guy on display let's say they quite they kind of uh they put death right out front right a lot and um yeah and it made me think oh what is a relationship with death in those when we we don't address those longing and we kind of live on on the sides so um basically yeah that was that was kind of just a i wanted to hear your thoughts about this because sometime you talk with people and you hear the same answer but they don't quite feel right but you know yours makes um makes a lot of sense um and yeah pastorally it's a hard call with a lot of this stuff because on one hand let's say in a tradition like the roman catholic church where in the tradition has said okay people are going to do this so let's let's kind of shape it and let's bring it within the church and we'll we'll form it and we'll in a sense give it christian form potestants were more we're not going to bring this into church but what tends to happen then is quietly families and individuals do their own thing and so it's a difficult call pastorally which move you want to make now these different things get worked out in different for example divorce so many protestants have gone along to say we will allow divorce and remarriage in the church and the church will observe it and and the roman catholic church has said no and the orthodox church has said well you get one um i don't know if that's quite fair same thing with contraception too right contraception contraception was for until 1930 completely out of the picture but you know they had to contend with the culture and so the churches are all dealing with similar things and but you have these traditions within christianity that have have things built into them spirits built into them that tend to say well you know um as a pastor you visit someone and i was just talking to my dear departed dead husband and such and such happened and i think this and as a pastor he just listened and you know no you know that didn't happen well what is that you know am i am i reinforcing secularism because that is a lot of what happens yeah or so it's it's messy it's messy and and so then obviously when traditions get going like the protestant reformation you get communities then reinforce certain things we do do this we don't do that but but again if you kind of understand where the who the protestant reformers are where they were coming from what they put at the top of their their their authority hierarchy you know purgatory another great idea again most people don't bump into this because unless you're really living with the tradition and the text well these questions don't arise but yeah once they do arise you begin to say oh and they say well roman catholics did this with it the orthodox do this the protestants do this the mormons think that you know it's it's all over the place it's all over the place now what uh i know it's not really your situation but i think it could address a lot of your viewers where let's say someone um someone feels like an appeal towards christianity but maybe they have a background in one tradition or another but they don't quite feel like they can fit in to any particular tradition because and like and you need one of those right like you need to have a frame to understand to make sense to to bump up against to all those things what would you uh what would be your your counsel for people who are in these awkward um this awkward no man's land in some way where you have to step into a story but then that story has multiple tracks let's say to follow and it gets worse because you are a being in time and space and so to actually practice your christianity you have to do so with a communion and maybe you live in an area that there are three churches you know there's a roman catholic church there's a baptist church and there's an uh it's a scapegian church so how do you and and the one pastor is an idiot and the other one is divorced and and this one over here they haven't had a priest for three years and so some well-meaning deacon is doing what he can so you know it gets really complicated yeah and so i think in in some ways you appeal to the namon's request to elijah when when namon says hey look i have to go back to my this is a little extreme but i have to go back to my master and when we go into the temple he leans on my arm and so i have to bend down in the temple of of the pagan god even though i've given my heart to the lord what what do i do and and elijah basically says god understands and and so we are you know this again this expresses my protestantism and even my calvinism we're finally saved by grace and the the critical question is not how how well or faithfully can i approach god and grab on to him the question is much more how strong is god's hold on me now obviously i want to respond with all my heart soul minded strength i i want to do that but finally we are saved by god and we do not save ourselves sure and that is and and and so there are abundant there are abundant examples in scripture of god understanding our weakness our limitations the limitations of our contexts and and so this is this is good news for us so so you in and and people have it all the time so they you know they they love this church but this one works better for their family or their children or their spouse and they have to choose and there's compromises it's always that way yeah yeah it's true well thank you so much paul that was a really great conversation oh thank you and no i i i will send this to you and if you're if you're willing that gets because again part of the reason i started recording these and posting these is because i get these questions and i know that many other people have similar questions and it helps them to hear us have this conversation so i'll send it to you and if you're good with it i'll um well i'm good with it and the question is is if it's uh if you think it's good too right like it's also from your perspective right so so the ball is on your side on this one okay okay well i will likely post it later this week or sometimes next week then thank you so much paul oh thank you thanks for your time have a good day okay you too