https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=L0aW5D5jZTw

 Hi, this is Paul and I am here today with Kales Elden. When a few weeks ago, I woke up and I saw this on Twitter. There's nothing Christian about hashtag social justice, redemptive salvation is a matter of the individual soul. Responding to Pope Francis, hashtag social justice demands that we fight against the causes of poverty, inequality, the lack of labor, land and lodging against those who deny social and labor rights and against the culture that leads to taking away the dignity of others. And that unleashed on Twitter a storm. And even among many people who have been die-hard Jordan Peterson fans, some people even in this little corner sort of jumped in and said, That's it, I'm done. I'm done with Peterson. Now, a lot of those people making noises were Protestants. And Pope Francis, I think, has had a fairly good reception among many Protestants, especially sort of moderate political Protestants. And so when this thing took off, the guy I wanted to speak with is my friend Kales Elden. I was just in my week of vacation. I was out east, not very far from Kale. And so we had decided that Kale and I would get together. And so Kale and I did spend a good bit of an afternoon together. And we had a lot of really good conversation. And so when this thing broke, I knew Kale was going to be all over this. He also made Jordan Peterson, and then sort of followed up with a Twitter poll. Let's see if I can find that Twitter poll. Because you pointed it out. Oh, I don't see it right now on my list. Anyway, Kale, thanks for coming on. Oh, it's a pleasure. You know, I've been talking at the bit to get back on here with you. This will probably come as a surprise to some of you all, but I'm pretty sure I listen to you about four or five mornings a week, because I sort of chuck my way in the morning with my dog, through my morning run. And so you're constantly in my ear and I'm constantly talking at you. Of course, you can't hear it. So I'm excited to finally get back on screen with you and hashing things out. It's always great. Well, you and I, we've done a randos conversation. You've told your story, maybe a little bit of your story that contextualizes your why I thought of you. I had a few other thoughts, too. Some of the some of the priests that I'm friendly with, I thought, they probably shouldn't be in on this conversation. But, yeah, you're you're a Roman Catholic and and quite a bit. So so let's so so what why did I think of you? Yeah, well, I think I originally came onto your radar screen after a piece I wrote some time ago now at one Peter five on things are broken. And what really kind of broke me then was the further revelations of the predations of then Cardinal Theodore McCarrick. And just sort of as almost a kind of a condensed symbol of all of the things that I have seen going on for a long, long time, but have seemed to really come to a head in the last three, four or five years, I would say four years, really, at least for me. And so. And in that piece, I don't know how much you recall of it. I think it holds up pretty well. But in that piece, I said that the the sense making power of the church is losing steam and in part because it's not it's sort of playing in its own sandbox and it needs to go outside of that sandbox and look for voices in the culture, so to speak, that are that are making sense, or at least trying to have what I considered now and certainly considered then adult conversations on on what is going on. And one of those people that I invoked, of course, was Jordan Peterson and a variety of the IDW folks at the time. Of course, the IDW was sort of still riding high. And now it is in some disarray, which I'm sure we'll get to. But I think that's probably and and that I'm coming at it from a position as someone, a man, a father, a husband who is trying to live out the relatively high bar of faithfulness in in my church, in a way that I find frustrating because it seems like there are numbers of people, leaders, leaders in the church who are on the verge of telling me that it's probably not worth my time. Now, I think a lot of Protestants, I mean, the sort of the immediate kickback against Jordan's tweet by especially by many Protestants was how ridiculous is this for a man who when asked if he believes in God gives this rather interesting does this rather interesting dance. And in fact, when one when one YouTuber sitting down in Hollywood with a couple of celebrities, you know, saw Jordan Peterson at a restaurant, Connie Selig and her husband sort of cornered him and asked him, you know, basically, do you believe in God? Are you a Christian? And he basically gave an answer like, you know, that's not a conversation for polite company. I don't I don't, you know, I don't disclose that. I don't I don't, you know, I don't disclose my Christianity publicly. And so for a man for a man who's like this to say to the pope, you don't know what Christianity is. And especially to make that that comment with respect to, you know, I was really struck by the deeply Protestant redemptive salvation is a matter of the individual soul. This was it's easy for people to just instinctively say, there's Jordan Peterson picking a fight with the pope on Twitter, looking for clicks, being a grifter, yada, yada, yada. But, you know, Peterson is not. Is not a simpleton, right? And he also knows a lot of Roman Catholics, and he has made a pretty deep impact in Catholicism, at least in the West. And there's also a ton of question in the church with respect to Pope Francis, because, of course, there Pope Benedict remains alive. And whereas we don't really sort of have two popes in different places in Europe right now, this is not a simple thing. And so also hashtag social justice. I think a lot of people sort of grabbed on this, dismissed it very quickly. But I saw and thought, this is not so simple. So I don't know, where do you want to begin? You want to begin with Jordan Peterson in the Roman Catholic Church? Or do you want to deal with what's going on in terms of Catholicism and this pope? Yeah, well, maybe we should start with the tweet heard around the world. I think that's probably the way to start this. And we can get into sort of the internecine Roman Catholic dynamics, because I think that people in this little corner, if you're not Catholic, I don't think that it's a waste of your time to talk about these dynamics, because I think that these are patterns that kind of replicate and scale out to different institutions in different spheres. So, you know, which is why, for instance, I myself watch and follow the big Eva and all the winsome wars and all that sort of stuff. I mean, in theory, or at least in practice, it doesn't, I don't have much dog in that fight per se, but I watch it with somewhat bated breath because I can see the resonances in different arenas. So as far as the tweet heard around the world is concerned, I mean, I want to put this out there before anybody comes at me. I mean, I think Peterson is basically wrong, OK, that salvation is not just a matter of the individual soul. I think there's a lengthy sort of response to that, certainly in Roman Catholicism, but I suspect also in sort of orthodox Protestantism or certainly heavy, heavy threads of that, that we understand that there's a sort of a dynamic between the individual and the community. And it's all that. Certainly you can emphasize one over the other. I get all of that. But I do think that on that basis, there's a problem. But look, the joke for ever since I've been alive and I'm sure you too, Paul, is the question that doesn't merit a response is the Pope Catholic. Right. And so, you know, for years and years and years, or however long that joke has been part of the memeplex, you know, the answer to that is obviously yes, he is. Right now. Now, and maybe this is sort of part of those internecine fights, like, you know, that is sort of amongst certain sort of more traditionally minded or conservatively minded. And those are two different camps in the Roman Catholic Church and the Roman Catholic ecosphere. You know, that is that is increasingly becoming a frustrating question. Right. Obviously, the Pope is Catholic. I mean, it's it's but but, you know, you can kind of get into that question. Well, what does it mean to be Catholic? What does it mean to be in communion? What does it mean to be in communion with Peter? And what does it mean when Peter seems to be saying things or allowing things that are off the reservation, so to speak? So this is part of what is sort of feeding that that backdrop, I think. Now, to Peterson, though, I think that this tweet, you know, he's going after the Pope, obviously. And and I think was it Gavin Ashenden had a great piece that I think that you link to in your in your in your in your blog there and I think a great response to it, that that the sort of the the penchant for this pope to play with, you know, footsie with sort of NGO type initiatives, you know, sort of these big global, you know, the globalist agenda and all that kind of stuff. I mean, it's undoubtedly that he is super cozy with with those kind of initiatives. And so I think that now it's so for me, it is impossible to hear Jordan's tweets at the pope outside of the context of his big announcement, which I think he just made official just yesterday, the day before. But he originally, of course, in that that that lengthy Joe Rogan appearance, you know, he's like, I'm doing this and I'm doing that. I'm doing this. And oh, by the way, I'm going to start a, you know, a counter UN, something like that. And on Reformation Day. Very interesting. Right. No, I know. I know. I know. And and I don't think Jordan's that dumb. I mean, I just think he knows exactly what he's doing. And so so to me, watching Jordan on Twitter as long as I have, and I know you have to Paul, Jordan is an erratic Twitter presence, you know, and I know I'm throwing rocks from glass houses. But I think for Jordan, he is he would he's punching up. I think there are a few people remaining on the planet that Jordan can punch up at because he doesn't punch down. At least, you know, I don't see him punching down unless unless. I'd argue about the sports illustrated swimsuit model. Yeah, but I don't think he was punching at her. See, I think I think if I if I'm if I'm reading Jordan correctly, I don't think he was coming after an oversized plus model on Sports Illustrated. I think he's going after the sense makers, the the culture creators who are trying clearly agenda, trotting out an agenda sort of to maybe trans value values. Like, I think that that's a that's a trigger for him. And so he's going to go after that full. But now that gets interpreted, of course, as Jordan's being mean to a fat woman. Right. I don't think that that's what's ultimately going on. I think that he's going at a sort of a meta level. So that we're going back to the to the pope thing. I think he's punching up at someone he believes is being irresponsible in his capacities as a leader of a worldwide church. That sounds that sounds about right. So then you're like, well, well, who is Jordan Peterson? Right. I mean, well, one of the first things that as the more I thought about this, I asked myself. Should the pope be on Twitter? Because I mean, one of the conversations, I just did a conversation a couple of days ago with Benjamin Boyce and Dave. I don't know if you saw that conversation. Yeah, I love Benjamin Boyce, though. So, OK, so so Dave, who is the distributist, who, you know, a few years ago had a, you know, dramatic transformation change in life to become a conservative Catholic. He's not going to a Latin mass church. He obviously has to sort of negotiate with his family. He's going to a little bit more of a regular Roman Catholic church. But clearly, he's he's over on the conservative end of American Catholicism. And one of the things that we that that you and I have spoken about and we spoke about with Benjamin Boyce in that video, too, is the degree to which anything, especially in America, anything it's and it's unavoidable to be Protestant. And in some ways, the necessity of of the pope being on Twitter at Pontifex. Now, in real life, you can't just stroll in and shake hands with the pope and sit down and say, now, Francis, you know, what about hashtag social justice? You can't do that. There are layers and layers and layers. There are hierarchies. And of course, the Roman Catholic Church is has, in fact, a pretty significant hierarchy. Yeah. And but once you come on Twitter, you are now in that in the terms of that arena. You are just another at. Yep. Yep. That's right. That's right. So, OK, yeah, I I I also am seeing this conversation that I think we're going at right now. But I also think, you know, we hinted at this here in this office when you and I were chatting. But the sort of there's the there's the the sort of the typical script. Right. And then there's the sort of these alternate scripts that have have emerged. Right. And we were talking about that just in terms of life trajectory and career paths and all that kind of stuff. But but but the but you're right. So so so the the normal way, the normal structures of things. You're right. I have no access to the Pope. But now that I'm on Twitter, I can add him all day long with, you know, because he's at Pontifex and I'm at Kailh's Elden. And boom, there we go. And now he's probably going to ignore me. And by the way, he's not working his own Twitter account. But at any rate, there's that there's that element to it that it is sort of this radical horizontalizing of something which is incredibly vertical. Look, I mean, there is no more hierarchical of a structure or reality than my church. And once you're once you're in that arena. Now, suddenly, I mean, you're you're at at Pontifex is, in a sense, an icon that in some way leads all the way to the pope. And, you know, it's it this this reminds me in some ways also of the Protestant Reformation, because until once the printing press happened, you know, of course, you had I've just this morning, I've just been listening to the rest is history, their treatment of Christopher Columbus, which I'm finding absolutely incredible. Of course, what happens with Columbus, which is sort of an almost an accidental discovery of this entire new continent, all of with people on it, the end of the the end of the second episode of the rest is history. Tom Holland reads this wonderful quote from Columbus, where he's talking about the, you know, this whole new world of prophet and evangelism, which in many ways exactly happens for the Spanish. Latin America becomes Catholic. Latin America is, of course, not incidental to this conversation, given the background of the pope in the rise of liberation theology. That's right. That's right. And of course, part of what the Protestant Reformation unleashes, not unlike Twitter, is that is now that suddenly a obscure Augustinian monk professor from Wittenberg, who is now writing like mad. But he gets printed like crazy. And now, in a sense, this little Martin Luther can sort of go toe to toe with the pope and the pope that tries to have him killed. Yeah. And one of the great one of the great episodes of the rest is history. Is there is there who you know, I don't know if the episode was on Luther, but I'm but it was about Twitter and who historically would have been best on Twitter. And I'm pretty sure Holland went all in for Luther, which I agree with 100 percent. I mean, no one would have been more impressive in this in this hellscape. We know it was Twitter. I mean, he would have been amazing. But but but that's exactly right, Paul. Right. It's it's, you know, you know, imagine you're Kajetan or you're the pope. You're like, really? I have to waste my time with some, you know, some schmuck of a monk who, like, is overly scrupulous, like waste my time on something else only to find out the holy crap. There's there's there's real energy behind this. There's a real spirit behind this. And I better go wait in. So what do you do? You take your biggest club and you try to you try to go after him and he's like, dodge and then you dodge. And, you know, he gets away and and then, you know, the rest is history as the as the podcast would have it. Right. And that's the that's the play. And so I I agree, you know, having the pope on Twitter is is kind of laughable. Or or or at least it challenges our sort of meat space sense making in a way that none of us have quite. Come to terms with, you know, if you thought the printing press was bad, you know. Yeah, because now, I mean, again, Jordan Peterson takes this tweet. He takes I mean, he retweets the pope's tweet and in a sense can have his way with it. And those in run, run, run. So I just did. Sorry, Paul. Look, look at the tweet count from March 2nd. Look at the tweet count on views. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That is insane. That is a million views. Yeah, yeah. And now, you know, it's but it's it's, you know, two weeks. It's got to be easily that. Oh, yeah. Now, I want to talk because on Twitter, you've also been talking about some of the drama that Peterson has unleashed in the Catholic Church almost right away in the first wave. Some fairly prominent Catholics came around. Bishop Baron, of course, Jordan Peterson and Bishop Baron have had multiple conversations. Bishop Baron has said rather glowing things. In fact, Bishop Baron said things to the effect of, you know, Jordan, we're not reaching the youth and you are. And and so and just just to kind of state the obvious, Bishop Baron is a bishop. Now, I know to a lot of Protestants, that's kind of like, meh. That's not a small thing. Right. And and so Jordan already caused disruption in the Western Church, at least. Talk, talk a little bit about Jordan Peterson and the Catholic Church in terms of how he's stirred your waters. Well, OK. Well, as a sort of an entree into that, Paul, you know, how how has Jordan Peterson's phenomenon or reality or rocket, as you'd like to say? How has that how has the how has the mainstream media reacted to that? How has the how has the academic institutions, how have the academic institutions of the West, certainly in the Anglosphere, how have the, you know, vanity fair, you know, all these things? Right. We see the pattern over and over again. He's a grifter. He's a joke. He's a lightweight. He is dangerous. You know, he is, you know, making, you know, he's a grifter. Right. I mean, that's these are all the ones. Right. And he's in this for the clicks and the money and everybody's in it. Right. And he's in this for the clicks and the money. And ever since, I mean, the his his firing is kind of, you know, the emeritization from University of Toronto. But his his getting pushed out of University of Toronto was the best thing imaginable for his fame and his wealth. Therefore, this is just another play at Griffin getting attention because he doesn't have the same attention that he had in 2018. Right. And I would say I agree with that. To a point, right. Not that he's playing that, but that that's certainly what happened. But I think you've been really good, Paul, about reminding your audience, reminding us, you know, that, you know, a lot has been taken away from him in terms of his day to day, face to face, flesh to flesh interactions with students, his private practice, you know, his world. You know, you know, we might on the outside looking in, be like, Oh, must be so cool to go from set town to town to town and go to PAC auditorium to PAC auditorium. I mean, that's what's not to like about that. We can look at his picture and we can look. This guy is like, whoa, like he's living. He's living. He's made it. But a lot has been taken from him. And, you know, so and I so for me, I think there's a real suffering that that. And again, you know, poor Jordan, right? Nobody's going to cry. You know, Jordan River. That's funny. Because, you know, he can't have his classes anymore and he can't do this because, you know, he's doing other things. But I think that there's a I think that's part of his suffering and I think that's part of his energy. He's like, all right, fine. You know, you want to make me the boogeyman that I'm going to play the boogeyman. And so to me, and this is something I think I shared with you a little bit on Twitter, DMs, but I think he is embracing his role as a kind of trickster figure, his role as a kind of joker or even a fool. And the and the reason why I think that is I was scrolling Instagram one day, you know, I usually listen to things. I don't I'm not I don't watch as much as other people, but I listen to things. And I I was on Instagram and I saw a picture of him talking to somebody at the studio there, Daily Wire. I think it was in the Daily Wire. And he had this bizarre suit on, you know, I mean, you know, something that I might have even blushed when I was 16 to wear, you know, and it's just it's a motley suit. Right. And so immediately, I'm you know, it triggered in me like, oh, that's he's he's he's leers fool. You know, he's he's playing the part of the court jester who can say the things that nobody else can say. Who else can go on Twitter and say, Pope, stop acting like a fool. You know, I mean, I could, but it would get ignored, right. And would I? But but but, you know, is it possible that Peterson is embracing the role that has been dealt to him? You want to make me this liminal marginal figure? You want to make me sort of one of the deplorable, untouchables who sort of exist on the margins, you know, and in all that. All right. Fine. I'll play that role. I will be this this this in between figure who can say the things that need to be said. So I don't know. What do you think of that? Is that not? I think that's true. Jordan, Jordan on Twitter. I mean, Jordan on Twitter has been a thing in and of itself. Jordan, OK, there's the array that we're going to pull some verveky things. Go ahead. I like that. So there's the agent arena relationship. Good. That's all my dad. And, you know, Jordan has been one of the most remarkable things about Jordan. Has been his transparency. And in an age of authenticity, you know, especially early Jordan, you know, having conversations with people on the Internet from his little home study, sometimes, you know, one very famous conversation with a with a journalist and kind of a grubby white t-shirt, you know, trying to suss out the resurrection. Now, of course, Jordan has has gone upscale with the with the expertise and and money of Daily Wire behind him. Yeah. You know, and of course, with the Crowder thing, Crowder's offered 50 million dollars for four years exclusivity. I read that. I thought, I can't imagine what they offer Jordan. Seriously. No, no, I know. Right. And that was exactly my thought. Like, crowd, I mean, crowders funny, like whatever, but he's kind of a bit bit player guy, right? I guess not. Yeah. And so Jordan, of course, his his exodus seminar has been, you know, by far the number one thing that Jordan has done for the number one thing on Daily Wire Plus. And so that has that has paid off. Yet Jordan on Twitter is is a different thing from Jordan on YouTube. Yeah. And Jordan, you know, you can see sometimes up yours woke moralist. Even even when he's talking about Twitter on YouTube, it's sort of the spirit of Twitter inhabits him. And, you know, early on, you know, before the Daily Wire time, there, you know, Jordan, Jordan would would put things on Twitter basically saying to his staff, change my Twitter password and don't tell me. That's right. That's right. And so part of him knows himself on Twitter. He has he did this really remarkable conversation with Jonathan Peugeot and Greg Erwitz about his persona on Twitter, which was really a remarkable conversation. I remember that. And now it seems he's not he's decided, I think, in some ways to fully inhabit this this role on Twitter. Part of it's a jokester. I think part of it is is the curmudgeon, you know, the the angry man who I mean, of course, Dyson tags him with that in the monk debate. Yeah, I remember that. And in some ways on Twitter, that's sort of what he's inhabited. And he's spoken before, he says, you know, at the end. And you just think about this. Jordan Peterson Day in during his tour, he travels in the morning. He gets to the venue. You know, there's maybe some practical things. He has a steak, of course, for for dinner. Is he or not busy water? That's right. And then he and if you if you just watch Jordan at any of these events, it's absolutely phenomenal because he's he's there. He does his monologue on stage, probably then some question and answer after the event. He he often has a little bit of time to meet meet with some people privately, which astounds me, because after you've been on stage for an hour and a half, you think you just want to. Yeah. But no, he's he's he's raring to go in those moments. And then after that, he has this OMG VIP thing where he he he works a line of 160 people. And and again, I've written about this. It's absolutely phenomenal as a minister who regularly has to work similar lines with people on the way out of the church, the amount of attention that he can give to those people. And then he does a Q&A. And then he sort of describes at the end of all that, it's sort of the classic band on tour things. You know, you finish your gig at one, two in the morning. You're not going to be able to sleep yet because you're still high in adrenaline. And so that's almost the sense that he pulls out his phone. He's got Twitter. And if he just watches, he's retweeting, you know, the kinds of things I mean, look, Jordan likes. Yeah. I mean, look, Paul, it's it's it's kind of people are going to kill us for that. I mean, it's not unlike Trump, to be perfectly honest with you. It's very similar to that. Like you knew like I knew, like I'm on Eastern time zone. Right. And so I I knew like invariably if I scroll to like one a.m. You know, on my time when I wake up at five a.m., you know, I'm like, oh, yeah, Trump's going to Trump's going to say some wild things. Right. And yeah, no, I think that's exactly right. I look as the you know, there are days, you know, as you know, I teach Paul and there are days like I have a couple of days of my week where I I literally teach every block. And then, you know, I have a meeting in the in the afternoon block schedule. Then I go to practice and then I go I go and eat and then I go home. You know, so you're talking like that day for me is roughly seven forty five to around six. Right. And and and throughout the entirety of that day, like I'm Mr. Zeldin all day long. And I'm I'm I'm I'm the lead teacher. I'm the head coach. You know, I'm I'm I'm all right. And I like it. Like, you know, I'm I'm I I find whatever. I find something in it and I'm good at it. And I like it. But you're right, like you're wired, you know, sort of at that point. And like it's all of those all that energy that you've expended on having sort of like cozy, cushy boundaries and like being like the welcoming, smiling guy, like that's just sort of spent. And so you're just like in this kind of raw state. And so the filters are gone. And remember, you know, filters go both ways. And so I'm more affected by things when I I'm in that state and I'm much more acerbic, you know, in that state, too. So I'm guessing it's something like that. And now so so then so then we have the dynamic where, OK, I will often ask people, I say. Do you want to know Jordan Peterson? Right. Right. Now, he's a he's a human being. We are long past the days when the press would turn its cameras from FDR's. We'll share. Right. Right. We are past the days when the press would. JFK is like, yeah, right. Totally. And now, in fact, we are in the time of transparency and authenticity where the the the demigods of our of our Internet arena are being transparent about who they are. And people are like, I can't I can't listen to or follow a man who. And it's like, you know, as a pastor, I hear this and it's like part of the real part of what you learn as a pastor is people have sides. Yeah, of course we do. I mean, like it's a fascinating of course we do. Right. It's like it's like I remember as a kid, you know, when I was in school, you know, the sort of the the teachers lounge. It's like this sort of this magic door. Right. And you sort of like walk by and not, you know, I was a kid, you know, so even like in my early school days, like you'd walk by and like you'd you'd smell the cigarette smoke and, you know, whatever. But it but it was this and occasionally you walk by in the door with had swung open and you kind of walk through and you're like, whoa, it's this sort of the land of giants. Right. And and then like, you know, whatever. One one time during the summer, I had to go in there with my mom to get something at the school. And you're like, oh, like it was just a room and, you know, it was a normal thing. And there's an ashtray and there's a, you know, there's the bathroom. Like teachers go to the bathroom and like, you know, so all of those sorts of things are are, you know, why would we not expect for those to be real for somebody like George? And I think you're right. I think I think the platforms allow us to pretend at even deeper levels, maybe that that these are, you know, these are sort of super people, you know, and I'm reminded of, you know, Luke Burgess's book, wanting. He talks about fresh Manistan and Celebristan. And I think so so much of this watching Jordan go at the pope is sort of he's kind of like us. Like he's kind of like, you know, like I remember being a kid and my dad would watch the news and he'd start going off on some crazy thing that some crazy politician had said, he's like, you know, and it's like, yeah, is the way that that's my dad at home. Yeah, you know. And this is and and so then I then I'll ask people now, you might imagine Jordan is like this because you could, you know, when he's you can see when people get under his skin now in many ways, his his peak was his peak performance, Kathy Newman, where, you know, he was just I mean, it was almost Neo and the Bullets with Kathy or was it Helen Lewis when he punches back? Right. Right. And now all of this, that the Jordan, the the profelicity of Jordan, to use Mueller's thing, the who the the the facade of Jordan has these. So on one hand, it's the, you know, Greg Hurwitz, you know, the rebel wisdom. They sort of wanted the Jordan who could, you know, the Kathy Newman, Neo Jordan, who could dodge bullets. A lot of others down there, especially in the in the in the street fighting going on in the Roman Catholic Church, they want the Jordan that's going to hit back up yours, woke more, you know, woke Twitter. I'm going to and and and in fact, you can't. You know, in some ways, Jordan is the guy that he so he, you know, he he says what he says to if if Jordan hadn't gone viral about C16, right? He would have been, you know, another university professor that said, you know, had, you know, yeah, buts about the real world legislation, but blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, who cares? Yeah, I mean, that was me. I mean, when I when I saw him doing that, I remember the suspenders. I think it was suspenders video. And I remember like whatever it came across a social media thing. And I'm like, I had no interest in that. I was like, OK, well, I said to myself, they're like, well, I'm glad somebody's saying something to these academic idiots because I came out of academia and I that's why I left academia. And I'm glad somebody's saying some stupid things like that. But honestly, I got other I have other interests. So I had I literally seen it and clicked through it like no interest in that. Right. But Kathy Newman happened. Right. And that's that grabbed me. Right. Kathy Newman happens. And it's like, wait a minute. She she couldn't lay a hand on him. And even his gotcha moment, which he later says, maybe I shouldn't have said that. But but that was just there he was on the line of chaos and order. Right. And there he's there. He's getting, you know, there he's getting traction. And of course, and this this is long before social media. And, you know, I'll be I'm going to be careful with this analogy. But a good part of the reason Jesus gets killed is because he draws groups of tens of thousands of people in the Galilee who are hanging on his every word. Other than that, I mean, they're sort of and that's a that's a that's a that's a power that OK, so now certainly Jordan isn't just a cranky random academic who wants to say some things. He has a following. And it's not just the clout in terms of how many Twitter followers he has or how many YouTube subs he has. It's also a function of the amount of attention and devotion that his audience has. So when he was here in Sacramento a couple of months ago, I remember back in 2017, 2018, talking to some academics. And they're like, yeah, you know, we've seen Jungian sort of rise and fall in the past. They make a wave. You know, even the Roman Catholic Richard Roar, John Van Donk is not really happy. I mentioned Richard Roar because every time his name escapes my lips, John Van Donk gets a little excited that I'm actually going to read one of his books. But, you know, these these Jungians come and go. They they do a little ducking and weaving with mythology. They might even break out with Star Wars, with Skade, some fascination, but it's never politically weaponized. And some of the reason I mean, you had a tweet also quite recently that I thought was really tremendous. That's why I retweeted it. Why do people hate Jordan Peterson? And I think part of it, of course, was the the neo moment of ducking and weaving Kathy Newman's bullets to the degree that she's she's like, my guns don't work. Yeah. And then, of course, sort of turning on Helen Lewis and beginning to engage in that fight. And so then people in church hierarchies watch this. Yeah. And they're like, you know, like the pope watching Martin Luther or Jan Hus or these things. And, you know, like, will my guns work? And I think part of the unsettling is that my guns work. That's well that we you know, how how big will this guy get? He should have been done by now. Yeah. Yeah, I think that I think that's I think that's huge. And I mean, look, Paul, the the the market dynamics are real. Right. And, you know, I think the. Maybe this would help. Like, what would what would it have been like to see Elvis before Elvis was on TV? Right. What what would it have been like to see Bowie before Bowie makes his big splash before he's bowing? He's like some weirdo in a club. Before Elvis is Elvis, he's just another guy kind of singing, you know, white dude singing black music in a gospel vernacular. You know, there's like there's like there there are there are many of them. Right. And why? Why does Elvis become Elvis? Why does Bowie become Bowie? Why does Peterson? I mean, look, I mean, think about, you know, you're you're an academic. Right. And you you've devoted your life to studying some relatively difficult, relatively obscure things. Right. And you've been working in this very clubby world. And, you know, you've been sort of working, you know, you're working your grind. Like you're working that thing, you're working that thing. And chances are, you know, you might publish a book or two. And then it'll get bought up by the various academic libraries. But like beyond that, it's not really going to like do it. You know, move the needle on Amazon. Right. And then all of a sudden, this guy comes out of nowhere and like achieves escape velocity. What? Why does he get to do that? You know, you know, it's like, you know, who's Jordan Peterson? Oh, my God. And he likes Jung. You've got to be kidding me. And I think so much of the dynamic, especially amongst the academics, is that. All right. So now let's take it to the church. Standpoint. All right. Unlike in your tradition, you know, where where and I'm I'm speaking generally here about the sort of American Protestantism, where there's a sort of an embedded entrepreneurial requirement, right, that that you have to you have to like do it. You know, and that might mean you apply to be at certain big churches at different cities. It might mean that you're going to start up, you know, plan a church and grow it that way. And there are a variety of different ways to sort of do that. But being entrepreneurial, in other words, being responsible for having people show up on Sunday morning, it's on you. As the head pastor, I'm talking here. Right. So put that into sort of the Roman Catholic world. Like, there's no such thing. Really, not not in not in terms of the formal structures of the church. Everything's territorial and geographical. Right. You get a priest assigned to a parish and the parish is like in a certain equidistant away from the next parish. And it's all very sort of structured out. And so, you know, the priest just isn't isn't in that regard. Now, that's broken down a ton. And, you know, I've talked about this before on air, you know, where, you know, that that sort of neighborhood, almost ethnic model has is in deep recession. Right. But so so so so that's part of the dynamic. And I and I just don't think that there's a way of having this conversation about Jordan Peterson outside of a sense of sort of resentment and jealousy for for exactly that attention bit that you're you're laying out. You know, and you said this, I remember, you know, Jordan had his his his first his first run. We called it First Wave. And then he gets sick and he goes away and he almost dies. Right. And he comes back and he is a shell of himself. And I remember you being like, man, it'll be really interesting. Actually, before he even came back, you were sort of like, well, if he has one, it'll be interesting to see what he does with it, you know, et cetera, et cetera. And then when he comes back, he's a mess, but like a really moving, raw, like quite something. Right. And maybe that's sort of this middle stage. And then now we're in this would you call it? Are you comfortable calling it a third wave or a second wave? I don't know. Yeah. Are you want to call it? The wires really third wave. OK. All right. So when he signs into daily wire, now suddenly things go up another level. Right. OK. Right. So so just prior to the third wave, then he had a couple of moments where he was. You had a couple of comment videos where you basically said, man, he's still got it. He's still got it. Like your only Jordan Peterson can do what Jordan Peterson is doing right now in terms of attention and and focus and intensity. You said, I think you use the word devotion. I think that's probably a really good way to characterize it. And and so I've I've been ever since I heard you say that, I've been thinking, well, what is this it thing? And that's why I kind of go I default to the sort of the star model. And he talks about stars all the time. I mean, he talks about actors and actors as the musicians of performance as stars. And and so I think what's so interesting to us that he has spent so much time helping us articulate the arena. And at the same time, he's like a player in that arena. Right. You know, you know, he's like a you know, he's not a he's not a bit player. I mean, he's like he's a star. Right. And and and and he is. Well, he's weird. He's a weird dude. I mean, he just is. And there's nothing normal about the guy. Like, I remember the first time I heard that he had his house filled with with posters and art from the former Soviet Union. Like, wow. Like, I mean, it's kind of a cool thing. I like to go and look on the Internet and like, look at the cool art. It's cool. Yeah. But like, would I surround myself with that? Like, that's just a weird thing. You know, and then you start pulling only he only eats beef. Right. Right. He only eats beef. And his daughter posts on Twitter is blood vitamin levels. Yeah. Right. So so OK. So and so then you anticipate my next move. So then, like, let's look at the people around him. You know, Michaela doesn't fall far from the tree. I mean, clearly she doesn't have the kind of intellectual depth and time in, you know, sunk costs, so to speak, that Jordan has put into this whole thing. But like, she's disagreeable and kind of charming in this sort of weird way. And I think that's him. He's really a disagreeable person. I do. I think he is. But but this is where this is where I think the Twitter window on him is really important. Yeah. OK. Because like all of us, he's multifaceted. And part of the difficulty people have with Jordan is, well, there one of the things that you learn pretty quickly. I remember the first time Jordan tweeted out one of my videos. And I thought, oh, there's going to be a big rush on that video. Nope. Twitter is a silo. YouTube's a silo. Instagram's a silo. You have all these different silos. And and so you have all these different arenas and people are different agents in these different arenas. Right. And and at least if someone is devoted to different arenas, as Jordan is sort of devoted both to the video space, YouTube, but also the Twitter space, I'm not on Instagram and I don't see what goes on there. I don't know to the degree that he gets into that. But I think those are sort of his two spaces. Well, Mikhail always ran his Instagram account. Oh, OK. Right. So that makes perfect sense. Yeah. So it's interesting in that regard. But no, keep going. Sorry. So. Part of what one of the really. I got to be careful about telling tales out of school. So I am not a personal friend of Jordan like Jonathan Peugeot. I've never been over to his house. He and I have had some personal interactions. I at a so I've he's invited me backstage a couple of times when he's come near here and I've met him. He has. I remember the oh, gosh, who was that? Who was that blog that Slate Star Codex? Yeah, I remember when 12 Rules for Life came out, Slate Star Codex, who, you know, of course, got doxxed by the New York Times. Exactly. Yeah. But had ran a really important blog for the kind of Bay Area rationals. But, you know, these these aren't sort of shallow rationals like you see in the decay of Sam Harris. These are quite a bit more sophisticated rationals. Yeah. And and I remember reading the review of 12 Rules for Life by Slate Star Codex. And he basically says he himself, who is a therapist, says, you read this book and you know, this guy is a really good therapist. Yeah. If you had Jordan Peterson as your clinician now, therapists, your mileage may vary with any given therapist. That's also true. I know that I see that as a faster. But he's a he's a really good therapist. And I have seen Jordan in contexts be enormously caring, warm and therapeutic. Again, one of the things that he has been known for on the Internet is breaking down in tears. Yeah. And and now, of course, towards the end of the first wave, his wife has got cancer. You know, we know with the the the Benzos, there are lots of things happening. So you very much understand why he got pretty weepy during those sections. Totally. But you you watch enough of them and you know, no, this weepiness is not simply a function of, you know, struggling with health or struggling with that. His wife is dying of cancer. But this is he cares deeply for. He cares deeply for men, young men who are struggling. And this is makes absolutely perfect sense coming from a university professor who for most of his career sat in rooms of, you know, either 15 to 50 young people watching men try to make it in this world. That is I'm not about it. It's it's not terribly human friendly. So women and men, they have different challenges. But, you know, men have been struggling. They've been struggling, especially in the university. They've been struggling for all kinds of ways. And so to simply dismiss him as an angry man who doesn't have a heart isn't true. Yeah. And when he talks about the fact that he temper mentally, he doesn't like conflict. I believe him. And because I see people who do I see, I see women getting into law. And once they I've seen that women and men, they they suddenly become a lawyer and they're in the job for they spent years getting there. They're in the job for a year. And they're like, I hate this. Well, why? Because the people who really like lawyers really like conflict. And Jordan Peterson, right. He he so in the darkness of the late evenings with his cell phone and Twitter. Yeah, you'll see an angry Jordan, but that's not the whole of him. And so and it's because that's not the whole of him that he has this devotion. And again, I want to reemphasize. In 2018, a number of people said to me, this is going to burn out quickly, and I thought that it very well might. We see that often. Yeah. Again, when he was in Sacramento a couple of months ago, he was in a rather obscure Indian casino. Thirty five, 40 minutes north of Sacramento. This place is in the middle of rice fields. I mean, that is kind of nowhere flat land, northern California. The only thing out there is this Indian casino named Hard Rock Cafe. And I didn't know how big the hall was going to be. And I was just kind of wondering, you know, has and I get there and, you know, the place is sold out. It is it is not all men. It is not all young men. It is probably 60, 40 male female. Jordan gets on stage. Women start yelling. Women start yelling. We love you, Jordan. Yeah. And it's I was at that event thinking not this isn't this isn't winding down. And if you watch his numbers on YouTube, you know, his numbers keep going up at quite a good clip, which is pretty amazing for a guy who on YouTube, for the most part, is two hours plus rambling conversations with people many of us have never heard of. So right. So so this is why I I get really frustrated with, you know, official, you know, the gatekeepers, right? You know, the gatekeepers in Catholic academia, the gatekeepers in secular academia, the gatekeepers in mainstream media, the gatekeepers in official church, you know, capacities. My frustration with them is that, you know, there aren't a lot of people on the planet that have spent more time listening and reading Jordan Peterson than like the two of us. Right. And I, you know, fine. You can crack on me all you want on that. But like, I've spent a lot of time listening to him. And I continue to be engaged with his material and I listen to everything. But, you know, a lot of it. And I can just tell you that there is real substance to this, you know, and that that his numbers, if we want to play that game. And he does. He likes to look at his numbers. His numbers aren't a trick. It's not a grift. It is not it is not some sort of like spell casting. In a nefarious sense of that, maybe in a in a in a. Positive version of that, but that, you know, in other words, there's something enchanting about him. And if it were. Chuck, you know, a shock and jive, you know, if it were, you know, phony, he would not be here right now doing what he's doing. And so therefore, my challenge to people who are quick to dismiss him as, you know, a crank or a quack or whatever. But my my Twitter thread said, you know, it's like you're not you're you're. You're not being serious about your critique with Jordan Peterson. And and, you know, so you brought up Baron gosh, 15 minutes ago. And, you know, Baron is crushed for having anything to do with Jordan Peterson, but especially by the center left and left portions of the church. And except for a couple of bishops and all the young priests, all of official Catholicism is basically center left in its in its in its sort of position, affect, etc. And they all loathe him. And, you know, they basically bought the New York Times drive by shooting version of he's an alt right monster who is, you know, activating, you know, all that sort of stuff. And of course, that's absurd. But the fact that you default to those kind of easy macros, these lazy, low res takes on on someone who's clearly a real thing means that, you know, you are relying on a kind of an authority based gatekeeping that is that is passed itself by date. And I really do mean that. And I look at these people who dismissed Jordan Peterson. I'm talking specifically here in the church. And, you know, Baron is the only one who dares talk to Peterson because Baron is a very canny player. He's an operator. He's not dumb. He knows exactly what those YouTube numbers mean. He knows unlike some of a lot of his brother bishops, he knows that the church is heading toward a demographic clip. He knows that the sort of the the kind of cozy, institutionalized, soft, you know, leftish, you know, sort of ethos of the church is not compelling. And no young people are buying this. And he'd be a fool not to try to engage with Jordan Peterson's audience. And I think Jordan Peterson really respects Baron for that, because I think it shows that that Baron is not going to kind of like rest on his laurels and rest on his position and rest on his sinecures or any of those kinds of things. And he's going to sort of go out and fish for men. And so the so Baron is very interesting in that regard. But he gets crushed by institutional Catholics for engaging Peterson. I mean, they hate him for that. They like platforming this guy. I mean, they sound just like they're, you know, work for the New Republic. Right. But just have a kind of Jesus veneer. And it's the same kind of thing. And I wonder, you know, is that is that that also true of the way that Big Eva treats Peterson? Yeah, yeah, I think. It's it's it's a. Basically, it's a mallet that's on the shelf that people like to pick up. And there's been some in the comments section. Vivian B likes to likes to make these. I'll pull her. I can't see it. No, it's OK. I'll pull it. I'll. Come on, Kale, don't be silly. Peterson is not a rock star. He's a right winger, just like so many before him. It's like, OK, I'm sorry. No, and I think that's I think that's OK. OK, that's true. Yeah, Vivian, you know, fine. I mean, you you can say that all you want. He absolutely is a rock star. I don't make the numbers. I don't you know, I don't control that, you know, the knobs behind it and what people watch, but he moves the needle and he is compelling, you know, and you dismissing him as a right winger is also really low res. I mean, yeah, he's probably conservative ish, but come on. He's a liberal. He's he's an old fashioned liberal. Poor Vanderklaas, he's so in love with Peterson, it's not reciprocated. I did all busted. You're good to get Jordan. Jordan sends me love notes all the time. All the time. Jordan says we love notes all the time. But I see. And the point is, I don't think I think a lot of this. Again, I got to be really careful with this analogy. Who you fired up, Paul? Yeah. Well, because when I compare Jordan to Jesus, there's a lot of way that Jordan is nowhere near. I'm just just just checking. Just yeah. Yeah. But I'm scared of I'm scared of my Lord. My Lord is not Jordan Peterson. Well, you your Lord knows your heart. But envy is a envy, I think, is a deep factor in this. Yes, that. And you know, because when you know, when Jordan first starts sort of courting Baron, you know, it's it's easy to say, you know, Jordan is kind of looking for entrance. And and what was remarkable about some of those conversations with Baron was it was Baron that was the one who who was sort of, you know, was very gracious. I don't one of the interesting one of the interesting questions that I that I had was if Baron would show up in the Exodus seminar. Now, he's a bishop, so he probably can't make it work with his schedule. Right. But I thought, would he sit around a table like that? Are you asking me? I'm kind of curious what your thoughts are. Absolutely. Absolutely. He would love you. Kid me. Baron's a nerd like us. He is that he loves that stuff. I mean, like I told you my first time ever. It's just so weird that Baron is a bishop. It's like barons don't become bishops. It's just such an oddity. You know, you know, bishops are cut from the cloth of managerial of the managerial class. Baron's not a manager. But when you when you talk about the the Catholic Church and the same is true for Protestant churches in America. OK. And the same is true for the Christian Reformed Church, the Christian Reformed Church, like the Roman Catholic Church. And when you said it to me, when we when I was in Rhode Island, I really took notice of it because I see this in the Christian Reformed Church. It's very true in other Protestant churches. They're they're staring at a demographic cliff. Yeah. And one of the things that Baron kept looking at was basically saying, well, maybe Jordan can help us with our demographic cliff. And I think in some ways, I mean, probably second to the Orthodox, the Catholics have benefited from a revivification of some people coming back to the church, I think partly again, because if, you know, Catholics are sort of the some people at this is going to be really controversial what I'm about to say. But because his wife has been, let's say because his wife has been communing with the Catholics to a degree. Michaela's sort of been with the Protestants. I know the Orthodox sort of want to claim Jordan, the trifecta. That's right. But I I have a hard time seeing Jordan as a catechist in. I think Jordan is. I think Jordan is fundamentally Protestant in in his perspective on the world, even though he's neo sacramental and he understands the deep importance of symbolism in a way that often makes most Protestants a little bit nervous. Yeah. You know, so if there were if there was one church, you would imagine Jordan may be joining if he could. It might be the Catholic church. Yeah. One of the one of the reason I think there's so much envy slash fear about Jordan in church establishments is that in some ways there's a warm water of this is ironic, of conservatism in the American Catholic Church, that the hierarchy that scares the hierarchy. And and so see, this is why I talk to you, because I when Cale and I talk, we're so often comparing notes because I know so little about your world and you're curious about my world that, you know, when I for example, when I you know, the Skowjek who has left the Catholic church, right? He and our good friends. Yes, I know. Yeah. Yeah. And and, you know, I watch these dynamics of deconstruction. And of course, that's happening in the Catholic church as well. Yeah. And it's certainly happening in the Protestant church. And what I've you know, people don't like it when I talk this way. But when I talk about the Jordan Peterson revival and when I say revival, I don't mean a tent with sawdust. I mean that there's been a consistent there's been a consistent group of people who have been moving back into the church and various churches, Orthodox, Catholic, Protestant, and anybody who's followed my channel closely right from the beginning and understands what I do in my Randall's conversations knows that part of those Randall's conversations, just my pastoral self being curious about people and wanting to get their stories. Another part is that I wanted to document this revival that I've been watching of people who have gone back to the church yet. Right away, I also saw that in many ways, the church was not. Ready for them, the church could not unfold them. Right. Catch them. You have said for years, you have drawn the analogy between, you know, the the structure of what Billy Graham did. Right. And you've always really helped me understand that part of what those crusades were about is that he would come in the town. He was the star. He was the rock star. Right. He would come in the town to do that. But he was from from your retelling was was very conscientious about preparing the local church in advance and setting up structures in the aftermath of this this this event. Right. This this this movement that it was was it happened. Like he knew how to do it. Right. And so so I said and tremendous institution to do it. Right. Right. Right. A huge structure. Right. I mean, just to sort of make this thing make this thing happen. And so I think that, you know, my sort of sort of historical what if, you know, that I like to play in my head is what if Benedict the 16th had not retired and become Pope Emeritus in was 2013, I think it was if he had stayed on. I think that the church would have been much more would have benefited greatly with this this Peterson thing, this this page of thing, this Paul thing. I really do believe that. I think that that I can't tell you how many direct messages I get from people on Twitter. You know, they know who I am and what I am. And I get questions all the time, Kale, like, how do you deal with the disconnect between the church that you receive in its teachings and in its sort of magisterium and its history versus sort of the the dumpster fire that's going on in Rome right now? And I always have the same question. I don't know. I don't know. But I know it's not right. And, you know, I know that's getting into the veering into sort of papal politics. That's not really the focus of this part of the conversation. But, you know, the the ambiguity that is being sewn, the mess that is being created from the tippy top has not been beneficial for the evangelization efforts that I think would have that have occurred as a result of Peterson's work. Now, what's interesting to me about the Catholic Church are the layers. And in some ways, like a monarchy, I mean, you could and please correct me if I'm wrong. But I suspect just like with monarchs in the in the third year of King such and such, you could almost do this in the Catholic Church with your popes. You know, John Paul II, Pope Benedict, Pope Francis, you know, in the. Just, you know, in the beginning of the 20th century, you see a Catholic Church that is trying to come. You see a Catholic Church that is trying to come to terms with modernity. Right. You know, obviously, in the 16th, 17th century, you have a Catholic Church that is trying to come to terms with rebellion in northern Europe and then, of course, rebellion in England. And the United States is sort of the release valve. And remember, and also the scientific revolution, all that stuff and the Enlightenment's huge. I mean, all these things are it's like it's like, you know, hit after hit after hit after hit. You know, it's it's the 500 years that, you know, somebody like Charles Taylor sketches out, you know, you could say that it's sort of the the 500 years of dealing with Catholicism and its breakup. Yes. Right. In terms of its its total, you know, control over everything, so to speak. And so you have all of these layers. And so now we get to so. So then again, when I was in when I was in seminary in the 80s, I was people if people had any idea about my background, I see the hit jobs they do on Tim Keller and his background. And it's like, yeah, I got the same story. You know, I was I was really fascinated with liberation theology when I was in seminary to the degree that the board of trustees that had to examine me for licensure. Someone had passed them a note to make sure they grill me on liberation theology to make sure I wasn't too cozy on it. I guess my my seminary professors had been telling tales out of class about the kind of comments I was making to them. But this is this is, of course, you scamp you. This is, of course, this is coming out of Latin America. Yeah. You know, this is I mean, classic liberation theology is Catholic. And so when when when Peterson sort of unleashes this tweet, people sort of take a step back and they're going to talk about, you know, Roman Catholic social, basically Roman Catholic social theory. And but when I look at this, I see just how many layers I see the distributist and the distributism. And I see, you know, Chesterton and this, you know, this integralism. And of course, we had, you know, the wonderful the wonderful Mary Cohen on our channel for a while until she she passed of cancer. And she's the one who introduces me to this. And so you see the Catholic Church and it's just so massive. And you have all of these layers. And then when I watch what Peterson is sort of provoking on the American scene and you see a revival of the Latin mass and resistance to that, and I watch all of this drama. I just I just I just don't know what to make of it. And then, of course, this demographic cliff that most churches are facing, including the Orthodox Church, quite frankly, because a great I mean, the body of orthodoxy in the West continues to be made up of immigrants. And so those immigrants are facing exactly the same challenges as many of these other churches are, too. So then, of course, Peterson steps into that mix and he gains. You know, I would imagine that there are many young Catholic men who take Jordan Peterson more seriously than they take the pope. Without a doubt, Paul, without a doubt. And and it and they would probably say that's because they. Apprehend, they experience, they feel a person. You know, I think Jordan's personalism is such a deeply underrated you. You've invoked it, so that's not fair. But I think that is such a powerful he's a witness. I mean, he is a professor. Right. And in that in that full sense of that word, like he looks like he believes what he's saying. And even in his doubt, his doubt is so humane, so rich, so honest. I mean, I I think I see in him just such a good faith actor that that, you know, I just don't think is. I know that that's not what's sensed amongst the young people when they look at somebody like Pope Francis. You know, that's, you know, it's not really Pope Francis's fault. I'm not coming after Pope Francis on that score. But Jordan just seems real. Now, there's another piece of Jordan and Nate, of course, Nate in this little corner, Nate Hile and his channel. And one of the things that Nate keeps pointing out, and I think Nate is right. You know, that when you step back sort of as far as you can and you try to get the biggest, broadest picture, we see the recession of modernity and the the flowering of something beyond modernity. You know, Peterson's certain there's some deep questions about post-modernity, whether, you know, sort of instantiated and wokeness, whether that can actually hold together. But but we begin to realize that. In in the longest view of things, civilizations need at their center a religious core. Peterson and the IDW also sort of have had sort of tried to forestall other cliffs that the West is looking at by saying, Tim Keller's in this boat, too. I played his clip quite often. Yeah, I saw that. You know, we need to we need to not lose liberalism. And so when when Nate Hile, you know, works on this question, I think he's right, because he looks at Jordan Peterson and the IDW and says, they're still fundamentally trying to maintain liberalism. But of course, it's been in many respects some, you know, really incisive Catholics who have given the conservative Catholics, who've given some of the most incisive, strongest critique of liberalism, saying that, you know, liberalism, too, is fundamentally unsustainable. And I think when you look at someone like Jonathan Peugeot, that's really where he's coming from with the Orthodox, with deeply conservative Catholics. Now, I really don't think either Orthodoxy or Rome are on the menu to become sort of the ecclesiastical core of the United States. That was a waspy, implicit Protestantism, the main line that has now sort of decayed into me too ish. You know, I want to be woke to. So, you know, I think I think I think Nate is right in there. But and I think that's also part of where and part of why Catholicism has managed in some ways to outperform. There are more Roman Catholics on the Supreme Court. Roman Catholics seem in many respects, Aaron Wren had made this point recently in a podcast, you know. It the wasps have sort of fallen apart, and it's been in many respects, conservative Catholics that sort of step up and say, we know how to do culture. We know how to do governance in a way that you Protestants are stumbling around about. And I think, you know, this is this is where Peterson is. It is really sort of an ambivalent figure, because on one hand, he's forefronting mythology, he's forefronting. But you would almost you know, there have been moments when he's he's almost said, basically, why don't the Catholics stand up and become the the the religious column around which the West can be? But when I hear that, historically speaking, I laugh because, of course, England, the United States, the Anglo-Western world was it was basically Calvinism that came in there and followed that structure and the Enlightenment thought and all of this, which leads us, I think, to this moment now where nobody quite knows where to turn. Yeah, I agree. And I think, you know, maybe maybe maybe this is worth an endeavor for us Peterson watchers. You know, if we could create maybe a kind of taxonomy of the different Jordans. Right. You know, he's always fond of talking about that, I think, sort of in the wake of somebody like Freud, where, you know, we have all these sort of subpersonalities, right. And they're sort of governed by a kind of an executive main personality. And and I detect in Jordan actually the the sort of the the crack up of the IDW. You know, you've got Jordan, you know, when he talks to somebody like Bjorn Lundberg and he talks to somebody like Stephen Pinker, you know, he sort of won Jordan. He's very conversant in that world. And he can play, you know, the data. He can play the data game statistics, et cetera, you know, because he's a trained social scientist. Right. And so he can play that game, which I think is largely a left hemispheric endeavor. Right. It's sort of the world is workshopped. But Peterson is in the other another and other. I'm not sure if it's only the other, but another Peterson is is deeply conversant and deep myth. And so therefore, which, of course, is in McGill Christie in terms that kind of right hemispheric. What does it all mean? Thing. Right. So Maps of Meaning is McGill Christie and in its in its very makeup. He's playing with both hemispheres in the very title of the work. And I I sense that. So if you look at the IDW, those members of the IDW that are most conversant with right hemispheric thinking. Broke away from, you know, the left hemispheric crew, which I would put like the Shermers and the and the Claire Lamans and Sam Harris, for sure. Right. That they said they broke to the left hemisphere. And then you have interesting characters. You know, the the I I call them. I shouldn't say this out loud, never mind. But you've got the you've got Eric and Brett. Right. And and Eric is kind of his own thing. But Brett and Heather are, you know, I think two genuinely good faith actors in trying to make sense out of things. And the saving grace for me, for Brett, will always be his conversation he had with Richard with Richard Dawkins when he challenged Dawkins. You know, Dawkins, of course, comes up with the idea of the meme in a selfish gene, but abandoned it basically as a kind of spandrel. Right. Memes are just this sort of this after the after the thought things. And sadly, they become mind viruses, et cetera. And Brett was insistent and challenged Dawkins on this. You know, actually, I think what you came up with is actually really, really important. And memes are as important as genes in terms of our adaptive standpoint toward our environment. And I think because of that, Brett is ultimately a kind of an ally. Now, he loves all this game be stuff and he loves all that kind of thing because it's always got I mean, he's a materialist at the end of the day. But but but the fact that he doesn't think religion is a mind virus puts him firmly in that that sort of Jordan version who explores myth and its connection to meaning. You know. I don't know if that if that. No, it makes perfect sense. And and the. You know, some people some people like to say, you know, the real the real gift of Jordan Peterson is Jonathan Pajot to the world, which, as you pointed out, he added. He officially added Pajot's video to the to the biblical series, didn't he? Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's sort of part of that's canon now. Yeah, it's a grim grizz throw out there. Yeah, yeah. And he put and he put he put Pajot on or Pajot is also on his alliance of responsible citizen free. Yeah, he's he's on the AARC. But but, you know, I think I think. For me, the the salient political institutional question of our moment is, how do we, you know, how do we move forward now? I am. I don't think you simply go back, even though the the instinct to go back is obviously deep within sort of the Protestant, the Protestant ethos, because Protestantism, Protestantism is an attempt to, you know, the Reformation period, go back to the sources, like fontase, go back to, you know, limit the canon to the Bible, build on the Bible, Sola Scriptura. But every time Protestants go back, they they often are a little bit blind to the fact that you're not living in, you know, you're not living in the first century Roman empire. In fact, you know relatively little about the first century Roman empire. And so what you find in Protestantism is all of these restoration movements where and they produce very they produce very, very interesting things, you know, even to the point of the the seeker movement, which in America was in the 1980s and 1990s, you could hear Bible, you could hear Bill Hybels again and again say as he's trying to riff off Bill Ezekiel and his his his Christian college professor, we want an acts to community there in northern there in northern Chicago with this modern looks like a junior college campus and beautiful. Willow Creek, Willow Creek. Yeah, yeah. So you have you have all of that. And, you know, we have the Jesus we have the Jesus movement, you know, that kind of the Jesus Revolution movie now. And people are interested in that. And of course, psychedelics, you know, people in the, you know, psychedelics bring us back into the the fountain, which is and then whatever they describe the fountain. Of course, orthodoxy makes the claim that no, we are we are actually the the same church that that Paul founded and our lineage goes all the way back. And of course, Rome says, you know, we are the we are the Sea of Peter, you know, continuing on through history. So so institutionally, both church and government are sort of at this space now of saying, OK, where do we find our foundation? Where do we find how we can build? And and I see I see those who have been sort of, you know, I I think I've had many names for Peterson, but I the one I like best continues to be the unauthorized exorcist because he sort of broke people out of a current spell to get them reading great books, thinking for themselves. You know, that's one of the things that I found in the Peterson following. And yet those people have continued to sort of look across the church the church landscape and say, where do I go? Where do I go? Do I go to Rome for the Eucharist? Do I go to do I go to the Orthodox for the icons? Do I go to the Protestants for the the psycho technology of music and preaching? Small groups, small groups, right? We you know, we have the cell church movement. So, you know, you're a you're a teacher of you're a teacher of your audience is your audience in the classroom is younger than my audience in YouTube. But what are you seeing among them? Are they still sort of still too much in the fold to really have an awareness of what, say, their 25 plus year olds are bumping into that we're talking to on the Internet? Yeah, that's probably the case. I think the the, you know, the the kids that I teach are are they're dutiful, you know, they're they're. Pretty I think they see the world in very kind of instrumental terms, you know, that they are going to play the scripts that their parents have laid out for them. This is not, you know, in my era or the Arab for where like rebellion is not really like a thing, which kind of surprises me. I'm always I'm I'm I'm deeply I remain amazed at their their conservativism. And I don't mean that in any kind of ideological sense. They're all they're all, you know, they've all been raised by their devices, even with very good parents. They've all been colonized by by their devices and and a vast majority of them have had their phones since they were in, you know, fourth grade, I would say. And so. It's a weird parallel world that I don't think they're quite. I don't even know if I would really call them like seekers in that way, you know, and I wonder and I'm speculating here, Paul, you know, this is I'm not trying to sound like I know it all like I normally do. I think they're deeply distracted from their existential reality. I feel like they have never been bored. And. Before Louis CK got canceled, there was this great bit that he did, I think, with Conan. On one of the late night, one of his late night appearances, and it was relatively early on in the smartphone era. So, you know, I'm putting this around 2010, 2011, something like that. And he did this whole bit. He's like, you know, I'm really worried about my kids and code is like, oh, what are you talking about? I'm worried about my kids because and he takes out his phone. He's like, because they've got this and they're always looking at this and they're never bored. And he goes on this whole riff about why it's so important for you to be bored, because in being bored is when you find yourself, like you start talking to yourself. Right. And it really struck me because I I remember being bored. Like I do, you know, and that in part is why I sort of started reading the way that I did. And, you know, and then you start reading and you sort of meeting other intelligences and they're like, unlike the person sitting next to me in class, like there's an honesty to this voice in the book that, you know, that I'm longing for, et cetera, et cetera. But it was in my boredom that I started to talk to myself. And I wonder and I ask my kids this all the time, you know, and they walk around all day long with these on. Right. All day long. And I love these things. These are great. But this is sort of part of this. Cyborg theocracy, you know, that Mary Harrington talks about that, you know, which I think I know I'm going all over the place here, but I swear it all it's all comes together. But, you know, this is I think we're living in the sort of the accelerationist moment of the abolition of man. And we our devices have have captured us. And so for young kids, if you're asking about young kids, I just don't think that there's a sort of a deep awareness of themselves. So they're deeply, deeply stuck in the throes of mimetic desire, for instance. You know, so it's all a very lateral, horizontal world. And, you know, how does the vertical break through in in in in that noise? Sorry. You know, in that noise, I don't know. I don't know how it does. Now, I know I know that when they hit around 25 and they've had a couple of bad relationships and they've been hurt, all of a sudden it's like, oh, wait, something, something, something. Something's the matter, right? But man, like, does it really have to be? Does it really have to play that out that way? God, you would hope not. If here's a question for you. I would not I would not find it if if Jordan Peterson would have a papal audience, he would definitely want it. I don't think there's any question about that. From what we've seen about Jordan, Jordan, and he'd like and he'd have the DW. He'd have the daily wire people with him and they'd film the whole thing. Yes, that's true. Would the pope talk to Jordan? No, publicly, no, no. What does that say? Is that important enough? I mean, that's OK to say. I mean, who does the pope talk to? It's a damn good question, Paul. No, I mean, I really I. Look, the pope, despite all of his. Pretends to being a simple man and, you know, a man of the people, and he doesn't live in the papal palace, he lives in like one of the apartments and all that kind of stuff, it was all part of the sort of the myth of Francis. You know, this is, you know, we're right at the 10 year anniversary right now. So everybody's talking about this stuff like, oh, Francis is like real and that Benedict was, you know, and all that kind of stuff. Right. And. Yet, despite all that stuff, there there is no. Other king on the planet. And that's essentially what what what the pope is. And, you know, kings don't. Have a conversation with Jordan Peterson. They don't. I you know, that's that's the takeaway line for this. Yeah. Yeah. Kings don't have a conversation with Jordan Peterson. They just don't, you know, because he talks back. He tweeted back. I mean, that's the joke. That's the joke that started this whole podcast. Right. You know, he he dared to tweet back and it's like. I would want I mean, as as a as a human being, but certainly as a as a as a Catholic, I would very much want the pope to talk to Peterson. You know, and bring him aboard. Like, why not? Like, I'll be I'll do the hurrah. You know, the ra ra thing as a Catholic. It would be great. But also just. I just don't see in the pope. I think the pope is I just don't think he's there. I don't I don't think he I think he would believe the lies that his handlers would tell him, which are that you can't platform this alt right troll. It's so interesting to me, and maybe this just reveals the depths of my Protestantism. I don't know. I don't know how many generations. I don't know if I could trace my family back to any Catholicism at all between the Jews and wherever I wherever my well, eventually, eventually you could, Paul. I mean, right. I mean. I mean, if you're European, right, you're you're you're European Jew like me, right? Yeah. Yeah. So maybe not. Maybe not. If you actually maybe actually, you know, maybe maybe our ancestors got you know, they left Spain for a reason. Yeah. But so so I mean, when you say that to me, that just think images rush in, of course, for me of Jesus, because the pope sits on Jesus throne and and and we all understand. I mean, I very much understand. I can't I have difficulty talking to everyone who wants to talk to me. And my locally, it's really easy. If you want to talk to me, just walk into Livingstone's Church. You can talk to me. No problem. There's no line here like there is for Randall's conversations on on the Calendly. But. You know, the. You know, the image that I have of Jesus is that and of course, you know, I would imagine Francis kind of wants to avoid this to why he doesn't live in the palace, et cetera, et cetera. But one of the one of the one of the stories in the gospel, that's, you know, the the Jesus handlers didn't want to have Jesus bothered with children. Yeah. Yeah. And so, you know, let the little children come to me. And so, of course, if you're pope, you have to, you know, be seen with children because Jesus was seen with children. Right. Right. And yeah, yeah. I mean, because the pope sees people, you see people with pictures with the pope all the time. I mean, yeah, I was I got into it a little bit with Jordan B Cooper on Twitter because he was talking about, you know, Protestantism and celebrities. And so I just pictured a well, here's I mean, the pope is a celebrity. I mean, I remember growing up and word was, you know, a little kid in New Jersey and of course, lots of Catholics in the New York Methodist Church. And of course, lots of Catholics in the New York metropolitan area. You know, the pope is coming to America and in the 60s, you know, Catholics are it's it's it's you know, it's the pope is bigger than Elvis. The pope is bigger than the Beatles. I mean, you're when you just said it now, I never thought of it that way. But he's in many ways the that sort of the the monarch of the West still today to the degree. I mean, the pope is bigger than King Charles. Right. Right. Right. You know, that's right. And, you know, and I, you know, gosh, I'm like, I'm of two. I'm of two minds and hearts about this. You know, it's like I want like you. I want the pope should talk to anybody. Right. But I also, you know, I I get he's got a lot. Everybody wants to talk to the pope. Who's he going to pick? Right. Right. No, I should just I mean, Jordan certainly would be allowed to go to an audience. Right. And every Wednesday, there's an audience where, you know, several hundred people get a ticket and you walk into the audience hall and you can like watch the pope and he says a couple of things. And then groups from Spain get up and say hello in America. You know, whatever. I mean, it's like a Jordan VIP event. It is. It is. It's exactly right. Yeah. But you know, but in terms of, you know, an audience audience, like like an actual like one where pictures would be taken of the pope and Jordan, like at a desk, I just I can't imagine it. I think he would he would run the risk. Let's say that the pope wanted to. And maybe he does. I think he would tick off all the sort of the little Lord Fauntleroy's. I think it would tick off all of his people so bad that I just don't think he would do it. It's not, you know, it wouldn't be worth the fallout amongst all of his underlings. Because it's they would be jealous. You know, it's maybe I'm wrong. I mean, people in the comments, I'm sure, are going to correct me. I just I don't see it, man. I just don't see it. Well, he meets presidents. I mean, again, so, you know, it's again, would Joe Biden, would Joe Biden, would Joe Biden meet Jordan Peterson right now? No, no, no, no. And see, and see, this is and I and I actually think it's political. You know, would Trump meet Jordan Peterson? Damn straight, damn straight. No, no, no. Trump and the pope met, right? Do you see the pictures? Like literally like us, like a full body scowl. Like if if your body can scowl, the pope is scowling. You know, so how many Catholics voted for Trump? Half a lot. All I mean, you know, yeah, of course, it's like. Yeah, but see, but that but see, but the way that the Europeans and the South Americans are doing it, you know, see that is that that's just weirdo Americanism, weirdo, you know, Yankees. You know, that's easily dismissed. You know, there are these weird snobberies that that exists, you know. I mean, you brought up liberation theology and it's like. It's hard to think that something like liberation theology could could happen in any other context than a largely white European leadership of South America dealing with the kind of white supremacy type guilt that they are dealing with in the face of a huge indigenous population. You know, it's. Liberation theology could only come out of that of that context, right? And, you know, yeah, it's such a funny thing. I mean, I had a question for you. Like what what broke your spell with liberation theology? Why did that prove to you not ultimately compelling? Going to Latin America? Yeah. I remember. So Raj Greenway, who was my my missions professor, he had been a he had been a missionary in Mexico City. I mean, so we're all these, you know, he said, you know, liberation theology doesn't really have a lot of adherence if you're actually among poor people in Latin America. Right. And so it's a luxury belief. It's a luxury belief. Right. And so I get down there and I begin to realize that in many ways, many of the absolutely impoverished Haitians that I'm working with who are, you know, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, you know, really are working hard to stay in the Dominican Republic and not get deported back to Haiti are, you know, they are they are they are looking for King Jesus to save them. And and sure, they want they certainly wanted better treatment from the Dominican government than they were getting. And they certainly wanted, you know, part of the part of why they were interested in being part of having a relationship with a North American missionary was hoping that some way or another, maybe one of their kids could get a visa and they could get to New York or Miami. And so they certainly were looking to work hard to improve their lot in this world. Yeah. But almost all of them knew that they were going to die young and poor in a difficult situation and which is why, Paul, which is why I, you know, despite Nate's misgivings, you know, I can't quite in my own head deny the sort of the left hemispheric Peterson, you know, when he talks to Bjorn Lundberg. And I look at at at, you know, like the shrinking of poverty in the last decade and a half, like that's a real that's a real thing. That doesn't also mean that that that there's been a widening gap between, you know, the privilege and the not like I get all those things, too. But in real term numbers, like I can't just pretend that. You know, we have less wide scale poverty now than we did 15 years ago. Yeah, like I can't quite put it away. Yeah. And in Latin America, I mean, a big piece of, you know, they call it the basically the evangelical bump. Suddenly you became a Christian in Latin America. And well, what did you what did you have to do? Well, the church was, you know, leaning on you. She'd be the husband of one wife and you take care of your children. Yeah. And you stay faithful to your wife and you go to work. It's a lot of these a lot of these very I shouldn't say the Protestant values because many Catholics have them as well. But I don't know what you mean. I know what you mean. But and so, you know, you go to you go to Latin America and you begin to realize that a lot of this consciousness raising and the kind of stuff, these are luxury beliefs. And these people, these people have very little luxury and it's it's live or die, and they're very pragmatic and they they they want what's best for themselves and their children. And they're going to work hard to get it. And so sit around in a circle, talk about consciousness raising. Right. Right. Right. You know, which is so which was why I think someone like, you know, a James Lindsay, let's say, you know, in his going after Marxism and Paulo Freire and all these guys like, I think these I think there's something I think there's something really to that project. And what what I have learned from him, even though I had to read a ton of Marx and Marxist stuff when going through graduate schools, you know, I I see luxury beliefs as the sort of the clubs with which you wage an intra elite fight for power. It has nothing to do with the actual people. And so what I see, you know, higher ups in the church using, you know, woke ideology, whatever you want to call it. Right. I know we are not allowed to say woke is woke, but whatever. You know, when I see them doing that game, they're ultimately fighting for position and rank and status. And it really has nothing to do with some sort of like actual Christian option for the poor or something like that. You know, I saw that in, you know, my father spent his life, you know, working with the poor people of this is heavy bingo. Get out of your car. Yes, it's time. You know, in Patterson, New Jersey, and you'd see in the nineteen in the 1970s, it were, you know, there were there were there were Catholics and Protestants who would actually live among the poor and and give their lives for their poor neighbors. And, you know, my father was deeply loved in Patterson because they knew one way or another he was for them. And, you know, my father wasn't what I had to have difficulty trying to sort of categorize my father as a liberal or a conservative, I mean, obviously believe deeply in the civil rights movement and gave his life for, you know, working with the poor in Patterson. But he showed that with, you know, by by being their friend and by pouring out his life for them. So, you know, I there are many people who talk a real big political game about the poor and really don't spend any time with the poor at all. And to me, I begin to get the sense that they don't really care about the poor. They're they understand that this is the bread that they're this is the side that their political bread is buttered on. And so they're going to slather it up. Yeah, no. And so I think that kind of posturing is a real thing. And I, you know, when I pull for Jordan Peterson, because I think he's interested in puncturing that pretense, like I really do. And for all of his his wackiness, you know, I think his project is fundamentally sound. I think he's a genuine seeker for truth. I think he does his best to sort of live not by lies. I do. I think he takes that that rule to heart. And so in in in as far as that's concerned, I I think he's right. I think I think he's a good faith actor. Whether I agree with all of his stuff is like, that's so stupid. Of course, I don't agree with everything, you know, everybody says like that. That's absurd. You know, and, you know, you don't worship Jordan, you know, but I don't worship any man except the God man. You know, so I think that's important. And, you know, I don't like those kind of purity tests. I don't like those kind of loyalty tests. And, you know, so when when when Jordan goes after the pope on Twitter about social justice, like I get his point, you know, and so it doesn't doesn't doesn't bother me. I guarantee he's got plenty of Catholics on his side who are like, yeah, pope, he's talking about, you know, why do we keep playing footsie with stuff? And oh, by the way, have you been paying attention to Germany? Oh, that's right. You haven't. Because Germany is like driving us off into cliff, you know, into into yet another explosion. You know, that's for another time. But I'm talking about the Senate and synodality. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's not going away. Yeah. All right. Always the Germans, always the Germans, always the Germans. All right. We got we got about 15 minutes. I told Cal two hours. So I'm letting some letting some people in the stream here. Oh, cool. Cool. So here's Mr. Luke. Luke Thompson, you I'm sure have something to say. What is it, Luke? So I haven't followed the the Pope Francis political debates because I like Nate or in a resident Christian anarchist and I think politics are the opiate of the masses. So I don't tend to follow that stuff. But I do agree with a lot of Nate's comments. And we've had lots of conversations about this, that there's a. I think there's a lot of false binaries that people think in in terms of politics. And I think it's really hard for Westerners to get outside of the. Completely colonized thinking around liberalism and liberalism to me is fundamentally equated with individualism. I mean, I don't know how you can divorce the two. And that's a big, big problem. Yeah, I would just jump in, Luke. I think that's why, you know, I don't know if. Pope Benedict, when he was Pope, before he passed away, wrote a cyclical called Speyett Salve, and he goes specifically into this sort of false binary of we're saved sort of as individual souls versus, hey, there's Grim versus, you know, like this sort of communal understanding. And he talks really about like, you know, it's you can't do an either or on that. It's really more of an inclusive or something like that. Personalism persons that they're not individuals or collectives, they're both their unities of multiplicities that involve communities, nations, languages, every field you participate in, it's what a person is. The individual is an illusion is a better word. Myths are great. All right, Grim Grizz. But for Grim Claire, I'm going to say I'm not letting anybody on the stream unless their faces on the camera, that's that's my bar. Dems the rules, Dems the rules. Dems the rules. I also hit her from the channel earlier, so that's you might talk about that. I just I wanted to ask a question relevant to the stream topic. If you if you don't mind. Yes, I understand that historically Peterson requested a discussion with Elon Musk, master of the Bahlberg network that we're talking about, and he basically gave him the cold shoulder. And and we were discussing the possibilities of the pope talking to JVP. And if Elon won't and the pope will. Then what signal does that send? So what press like what are you gentlemen discussing this topic? Think about that and thank you for taking the quest. Paul, you want first? No, you go ahead. All right. I you know, it's funny, I've been noticing the way that people treat Elon on Twitter right now, or at least the last couple of months. And like he very is he is very clearly performing a kind of God function on Twitter, like if something goes wrong with Twitter is like, you know, at Elon, you know, it's like I always sort of, you know, it reminds me of that scene in Bruce Almighty when she he get how it happens. But you get to see you. You can hear all the prayers that are coming to God, like at the same time or at the same moment that God is constantly inundated with these petitions. Why? I sort of feel like that's the way that Elon is being played on the game of Twitter. You know, it's like, you know, he's a God function. But I don't know. I'm surprised that Elon gave Peterson the cold shoulder. That's all I'll say. I don't know. I was a little surprised by it, too. I think the question is really good, though. Yeah, especially comparing comparing to comparing to because, you know, and just just the what we what we what we poked at a little bit, Kale, in terms of would the pope give Jordan an audience? Who does the pope talk to? Who doesn't the pope talk to? Elon Musk was on the Babylon B. So he he gave the Babylon B an audience. So, hmm, hmm. It's a really good question. In terms of just sort of sussing out the structures in which we live. I mean, you know, Dave Rubin got got got access to Elon. Yeah, you know, Barry Wise and Schillenberger and Matt Taibbi. And it's interesting. Maybe maybe Elon's got beef with Ben Shapiro. I don't know. So one quick thing I want to hear what Sam has to say. But if we are like, who does why does anyone talk to who they want to talk to outside of outside of a Machiavellian psychopathy, outside of I'm talking to someone to get X because all of that, all the stuff we're talking about is rooted in status and hierarchy and power. That's why they want to talk to people. They don't know these people. They want to influence their will. I'm a little reluctant to just dismiss it as status, hierarchy and power. I think there are other motivations that are moving to like what he rebuffed Alex Lex Friedman's friendly offer to help with Twitter. So interesting. All right, I'll I'll let you on what your faces, what your faces in the camera here. So I mean, well, I want to be out. I can take you out to Washington State. All right. What's up, Sam? If you've got imagine you have Catholic friends who are headed in a pretty evidently leftward and woke direction every time you see them, you know, it's like not only do the things that they say are more left, but it's a higher percentage of the things that they say. Right. Having an absolutely allergic reaction to Jordan Peterson, as would be predictable, but think Pope Francis is like their man and they worry about what would come next. How how should how should someone interact with them? You know, I I usually I usually lead with like, look, you know, I have you listen to him, you know, I think, you know, I'll try to think of maybe a couple of episodes that I recommend, the easiest thing to recommend is episode one of the biblical series, you know, because that was that that was just sort of Jordan in full. You know, he's sort of he's curious. He's he's wide open. He's properly respectful and deferential. But, you know, he's just on. And I would say I would just look, watch this. What is it? An hour and a half, Paul? I mean, I say, watch this and tell me if you think this guy's dangerous. But as far as like my my my my Catholic friends who sort of trend in the woke direction, you know, yeah, I have a hard time talking about that stuff, not because I don't like to talk about it, but because, you know, there are plenty of there are plenty of people in positions of power. I mean, look at Cardinal McElroy out of San Diego. He publishes this piece a month ago in America magazine, which is using the word the lingo of diversity, equity and inclusion. I mean, who am I? I'm just some schmuck who teaches poetry for a living. Cardinal McElroy is one of Pope Francis's darlings, made him a cardinal. There's like a handful of those guys. You know, so no, it's hard. I think that's part of the that's part of my crisis as a Catholic in this moment right now is that it seems like the pope is giving air to things that I think should not be given air. It's hard. It's hard. I don't have a quick, easy answer. But I'll but then I will witness personally to Jordan's sense making help to me like he's helped me make sense out of myself. He's helped me make sense out of the world. He's helped me see my frame a little bit better. So I would just challenge my friends to not the law, not believe the kind of low resolution lies that the kind of gotcha interviews reveal. You know, yeah. So for my my faintly woke millennial Catholic friends who are, you know, just kind of starting to have families and kids. Yeah, I feel like Pope Francis is actually doing a relatively good job of giving them some hope. And I almost wonder, imagine, say, Pope Francis were to be replaced by someone who would draw much brighter lines on sexuality and anti woke sort of questions. I wonder how many people in the United States and Europe are in that faintly woke Catholic camp that would finally feel like that was the straw that broke their back and then they would become Episcopalian or stop going to church or I don't know what. Yeah, that's a great question. I think I think that'll probably happen. And so the next Pope or you mean, yeah, yeah, I think that if your faith is contingent on, you know, let's say a kind of generally affirming point of view, right? You know, I know what I I know what I think about that personally. But I would say that then your faith is already you're already apologizing for the faith before. You know, you're trying to have faith on your terms. And like, I mean, I believe in a in a divine order. And I believe that it doesn't matter what I think about, you know, gay relationships, but that, you know, the divine order, as I understand it, has given to me through the person of Jesus and through his church has shown for thousands for a couple of thousand years that that's not what God wants from me. It's not what God wants from you. And so and that and I would just say, look, and again, I don't say this sort of thought my chest, but it's like I am supposed to order my desire and my will to him, you know, not the other way around, you know, the whole Jesus hostage, you know, until you come around on this gay marriage thing, Jesus, like, I'm not going to give you the time of day. Like, I already I just already think that you're you're hedging your bets or something like that. And again, I know that's a tough it's a tough answer to give people, but it means that I don't think that the faith, perhaps than the faith for somebody like that is just sort of a more of a moralistic theistic moralistic therapeutic deism more than a faith in historic Christianity. I think, Sam, what you just laid out has been the sort of the institutional posture of Big Eva and of the Christian Forum Church. Because that and establishment Catholicism, let's be very clear at all the colleges, at all the high schools, like that's the bargain. Keep people on, you know, don't be don't draw those bright lines. The conservatives will stay because they have the loyalty. It's the it's the moderate left that's been trending even further leftwards. That's most at risk of being lost. And so we need to most cater to them. Right. And so and that's and so what you have in, I think part of what we've seen, I imagine in the Catholic Church, but definitely what I've seen in the Christian Reform Church is that the right has finally said that we're not having it. We're not going to pay for it. We're not going to tolerate it. We're not going to endorse it with our presence. Either you cut it out or we're done and you can no longer count on our vote. And you can no longer count on our support. That works in a small denomination like the Christian Reform Church, because the in that sense, the confessionalists, as I'll call them, they have been loyal. And it has been their identity. And the rest of the church is like, we're nervous about losing the kids. And to a degree, part of what the right has been saying is we're taking your kids because at the end of the day, they and I think this is where Jordan Peterson comes in, they only respect people who are willing to stand up and have it cost them something. Any other kind of nominal establishment faith? It's not really worth my time. I'm not going to go to church on Sunday morning and I'm certainly not going to give sacrificially to support your institution. And maybe, Sam, I don't know what your background is, but my Benedict famously predicted Pope Benedict when he was a Ratzinger, famously predicted that there would be a much smaller church. And that's been interpreted a couple of different ways. I never took him to say that sort of triumphantly. I think that was sort of more of like an sort of an exhausted prophecy, like, yeah, like, you know, the world will gobble up a bunch of people and so the church will effectively be smaller. You know, but what kind of bargain is it to stay big when you're really just small, but you're pretending that you're big? It's a, you know, I think it's a it's a it's a myth. Yeah. So so Nathan, who's been around the channel a while, five dollars, look at that. We have us. We have a super chat. How do you navigate a society where the enemy doesn't respond to anything but equal and total opposition? That's a real question. Also, Hi, Paul. How do you navigate a society where the enemy doesn't respond to anything but equal and total opposition? Well, I'll sort of play the the Peterson card here. It's like, well, it depends upon what you mean by the enemy. And, you know, like, are we talking about the devil? Because the devil, you know, like rust doesn't sleep. So, you know, but are we talking about sort of human to human opposition? I don't know. How are you taking the question, Paul? Yeah, I I'm not I'm not sure. Yeah, Nathan, I'm not quite sure how to contextualize your question, because which enemy? I think it might have something to do with what we've seen in in the political sphere, where for a long time, Democrats within Democratic circles, they would say things like, you know, we're not really fighting the Republicans because, you know, like single issue voters on abortion, they're never going to vote Democratic because it's always about abortion. So then the Democrats sort of ratchet up the polarization and say, you know, we're going to single issue everything. And everything's about racism. So, yeah. And of course, that kind of fighting very quickly leads you to where now suddenly you can't have any conversation because you're you're just you're just fighting about this or that. So all right. Look at this. Another super chat. I wouldn't expect any super chat. We usually don't have any CW since I bet Grimm five dollars. Kale has read it. What does he think of Patrick Deenan's Why Liberalism Failed? Well, I'm not sure if you bet on me or or Grimm was betting on me, but I have read the book. It is a favorite of mine. I'm a I'm a big fan of Professor Deneen's work, less a fan of his. Anyway, I don't get into that, but it was for me, it was a real watershed book for me to read because it finally gave me permission to let go of my sort of latent affection for liberalism and to see it clearly for the first time, so it deeply affirmed my convictions that something was really, really wrong. And what I didn't realize, what was really, really, really wrong was my liberal frame. And so it kind of gave me permission to be weird. And so I so for that, I have deep, deep, deep appreciation for Deneen. OK, all right, good. I think I think we have reached the end of this. So sad, I don't want it to end, Paul. I have to go like do things. Yeah, I've got phones. Phone calls have been have been stacking up that I have to go at. Oh, I didn't see what what William laid out anyway. So, yes, thank you. Well, always. Bye, guys. All right. Take care. Yeah, no, this is as great as always, Paul. I appreciate it. You know, I hopefully I'll get my live stream up and running soon. And I'd love to have you come on if if you can. So absolutely. Always, always happy to come on. So thank you so much, Kale, for I know it's a little I mean, there there is there is risk in YouTube is for people who, you know, don't have too much to lose in some ways. But there's always risk in getting on the Internet and sharing with the world what your thoughts are. And but I I really appreciate you, Kale, and the integrity and the the honesty with which you grapple with this stuff. And so I just think you value what you're doing. So you keep doing what you do. And I need something to listen to my runs. So I really appreciate it. All right. Very good. Take care.