https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=J9_tXN88sJk

 Hi, this is Paul. Just getting back into the swing of things in terms of commentary videos. I have a long list of stuff from vacation I want to talk about. Whether I'll get it all in, I don't know because new stuff keeps coming down the road. There's a very interesting conversation with Jordan Peterson and Andrew Claven that I intend to do a commentary video on, and it's connected with another very interesting video that Rebel Wisdom just presented, which is Jordan Petersonitis with Jonathan Rosen. Rosen, Rosen, I'm not quite sure how he says his name. Both of these videos are very interesting because we're to the point now that we have some perspective on at least, to some perspective on the first wave of Jordan Peterson. Again, as time goes, we'll gain more and more perspective. I thought actually there's quite a bit of connection between these two videos. I want to do commentary on both. I'm not going to have time today to get too far into it, so it might be a part one, part two type thing, or maybe there might be three parts to it. I don't know. The Jonathan Rosen, or Rosen, Rosen, Rebel Wisdom piece, he did a very interesting conversation with Peterson the same day apparently as Kathy Newman. After I watched that Rebel Wisdom video, I went back and rewatched this video. It's pretty easy to see why he got a lot of negative commentary on there. In some ways, the conversation sort of devolved into bickering from both sides. Bickering usually isn't terribly productive, and they did a fair amount of bickering. It doesn't mean that the points that both were making against each other were invalid. We'll get into some of those as we look at the Rebel Wisdom video. Just the manner that that video went was interesting. The timing of that video, now that we have a By the Rebel Wisdom video, a little bit more perspective on it is very interesting. I'll let Jonathan Rosen talk about what he sees as Jordan Petersonitis, which I thought was a very interesting thing. I haven't read any of those pieces by him yet. I still have to dig those up. Jordan Peterson at that moment really became sort of a cult leader. I don't mean that he actually established a cult, but some would list me among the elements of that cult, people who've sort of latched onto Jordan Peterson and haven't let go. I get a number of complaining comments on my channel about that, but that always sort of mystifies me because a lot of those who have found my channel found my channel because of Jordan Peterson, but of course there are many others like Cassidy who never really liked Jordan Peterson, but came onto the channel and liked the community and likes the conversation and are here anyway. So that was the RSA video. Maybe we should just jump into this video because I thought it was really very helpful. OK, so let's jump in. On January 16th 2018, Jordan Peterson had his famous clash with Kathy Newman, the moment when he broke through to the mainstream and the spark for the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. But it wasn't the only interview he did that day. Shortly afterwards, he went to the Royal Society for the Arts, one of the UK's premier think tanks. Good afternoon everyone. Now the fact that it was after the Kathy Newman interview is very interesting. We don't know what, I mean, Peterson in that period, I mean, beginning in January of 2018, he was about to launch his book tour. He was all over the place. I mean, Jordan Peterson is, I don't mean, Jordan Peterson works, OK? Work, work, work, work, work. That's what the guy does. And so the fact that this interview sort of devolved into bickering, it being on the heels of that very famous Kathy Newman interview, which descended into, didn't really descend into bickering. I mean, Peterson just sort of mastered that. This interview didn't go as well. For a conversation with the philosopher and chess grandmaster, Jonathan Roussen. My job... OK, Roussen. I'll try to remember that. It was, you know, challenge him a bit. Find out what he's really trying to say. He can speak beautifully. The audience show up to buy his book and hear him give a great performance. He'd done that hundreds of times before. He'd do it again. But this was a bit different. And I even said to him before we went on, it's OK, I'll try and challenge. He says, of course, of course. He was keen for all that. As rule six says, make sure your own house is in perfect order before you criticize the world. Yeah, it's a dark chapter, that one. Dark, yeah, and challenging and controversial. And I didn't agree with most of it. You know, much of my... And let's get into this that chapter. I think of all of the chapters of 12 Worlds for Life, it had my least favorite title because no one can put their house in perfect order. And the whole question, as these two will get into in the conversation, is at what point and how do you engage the broader society? And Peterson doesn't disagree with that. It's it's just a question of how. But it sort of burrows down into bickering around those lines. My most of the book and the ideas in it, I had challenges here. So I'll try and explain what I think they are. When you say to a whole new generation, take responsibility, they're like, well, yeah, but my my fear is that we're going to be inundated with climate change. My fear. That's a very interesting idea that somehow a fear legitimates a response, which a fear causes a response and might legitimate a response. But what's interesting about that point is that, OK, tell me in which world human beings have lived that they haven't had legitimate cause to be afraid of something that could justify a response. There's always some fear to respond to. Here is the private actors like Google and Facebook and I control the public realm. My fear is that artificial intelligence is getting way too intelligent and is actually a risky thing for you. Here's a fear. Your attempts to fix that will make it worse. Well, OK, that's this is the question. The heart of the matter. So on the one hand, you say, look, you don't know what kind of clue what you're doing. Stay out of it. Right. But we live in a democratic system. And I think Raoul, see, I already forgot how to say his name, Raoulson. He's got a legitimate point here. But so often you can have a conversation with someone. Both people are making legitimate points, but it's the tenor, the tone of the conversation that sort of dominates. It's almost. I have this theory about human beings and I think that's a very interesting theory about human beings and mood. Angry people will find reasons to be angry. Depressed people will find reasons to be depressed. We so often think that this ration of this reason that we have is motivating the emotion and sometimes it does, but I think it's often the other way around. And if two people get together, I mean, Jordan's wearing exactly what he was wearing on the Kathy Newman interview. That little tidbit is a very interesting little tidbit. You know, within time, there's perspective. It's where it's our responsibility not to stay out of it. So how do you manage that? Because you seem to be saying humility, humility, right, but humility doesn't preclude activism. Generally, it does. Yes. But they're both a little bit categorical here. And I wonder, I mean, Peterson also. Knowing what you know, he also seems a little weary and again, coming out of a. As a preacher, I know you tend to Sunday morning, you you rise to the challenge. And if you even if you're being sort of even if you have a cold or something, I mean, Sunday comes and you're not feeling well, but the adrenaline gets going and you stand and you preach and then Mondays are famous times not to look for preachers because sometimes they're just a little bit depressed. Doesn't mean that doesn't mean that I'm saying that there is no situations under which political action or activism is justified, because there are clearly situations under which it's justified. But it's not the first thing that you should be taught how to do when you're an 18 year old person going to university and you don't know a damn thing. And see, you can already tell just emotionally he's probably tired, a little bit dismissive, his answers are going to be, you know, a little bit punchier. And, you know, this this for the other guy, for for Jonathan Roussen, this is a big opportunity for him, because especially after 2017 to land time with Jordan Peterson was pretty rough. So I don't doubt that there's calo youth. I don't doubt that people have a lot to learn. And they're not learning it from their professors. That may be true. So I thought the day had gone really well. Right. I went home and I thought, oh, I wonder what people are saying. It's on YouTube. And suddenly I was like the outcast. I was completely flogged verbally for all sorts of things to how I was interrupting him, to what I was wearing, to how I didn't understand. Just like someone's going to make a comment on this video. It's like, why do you keep interrupting them? And then how dare I challenge the professor? The reaction online was totally polarized between people who hated his lines of questioning and others who were glad to see a real debate in the aftermath, Jonathan spent months reflecting on the encounter and ended up writing an epic paper all about how he contracted and cured himself of what he called Jordan, Peter, Sinaitis. I was very intrigued by the fact that the way the response was mobilized was one of do you approve of him or not? Now, that's the wrong question. Right. Do you want a mature culture that's learning from intellectual phenomena that are going on? The question is much more, look, why are so many people captivated? What is he saying that might be of interest? If you are not captivated, if you don't get it, what might you be missing? Right. That's the kind of question you would ask people to say. Now, I agree very, very, very much agree with what he just said. I do want to take a step back, though, and pause and say it's these. Presuppositional postures that actually make up a culture and are themselves something to think about, so I again, I agree 100 percent with what he's saying. And. Clearly, those who are captivated should be curious about those who are not. The lack of curiosity about him amongst my peer group or my professional colleagues, it's like, aren't you aren't you a bit curious to know why millions of people seem to think he's so impressive and they're not. And it bothers me. It's like, that's weird. You know, we met in the woods of West London to reflect on the experience. So, Jonathan, West London has woods. Cool. And you're a philosopher, you're also a chess grandmaster and you're head of Perspectiva. But the reason we're having this conversation is that you had an interview with Jordan Peterson beginning of 2018 now. And we're going to talk a little bit about that kind of recap. Let's start with what's really interesting as well is that this interview was immediately after the Kathy Newman interview. And we've got like a real shared history around for many different reasons. We our work, your work and. This video is also interesting because, you know, even though David, even though David Fuller is producing a lot of content and in many ways sort of behind the camera and a lot of these things, although he's an interviewer to it. So he does interview its David Fuller's piece of this story is in itself quite interesting. And I've you know, I've done a fair amount of commentary on interviews with David. Andrea did one. He did another one at a college. And so I, you know, I really appreciate David's perspectives on on these things because he's he's very much been along for the ride. And I have a lot of respect for how David has approached this ride. David, of course, rebel wisdom is connected with for lack of a better term, men's work. Which, well, we'll let David describe who he is for those of you who aren't terribly familiar with David. My interests cover a lot of the same territory that Jordan Peterson is covering, the role of spirituality, the role of religion in society, the role of the sacred, all of these questions. So we were both hugely affected by it. And you wrote this piece, An Epistemic Thunderstorm, and coined the term Jordan Petersonitis. And it feels appropriate now three years on for us to have this conversation, to just explore what it meant. And as you said, the lessons we learned and the lessons we didn't learn. So maybe before we go into that, let's let's maybe frame this conversation. What are you hoping to get from this conversation? Oh, a little bit of catharsis, maybe a little bit of, you know, it's three and a half years, it's almost three and a half. So good period of time. And it was very intense at the time. So looking back now from a sort of safe and comfortable. It was again, perspective is really cool because January 2018 was really an inflection point after Kathy Newman. You know, there were certain if you think about Jordan Peterson status rocket ride, I mean, one stage was his first talk with Joe Rogan, whole group of people, but a fairly specific group of people were introduced to Jordan Peterson. Then this Kathy Newman interview just propels him. And of course, this this comes out just on that the heels of that. Distance is part of it. So to enjoy the reflection of that, because we were both heavily involved at the time to hear a little bit more from you about what you went through and, you know, how Jordan Peterson influenced rebel wisdom, the different moments of sort of excitement and intrigue combined with maybe distrust, awareness around him, the impact on our social surround and how, you know, what what people were saying about him and how that chimed or didn't with what I was experiencing, the writing process of making sense of it and how difficult it was to really get to the bottom of my own feelings about it. But more broadly, since we are three and a half years down the line, like what what did we fail to learn? Like what what was going on there that we didn't adequately pay attention to now that it's no longer about people. It's interesting because what did we OK, whose we is it? Jonathan Roussen, is it David Fuller? Is it me? Who's who's the we who's the us? Is it society, academia? Again, David Brooks labels him the most influential intellectual. It was influential. I mean, David Brooks wrote an editorial fairly early on, which was hugely. Which praised Peterson pretty significantly, and you'll find that you'll find that little phrase uses it. Yeah, it's right there on the top on the cover of Beyond Order, the most influential public intellectual in the Western world today. And says New York Times doesn't say David Brooks, New York Times. It just says New York Times. I wonder what the New York Times thinks about whoever the New York Times is, the editorial board. Peterson as such, what was the Peterson phenomenon about such that a little bit time downstream, we can maybe, you know, pick up something that we lost along the way. I love your phrase, an epistemic thunderstorm. And I've used the term a one man lightning rod for the culture war, the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. And it was an extraordinary time and I think is still there's so many different there's so many different layered pieces within it. My piece, The Glitch in the Matrix, which came out in 2018, looked at the Kathy Newman interview from these sort of different layers like the clash between the mainstream media and the alternative media and then the kind of gender dynamics that were going on underneath that conversation, all of these different topics. And it was so multilayered and archetypal even back then. I remember talking to Richard Tarnas, the archetypal thinker, about Jordan Peterson is certainly carrying some kind of archetypal force. I see him as I think some of the force that's coming through him is collective. It's he is a he is a kind of channel for things that haven't been said for a while and that in some sense needed to be said. It's a you know, he's a kind of channel of the return of the repressed in that sense. And people have there's so many different kind of frames. There's like the father energy that he was carrying. There was the sort of the sense of that he was a in some ways he was sort of crowd sourced, but he was a genuine internet celebrity that sort of then erupted into the mainstream. The mainstream just wasn't sure what to do with this at all. And there was the sense of him representing this kind of insurgency against this sort of what I would call a kind of low resolution liberal mainstream worldview and kind of pulled apart quite a lot in on rebel wisdom. But the first the first thing I think would be worth covering something you covered in your piece as well is like this tendency that we have to almost immediately split into pro and anti and like this tendency in public culture to do that and what that means, like how we lose any opportunity to to learn from that, because everyone's immediately like, oh, I don't like this or I do like this. And you know, yeah, you know, that's a that's a great point. Complete we do it. Why resolution? We need we encounter something new. And we instinctively immediately have to categorize it. One of the things I want to get into is Ian McGillchrist's conversation with Jordan Peterson. They're going to talk about McGillchrist a little bit, too. To be honest, that's the heart of the matter, I think, because that was the experience of the time. Peterson appeared as if out of nowhere. I know that you'd seen him coming. I mean, to your credit, you'd notice what was happening. And maybe what others didn't notice is that he also had this sort of 20 year history of studying mythology and depth psychology. And those two things together made him this sort of sensation. But really, the way people reacted to Peterson was the problem. So I I should say early on, like the issue is not whether you're a yay or nay, right? It's not people are looking for that. People want to know, do you like him or don't you like him? And it's a really you never get a second chance at a first impression. It's just human troublesome way of framing things. It's very human. It's a kind of very tribal approach. Do you think he's one of us or is he not one of us? Do you think he's safe or is he unsafe? Is he a Christian or not a Christian? That question never really occurred to me for some for whatever reason. What I saw when he sort of first came to prominence was someone who was very intriguing, quite captivating to listen to, very intense that he had a certain kind of following and he was rubbing certain kinds of people up the wrong way. And at that point, I was just observing, not really sure what was going on. But I noticed even from the very early moments, like pre-Kathy Newman interview before that moment, he was already quite controversial, already written about in lots of prominent papers. And I think I was that was after the Joe Rogan. And so, yes, even before Kathy Newman. And again, 12 Rules for Life had about the world's best timing for a publisher. I mean, he was he was really hot on on YouTube. He was starting to hit the circuits. He had been on Joe Rogan and boom, here's a book ready to go. January 2018. It's troubled by the fact that people weren't asking what's he saying? Why is it relevant? Is there something of value here? Those questions weren't really there. What was going on was something about he's doing this for the young men. That was like one quick story that people latched onto. Or he's doing this. And it's interesting. And I think he's right on this. We're. OK, so Jordan Peterson, yes or no. And then afterwards, it's Jordan Peterson. What what is this about? Oh, young men. This is about young men. This is about and so people are and I did the same thing. What is this about? Of course, we're all doing a whole lot of projecting and looking for whatever it is that's salient to us and putting that on Jordan. And and part of what was going on with him was he was just talking about so much we could all sort of find a piece to either agree or disagree with him this because he's against the sort of woke left liberal people who are just, you know, flaky and fluffy. And he's he's back here to get things real and take things seriously. And also he was against the kind of pseudo activism of people who say claim to be claiming safe in the world when they can't tidy his room and tidy the room in his language. Now, now, I don't think we can also not appreciate how you know what was going on in the culture with respect to the American election, Donald Trump. I know these are two guys in the UK. They've got Brexit going on. To give some perspective on what was going on in the mind of the culture, I often go back to this letter from Aaron Sorkin that he wrote his daughter after the election of Donald Trump. Now, remember, Trump would have been what Trump was inaugurated in January of 2017. The election was in 2016. That's one year. That's one year before the events that we're talking about in this video. And the letter says this while the world changed. This is from November, obviously, during the election. While the world changed last night in a way I couldn't protect us from. Oh, that's interesting. That's a terrible feeling for a father. I won't sugarcoat it. And it kind of gets into this this thing I talk about often in terms of this deep presupposition about what life is like. Well, life is well, there's climate change and there's AI. And there are these threats that I'm anxious about. Life shouldn't have any of these things. When has life not had these things? If you have any anxiety and all of us do to one level or another, you will find something to be anxious about. And once you have that thing that you're anxious about, you have also built into your first draft a picture of how you think life should be. And I mean, you have the whole package that you're working from. So it's hardly the first time my candidate didn't win. In fact, it's the sixth time. But it is the first time that a thoroughly incompetent pig with dangerous ideas, a serious psychiatric a serious psychiatric disorder, no knowledge of the world and no curious curiosity to learn it. Wow, that should scare your daughters. One daughter or two daughter. It wasn't to tell Donald Trump won that night. It was as it wasn't just Donald Trump who won that night. It was his supporters to the Klan won that night. White nationalist, sexist, racist and buffoons, angry young white men who think rap music and Cinco de Mayo are a threat to their way of life or are reason or are the reason for their way of life, it's been given. It's been given cause to celebrate men who have no right to call themselves that and who think that women who aspire to more than just looking hot are shrill, ugly and otherwise worthy of our scorn rather than our admiration. Struck a blow for misogynist shitheads everywhere. Hate was given hope. The world had no time to react and. We got to fix this a second hand. Roxy, that must be his daughter's name. I know my predictions have let you down in the past, but personally, I don't think this guy can make it a year without committing an impeachable crime. I didn't think it was going to last long either. If he does manage to to be a douche nozzle without breaking the law for four years, it was eventually impeached twice. He'll make it through those four years and three years from now, we'll fight like hell for our candidate and we'll win and they'll lose. And this time they'll lose for good. And I think. I just laugh when I read stuff like that. You know, I was having a conversation with Kales Eldon and and Brett Sockold, and they talked about in the Roman Catholic Church when John Paul II became pope and then, you know, it's the end of history. We've won over our rivals and we will always win from here on in. Well, that's what one side was thinking. And then along comes Jordan Peterson and, hey, wait a minute. Trump was supposed to be a one off. And then from then it's the end of history and we just keep winning. And anyone who doesn't line up with their narrative, well, now they're on the other side and it's an existential threat. And politics has become your religion and off you go. So I was very intrigued by the fact that the way the response was mobilized was one of do you approve of him or not? Now, that's the wrong question, right? If you want a mature culture that's learning from intellectual phenomena that are going on, the question is much. That letter does not express a mature culture. Look, why are so many people captivated? What is he saying that might be of interest? If you're not captivated, if you don't get it, what might you be missing? Right. That's the kind of question you would ask people to say. Equally, those who are captivated should be curious about those who are not. What are they seeing? Repulsed. Repulsed. Yeah, exactly. Stronger than that. Those who just think this is a misogynist, old fashioned, privileged, patriarchal white male who is telling everyone how to behave, we're done with that, get over it, right? That's also there. And this was happening. But I was so disappointed by the kind of lack of let's learn from this approach. And so three and a half years later, it's a bit easier to do that. But at the time, they were just heat, not so much light. Yeah. And this conversation could go like there's so many different directions it can go in. And there's so many different topics to unpack. So maybe let's start with a kind of chronology. And you mentioned that I first saw him in 2017. I think Alexander Bard was the first person who mentioned him to me. And and again, I really like this conversation because of a lot of these little details and who is Alexander Bard. Oh, he's on this other channel that I watch and someone who's primarily I've spoken with him, someone who's in France. He's primarily a medium writer. Then I started listening to his lectures, like genuinely, like captivated. I listened to the Maps of Meaning series in particular. And I still think that that over and above, certainly far over and above the books that came out since, but there's something compelling about the way that he speaks, that the the vision of the Jordan Peterson, what is that? Why? I mean, that's that again, continues to fascinate me because same thing happened to me. I, I think the first video I saw of him was the suspender video. And well, he's engaging the crowd in a very interesting way. He's just not screaming back at them. And then I saw a lecture that he did at Harvard, a piece of a lecture that he did at Harvard on it was basically about education and great books. And I listened to that and I thought, yeah, yeah, that's I agree with him. So again, it was the simple, yes, no, it's the first question we have. It's the first impression. OK, I first thing I saw was I like how this guy is dealing with his adversaries. Second thing, I like his perspective on great books and education. And then I start listening to the biblical series and Maps of Meaning. And it's like, wow, I've never really heard this before. And I'm finding this to be compelling. And then I start asking, working my networks. Anybody ever hear this guy? No, no, no, no. Tim Blackman, a friend of mine, says, I tried reading Maps of Meaning. It was inscrutable. But the lectures, wow, yeah. And the all encompassing vision that was laid out and that was just so compelling and it tapped into so many things that I was already aware of, but the sort of the deeper mythology, the Jungian perspective. And it was it was like and I I think we were in touch then. And I wrote this piece about Jordan Peterson for Perspectiva, your organization. Gosh. So we'd just been we were quite young looking for new material and new authors. You weren't rebel wisdom hadn't yet formed. And the title of the piece was didn't hold back. It was something like, can this man save Western civilization from itself or why this man can save Western civilization? It's a pretty audacious title. And and I've had other people tell me the same thing. You know, what was it about where we were at? And again, I didn't vote for Trump and either of these guys voted for Trump. But yet I look at one side of the nation having this existential crisis and the others and really sort of blindsided. And again, when I saw that, I thought. I didn't think Trump was going to win either, but I didn't think it was I knew it wasn't going to be a landslide because Hillary Clinton was unpopular. But when he did one, it when it was like, well, well, there's it's not a huge surprise. There's a lot of people that think that way. And then I read Aaron Sorkin's letter and I thought. That's dangerous. You're really going to tell your daughter this, that we're going to win and always win. Well, what are you going to do? Just like Jordan Peterson said on Bill Maher, what are you going to do with the other half of the nation? And I was like, well, we'll publish that because it's kind of intriguing. What on earth could he be saying that earns him that kind of accolade? When I first saw his work, I felt immediately this is the message that we need to hear right now. There was something of like I put all of my chips on Peterson. I was like, this thing is going to go viral. It was sort of the sense of like this is exactly what we need right now. Does it fit this hole in the culture? Yeah. And that's so interesting. That, you know, and I mean, I had the same thing, too. But then I asked myself, OK, fit for what? What am I feeling the need is? And not just the what am I what is the tell us that we're looking for? What are my hopes? And when I listened to this conversation, I thought a lot about tell us and goals and because I. Tell us and goals are always sort of implicit in any sort of narrative construal of our lives perfectly. It was like it was the deeper story of Western Western culture. It was taking on the new atheists in their own on their own turf, which is something that we'll come to a little bit more in a minute because this is and and. See, if I say Christians weren't really taking on the new atheists in a compelling way. Of course, everybody has an opinion and. But but as I described many times as a local church pastor. There was sort of a the road out of the church was a one way street. And people seldom started. People seldom came back down that same road. And with Peterson, because of Peterson, I saw them coming back down that road and I knew. There's something here I have to pay attention to. You wrote that amazing piece for the RSA spiritualized, I think, where you looked at spirituality and culture. And so you've you've also kind of been very keen on on on this perspective. And so I wrote this piece for Perspectiva. That then got me the interview with Jordan Peterson because I sent him the piece. He really liked it. He really liked it. I went out to Canada in at the end of 2017, got an interview with him that I then turned into the documentary Truth in the Time of Chaos. And then three or four days after that came out, the Kathy Newman interview happened while I was out in Thailand and I was in touch with you because you were then you were due to have this conversation with him at the RSA, which happened on. It's funny because he says while he was in Thailand, because in that Thai trip, he actually met somebody that I know, my wife knows. And so then when they came out here, my wife, you know, my wife had said, you know, this person that she knows, this friend of hers says, you know, it's funny the connections that were made at that time. On the same day as the Kathy Newman interview and then why the I said this a few times in public, but for me, it's still absolutely extraordinary that the main topic of my conversation with Jordan Peterson was young synchronicities, young and how synchronicities of these amazing coincidence to tell us something about the deep meaning of reality, and then he shoots to fame on the show Channel 4 News that I was working on for about 12 years with Kathy Newman, how I was working in the same newsroom as only a few weeks before, never worked again in that newsroom after bringing out Truth in the Time of Chaos, which I knew at the time, so I kind of deliberately ended one career by putting that out, thinking that let's see if the roulette wheel comes back on Peterson and then he just said he put all his chips on Peterson. So, yeah, double down. Rebel wisdom pretty much generated an audience by looking at the Jordan Peterson phenomenon and trying to make sense of it. Yeah, as did my channel, obviously not as big an audience as theirs. But I mean, to whatever degree my stat, my channel got off zero. It was because of Jordan Peterson. So that's kind of a back story. I can say to your credit, David, that, you know, not everyone else saw this coming. Like there was some luck along the way, as there always is. But, you know, it wasn't that obvious to everyone that the Peterson phenomenon would become what it was. A lot of people would just have seen another university professor with a little bit of controversy and that's it. But you had seen something about what was waiting to be spoken about. And he was the person, the people were ready for something like the message. And he was the messenger. But I mean, I should just say before we get too far into this, you know, I have huge reservations about Peterson and I had them very early on. And just amongst, you know, my my wife, my friends, my family, people who were just listen to him and were a bit weary. Something about his demeanor. Now, it's interesting here because notice how he mentions wife, friends, family. Why? I always say we never believe alone. We always believe in groups. We, Peterson says this often, too. We use each other to sort of stay sane. We calibrate our sense making via the community of people that we are spending time with, the community of people that we esteem, the community of people that are around. And so on one hand, independently, he looks at Peterson's like, oh, but he's listened to everyone around him. He's like, they're like, no, no, no. And so, you know, stock lowers. You know, being a little sharp and a little too intense and hyper masculine. And, you know, this this sort of language was going around. So I was. I remember when I brought my wife to the first live event. The first time I brought my wife to one of the live events here, I was really curious. How was she going to? And she liked him. You know, it was very interesting. I was never at a moment where I thought absolutely sure this guy is what we need. And I think maybe early on, it was somewhat different for you. I would say that we're in a different place now, which is why it feels like the right time to have this conversation. We are in a different place than we were in 2018. Like he felt like the right key for the right particular lock back then. It could have been maybe, but I'm not sure. But also, I think there was a trajectory that we'll come into later. I feel like. And you pointed to in your essay that in some of his work, you can see him pointing away beyond the culture war dynamic, and then in other ways you can see that he became a culture warrior and was deepening that dynamic for matters of temperament or for positions that he took or all of this sort of stuff that I think we'll get to in a bit. But you want to stick to the chronology. Now, again, I want to mention what I mentioned at the beginning of this video and I'm watching the time slip by, and so I know this will be multi-part. I'm probably going to have to come back to this video again tomorrow and pick it up, which is always dangerous with this kind of thing, but that's just the way it's going to go. But. I've got Andrew Claven's commentary with Peterson in the background, and part of the reason Claven contrasting his take, his three year retrospective on Peterson in that conversation with Peterson and these two is because Claven. Well, OK, he's he's an author. He wrote a beautiful spiritual biography, which I read a number of years ago and very much enjoyed. He works at a works on a YouTube channel, which is conservative American political punditry. A lot of red meat for conservative American politics. And I've listened to Claven a number of times because when people talk about Peterson, they usually send me a little note. When he talks about Peterson, there's often a disappointment and a frustration from Claven. Why won't Peterson cross the line? I'm writing something for for Justin Briarley about Peterson, Murray and Tom Holland about this. Why won't Peterson cross the line? Why won't he cross the line? And they get into that. And I wanted to do commentary on the Claven Peterson talk after this talk because there are connections between them. Now, I've spoken a little bit with David Fowler and he's talked, spoke a little bit, especially in his interview with Andrea with the Bangs, who's been on my channel a number of times. And she just hosted that conversation with Benjamin Boyce. But of course, in a lot of ways, David Fuller is post-Christian. And now Jonathan Roussen is, you know, believes in God. But again, not terribly. Let's use the word observant. I don't whether or not he goes to church. I don't know. But what's interesting to me are the parallels between, let's say, this conversation and the take on Peterson. And then what we'll get with Andrew Claven. So maybe let's just go to your interview. I can go to my how it came to me. I mean, how it came to me was when I think I was told in sort of late December that I'd be doing this in January the 16th or something. So I had time to read this book, which frankly, I don't think is that great as a book and the prose is kind of prolics. It's difficult to get through. And you often have this feeling in each of the twelve chapters that he was really himself in terms of pointing out lots of problems and then towards the end of the chapter, he sort of lightened up. But you could very much see the difference in voice in the book. So I felt as though the editor could really feel the editor's presence in the last part of each chapter. That's a very interesting observation. And we're going to have to think a lot more about that. As the editor was almost saying, like, give the reader something positive to take away from this. Because, as you know, Peterson is, as he said himself, quite a dark, even depressive temperament that he's fought with and admirably so at times. But the book, you really feel that. So I didn't really enjoy the book, if I'm honest. But nonetheless, I didn't really care because I'd already seen a lot of the videos and that's where Peterson actually is at his best. And this is the thing that I think lots of people who don't like Peterson or find they're allergic to him in some way, never really grasped, I think. Well, they wouldn't because so one of the things. So I've been playing with my substack and I've been sort of playing with that in conjunction with how I play with Twitter. Partly because. Obviously, the strange phenomenon that I've been playing with on YouTube has happened. But the number of people who listen to a lot of audio content is relatively small. And the way our society structures, a lot of high status people tend to default to reading text because text is quite a bit more efficient than spoken word like this. So it doesn't surprise me that, number one, Peterson's best form is YouTube, quite frankly. Number two, you get a very different Peterson when you read the books and he's a better speaker than he is a writer. Number three, those who don't have time to listen to all those videos or aren't sort of or who aren't captivated by them. Aren't going to get him. And so part of his foray into writing is to expand the audience and, you know, now having been playing around with the spoken word via YouTube and exploring this new medium, it's substantially different than writing. I find I personally find writing much more challenging because I have to be much more careful if I misspeak in a video. Part of the reason I call all of my videos like these rough drafts. Is because it's a rough draft, it came off the top of my head. Upon further consideration, I might change my mind. It's a different forum, and so everything around it is different. And again, when I first discovered Peterson, I was rereading Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death, which gets into these questions of medium and meaning. That he's primarily a theatrical spoken performer. Theatrical is interesting. I always saw him much more as a preacher. Because. I'm a preacher. Who just happens to be a seasoned professional, both a professor, mostly of social psychology and a. Just happens to be, you know, he's he's been lecturing to students for a very long time, and he often gave tips about, you know, talk to one person at a time. And whenever you'd go to his lecture, you'd watch him doing that. He'd zero in on one person in the audience and keep talking to that person. Now, as a preacher, I don't tend to do that. I think it's a I think it's a it's a valid technique to use. It's certainly not the only technique. Clinical psychologist. So he has forms of expertise and then he has this historic book, Maps of Meaning, written 20 years before. And which was barely read, I suspect, because it's so kind of arcane and it's very long and it's not easy to get through. But he turned that into these lectures. And so when what people were responding to with Peterson was this kind of intensity speaks as if life as such is at stake and that's that's pretty new. I mean, it's a line by when he said that's new, I'm thinking, well, I don't think you go to church because. That's especially Protestant Church. And in some of my older videos, when I talk about Peterson as a Protestant, that's part of it, he speaks like a Protestant preacher. Lember Richard Rorty, the pragmatist philosopher, he says the chief instrument of cultural change is not arguing well, but speaking differently. That's a fascinating statement. The chief and just played again and I think change. Richard Rorty, the pragmatist philosopher, he says the chief instrument of cultural change is not arguing well, but speaking differently. And I think the thing about Peterson that people maybe didn't grasp until too late was I'm not sure he actually was saying that much of substance. There is some substance to get me wrong. It's that I disagree with. There's plenty of substance that you might disagree with the substance, but especially when it came to the biblical lectures and maybe others had said it before in other ways, that may very well be true. You can argue. How creative. His thinking is, but. I I learned at least new to me and new to a lot of people. So I the idea that there isn't substance there, I simply don't agree with that. But primarily it was the tenor and the captivating, intense reckoning style quality of his speech that people were just mesmerized by. Like, I don't know what he's saying exactly, but I'm intrigued because whatever. Well, that's true. And that that function of I don't know what he's saying exactly is something that I've been thinking a lot about the last few months because we're very strange creatures and that we hear things and this gets back to the agree disagree. We hear things and we say, well, I agree with that. And, you know, as a preacher and as a pastor, I get to sometimes because I have relationships built up with people, I can sometimes push in a little further and say, what exactly did you hear? I mean, even most of you don't watch the Freddie and Paul show, which is probably a good thing. But even on the Freddie and Paul show, I'm always interested to hear what Freddie and Nancy hear from me on Sunday. Now, I know what I'm thinking. I have a pretty good idea of what I said. There's a recording of what I said, but what they heard is vitally important. And. This relationship, now is a depth psychologist, obviously, but this relationship between. I hear something, I have a low resolution take. One one thing that you'll hear sometimes in church circles is in evaluating preachers, people will forget what you say, but they will remember how you made them feel. And I think that is deeply involved with Peterson. Now, to dig down into that dynamic. What in how I said it now, certainly there's the you know, all of these preacher tricks that I certainly play, you know, I can pause, look deep into your eyes, lower my voice. All of those, that's all technique, that's rhetorical technique. We've known that. And that's a part of spoken language that there are other ways to use written text to get at these things. But. We are primarily again, back to McGillchrist, we are primarily. I'm dyslexic, so the right left brain always always throws me so right hand, left brain, left hand, right brain. The master lobe of our and to the degree that you buy how it hooks up physically, et cetera, et cetera. But I think his main point that we are finally to use for vacu's four peas, we are finally far more perspectival than propositional. Is all about that, that I will remember how you made me feel. And the stuff that you said, it goes in there and I might not consciously process it and I might not be able to remember it as such or even be able to tell it back to you, but the words and the examples and the illustrations that you used moved and touched portions of my brain and portions of my let's call it my spirit in ways that moved my mental map. OK, let's say it that way. Whatever it is, he seems to really care about it and maybe I could care about it, too, so that was going on and that's where I was. And of course, he's a clinical psychologist, which he continued to say. And so he has an understanding of transference and projection and all of these psychological aspects. It was like, OK, what is that? Like, what is that intensity? What is he talking about? How can I distill this in a way that makes sense to me and to others? And so come January 16th, I was going back to my old employer, so I left the RSA a year and a half or so before and that was interesting in itself. And the other thing that was going on is because I created Perspectiva, I was keen to generate our own material, too. And I had a thought that an old sort of colleague and friend, Ian McGilchrist, who is familiar to Rebel Wisdom, he might like to speak to Jordan Peterson and maybe vice versa. And it turned out that Jordan Peterson had heard Ian speak in Toronto or something and he was very keen to speak. So through his agent, I tried to make this itinerary for he to arrive at this time. We do this interview first, then we have a break, then we go on stage, then we do this other interview. But then, of course, I'm the host. I'm in this unusual position. My job, encouraged by the RSA, but only gently encouraged. They let hosts do what they want, really, was to challenge him a bit, find out what he's really trying to say. He can speak beautifully. The audience show up to buy his book. And even that, OK, find out what he's really trying to say. That's a hierarchy right there, because he's trying to say a lot of things. Find out what he's really trying to say. OK, that's a hierarchical statement. So so what exactly distill it down, put it in a nugget, put it in a word. But again, this whole business of do I like or not? Like, that's all mapping. What side of the map are you on? And you start with that. You start with that binary. Yes, no. And then from there, you build nuance. But what are you really trying to say? I'm trying to say this, that meaning is the gyroscope. You didn't. These are my words of what he's trying to say. Meaning is the gyroscope to navigate within the iron box of secularism when we can no longer see the stars, do what is meaningful, not what is expedient. That's one of the things he wants to say. But again, they honed in on rule six. Why? Probably mattered to him, because what is behind this activism? There is, I think, a religious assumption that activism will save the world. Well, what's behind that assumption? Well, it's the voice of the people. And when Aaron Sorkin, well, there's good people and bad people. Again, we got another binary. There's good people and bad people. So the bad people, well, they should be moved away. And I correctly use my left hand. And the good people should be brought in. The good people should be on top and the bad people below. And, you know, on and on and on and on. You can hear him give a great performance. He'd done that hundreds of times before. He'd do it again. But this was a bit different. And I even said to him before we went on, it's OK, I'll try and challenge. He says, of course, of course, he was keen for all that. So I began introducing him in a way that said, you know, this morning, I think I said something about this morning, I made sure that I was I took the rubbish out and I'd sorted my house out and I I wore a tie especially. And I was sort of trying to sort of say, I noticed so I made a I tweeted about this, actually. I made a you know, when Jordan Peterson talked to Jonathan Peugeot, the thumbnail had Jonathan Peugeot, a picture of Jonathan Peugeot with the shirt that he was wearing in the conversation, which was a plaid shirt, you know, bigger plaid than this, but just a plaid shirt was fine. Jonathan was in his study, et cetera, et cetera. The thumbnail was remade with Peugeot in at least a coat and a nice shirt. It was an older picture. And I thought, huh. And of course, I remember Peterson some of those early days, sometimes just in a T-shirt, but then dressing up in a suit. And, you know, you almost get the sense of makes perfect sense with what Jordan Peterson is doing. Wear a suit. And it recently in an interview he talked about, you know, buying this expensive suit and the clothes make the man. I mean, this is all none of this stuff is incidental. It's all part of it. I've taken the message on board about self-possession prior to any bigger issue. It comes across as slightly fawning when I look back on it, but it was what it was. And then we got talking and I was trying to sort of pin him down. And when he says it comes back on slightly fawning, it's like, are you a little embarrassed for this? Did you did you did you put chips on Jordan Peterson then that now you're a little bit regretful of were such subtle creatures a little bit. So what exactly he was saying. And the conversation went, you know, you've seen it and you know, it got quite heated several times, but it was always quite civil. You know, there was a sort of I didn't feel during the conversation there was any hostility, but the atmosphere in the audience was charged. And it was only after then we went backstage and arranged the interview with Ian and that's had over a million views and was kind of a perspectiva success and they got on really well and same suit. It was a beautiful conversation to watch. And then his wife had drawn a little sketch of me and it was all very amicable. So I thought that they had gone really well. Right. And this is where the other side of Peterson comes in, because I went home and I just thought, oh, I wonder what people are saying. It's on YouTube. And suddenly I when he says the other side of Peterson, I don't think he means Peterson as Peterson, I think he means that everything that's around Peterson is like the outcast. I was completely flogged verbally for all sorts of things to how I was interrupting him, to what I was wearing, to how I didn't understand him, how dare I challenge the professor. And I was like, well, what is what is this? And it got worse and worse and it went on for days and days. And then there were spin off videos and then people started to recognize me in the street and I'm starting to wonder if I made one. Now, most of that was all right because I felt some kind of productive work had been done and a lot of people were also complimenting me for the challenge. And so I knew it wasn't a disaster, but you wouldn't know that from reading the YouTube comments. YouTube comments are very one sided. Really? Every time Peter says, well, most of my videos are like 97, 98, 99 percent positive. It's like, yeah, that's kind of the way when you find a YouTube video that is really contested with a lot of down votes, there are reasons for that. Most of the time, YouTube is a social media and you develop a following and people like what they like and they'll keep going back to the channels that they like and sometimes they like to hate a channel. You get a couple of those around, but. Anyway, that happened. And the next day, to be honest, I had a kind of, you know, I felt somewhat possessed, if I'm honest, like somewhat like there was an energy that wasn't altogether comfortable as if there'd been something had taken place and it took a while to work through that. So that's interesting. I spent the next sort of six months ish, obviously, with other responsibilities, but just trying to write down what was that about, not just the feeling, but the whole phenomenon and what I had to say, what it meant for perspectiva. So I did that and that was the publication. Yeah. So. And you coined Jordan Petersonitis. So that that term. Now I've got it. Like I said, I've got to drop this in about five minutes. I'm not going to get a chance to pick this up until later. See what I do with it. I don't know, but I'm going to have to dig up that publication and read it now. This night is that's what I had prior to interviewing him and to some extent afterwards, and it's to do with the cultural pressure to take a side, but not really being able to despite a lot of effort. Right. So I define it more clearly and there's lots of symptoms in the paper. But the essence of it is the cultural pressure to say yea or nay to a public figure. Not the cultural pressure, pressure to say yea or nay to a public figure. Yeah. Yeah. Not just a public figure. Oh, the current ones, of course, are the biggies, systemic racism, white supremacy, take a side. You'd better be on our side. Well, of course, religion is all about this. Politics is all about this every time. I mean, in the United States, every four years we have this presidential campaign. I think people join political parties just so they can just stop thinking about it sometimes. Being able to because on the one hand, he says things and he says things in a certain way that you like. And you think we need more of that. On the other hand, you'll say something somewhat ridiculous or maybe maybe a bit banal sometimes also. And you think, well, I'm not so sure about him. And so the problem is that that's normal. That's like human being behavior. People are not perfect and they'll say contradictory things and they will know some area as well and others not so well. But somehow you got caught up in this big sort of torrent of Peterson phenomenon that it was as if he was meant to have a whole world view sorted out already. And he didn't. It's a Messiah complex. You have this in churches with preachers that. And as a preacher, you learn you learn to be careful with it. I remember one family that I still know quite well, who the first time they were in church, she sat up front and she cried. And after the service, she was pastor. I don't know why your church is so small. That sermon was amazing. This church is going to explode. You're amazing. And it's like as a pastor, you've been around the block. It's like, be careful with this one. Once they put you up on a pedestal, more often than not, they'll kick that pedestal out from under you. And when you fall, oh, boy, he had was a certain forms of expertise and a certain rhetorical capacity. And then he was expected to know everything about everything. And he just didn't. Yeah. So I think I'll pause it there. And let's see, we're. Almost about a third of the way through. There's a lot more where he gets into individualism that I'm going to want to pick up on, because again, I see this as sort of a nice parallel to the Andrew Claven conversation because Christians have had their own sort of relationship with Peterson. And a lot of these dynamics of having to have all the answers, being a hero, very much come into that and that other issue of heroism and the hero very much as a piece of that, but I have to stop this right now. So we'll see where this goes. Well, this is day two in this commentary. And those of you who follow me on Twitter have an idea about what I've been busy with. I made I wrote a substack about about half of it. And then I just had a whole bunch of other tweets. I used to process this stuff quite a bit more on Facebook. But it's Facebook is a different is a different audience. And so I've decided to play around with it a little bit on Twitter. All of that is to say that. None of this is is completely theoretical for me. This is a hard world. By the grace of God and with the sweat, hard work and determination of generations past, it's a lot better world in many ways than it has been in the past for a great many people. But those who are homeless with substance abuse issues, it's a difficult and naughty problem. So yeah, that's probably seems sort of random in the middle of this video because I recorded an hour of it yesterday and then had a little bit of work to do in this area and had a lot of work to do in that area today. So again, those of you who follow me on Twitter can read about it if you're curious about it, it's half of that story is in a substack called I'm an asset, not a liability. So hopefully I'll get a few days reprieve and then maybe basically what happens is when I go away on vacation, people in the neighborhood realize that if I'm gone from the church for a certain number of days in the row, they start camping here. And when I get back, I have to deal with usually moving them out. And I tried to do so gently and I tried to do so in a Christian way. But there with at least one individual, there's a history of violence and there's a restraining order, which he doesn't like to obey and which usually getting the police to enforce it is a little bit of work and it takes some time and commitment and isn't always in the best interest of that individual. So that's a last resort. And so basically today I was able to get him into the hospital. That's another way to move him off the property. And I'm in contact with his probation officer. And when he comes out, I'll work through those issues again with him and hopefully bring some resolution. But let's get back to the video. That's a conclusion I've come to since is that I think he got seduced by that sort of certainty, by that kind of feeling of certainty. And I think there was this sort of trajectory where that was what was expected of him. And I think he played into that. And I think that was that was became very, very dangerous in retrospect. Of course, he's talking about Jordan Peterson here. For those of you after I edit this video, it'll be one continuous thing. And the words that I just said will seem like an interruption. They don't seem like an interruption to me because I've been living this other timeline through it. But I think, you know, I've over the last three years, you know, even though David Fuller is a content creator and his focus is on facilitation, I've very much appreciated his perspectives on Jordan Peterson. And I think he's he does so in goodwill. And I think on this, he's right. And and that isn't to. That isn't to really say anything against Peterson, given what he faced in starting with Bill C-16 and going all the way through the illness of his wife and then his own illness. And then once he gets back with that interview from the Times of London, I mean, good grief, man. I know a lot of people who they get one or two negative comments on Twitter or YouTube or Facebook, and, you know, they're under the cover, sucking their thumb for a day or two, you know, poor Jordan Peterson had the weight of a lot at him. And what you tend to do when when those things close in is you respond to them. And the fact that in some ways, Peterson doubled down on a lot of. A lot of culture war issues rather than sticking sort of to the side of the conversation that David Fuller and myself and Jonathan Pigeot and John Vervecky would rather see him stay with. Well, that's you know, that's on Jordan. That's his decision. But there are consequences to it. So I think what David said here is basically right. One other thing I was going to say is like we both come from an environment because I think it'd be very easy to look at sort of rebel wisdom's content. I mean, we've we've been relatively like we've interrogated the Peterson phenomenon. We've had people on who've been critical of Peterson, probably not as much as some would would want. But we've put out pieces like the Peterson paradox. I put out a piece, say, it doesn't matter if you're right, if no one is listening. And also, although we've we've kind of had a lot of success in terms of building an audience, there's also there's also costs involved in in saying that this guy's got something worth paying attention to, which I think you were aware of as well when when you did this and I've been very aware of as well. Like it's it's not one sided. And it's you know, speak about founder syndrome. It's not it's not as though Peterson is a founder of rebel wisdom at all. But there is a sense in which it's hard to escape that. The energy was there. It gave you a big sort of trajectory and volume of material. You caught the wave and rode it. But then you're sort of left with that audience and for good and bad. So, no, I can see the challenge. One thing I was going to say is quite important. And you know what he just said there is right. And to a degree, to a smaller degree, that's true of my channel. My channel certainly. Caught the Jordan Peterson wave or the wave caught us in some ways, in some ways, the wave caught Jordan too. And I've, you know, continued. I just did a conversation this morning with Benjamin Boyce. And and he asked me about, you know, plans for the channel. And I basically said, I don't plan my channel. This the con the conversations come to me. The content that I produce or at least the monologuing I do usually has everything to do with whatever I'm processing while I'm doing. I do much more planning at church and in that work. And so there's more planning that goes on in the sermons and and those kinds of things, not all of which is seen in my channel, but. There is a there is a there is a larger arc that I am working, but the smaller stuff. And so, yeah, when when Jordan Peterson's when Jordan Peterson took his hiatus for health reasons, you know, I continue to work on other things because this this my channel has been basically about thinking and rebel wisdom has continued to work on the kinds of things that they've worked on. The truth, right? One thing I was going to say that's quite important, I think the truth, right? There's this lovely saying in courtroom dramas. I don't think they say it in the UK, but in the US promise to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. Right. So I think one way to. They don't say that in the UK. It's got to be a mess. Understand Peterson is he's really into the truth. Right. And he might even be into nothing but the truth. But he doesn't do the whole truth very well. Right. I think that's one way to kind of critique him without sort of rejecting him entirely. This is this is the core. I think doubling down on this, I think is the core, because as you'll know, we've talked before, like my take on Peterson now is that he's necessary, but not sufficient, like I think everything that he is saying is or an awful lot of what he is saying is absolutely necessary. The individual is necessary, but there is something more. And I think I think that insufficiency is what we will hopefully talk to here and also bring in the developmental lens, which the perspective is really based around developmental thinking, so Piaz, Ken Wilbur is another famous example, Robert Keegan, which is also very influential over over rebel wisdom. And that developmental lens, I think, is something that was needed and missing from the conversation around Jordan Peterson and also the conversation around the intellectual dark world, which kind of arose in the aftermath. Like at what? OK, so on one hand, and they're going to get into individualism here. And I think. So there when I hear them talking about the developmental lens, they are thinking and actually Benjamin Boyce and I were talking about this a little bit today. I mean, Benjamin Frames. And I think this is this is deeply cultural at this moment. The the framing is around individual development. And they're going to critique individualism in this, but the. I think what Christianity and particularly the church has to offer is, in fact, the. Sort of the the other side to Peterson's individualism. And again, part of the reason I started working on this stuff was because I saw immediately that an individual can go into an auditorium and can make YouTube channels and whole many people can be changed by that message. And I think the phenomenon continues to be important to study and to participate in because of that change that are happening in people's lives. And I think, again. Even though Jordan does talk about systems, especially the university system and other systems, the core of his mission is individual transformation, OK, and that's he's a clinical psychologist. The core of clinical psychology is individual transformation, the the patient client relationship. And. That's a that's a great core, it's a great goal, but as you know, where my conversation with Benjamin Boyce when I was talking about the, you know, the agent arena relationship in that. A person is transformed not merely from the inside out, but also from the outside in, and this is where I think, you know, some of Jonathan Haidt's work is important when it comes to his metaphor of the elephant and the rider. The elephant doesn't fundamentally change by the rider talking to the elephant. The elephant isn't that type of thing. And when you let's say, well, map in McGill, Christ onto Jonathan Haidt, the elephant is the master and the rider is the emissary. Now, how do you change the elephant? You change the elephant by changing the herd and you change the herd via the elephants and you change all of them with the path. And so in many ways, what religion has always done, especially within narrative, is to construct these far larger narratives which shape the elephants and the communities. And they do so in a mythological way because mythology is is not only basic in terms of a culture, but it is accessible. It's highly accessible for the people in ways that, you know, all of this theoretical talking that we tend to do on my channel that Rebel Wisdom majors in. Now I know that they, you know, they do all kinds of other work, too, in terms of practices, and of course, John Vervecky has been working on this. And some of those in the John Vervecky side of this little corner of the internet that we've been working in. Fair enough, but the church has been majoring in these things for a very long time, as have other religious traditions, absolutely. The church has been majoring these things in a long time. And I think, again, that's part of the reason when I saw Peterson's work, on one hand, I wanted to learn it because I wanted to just up my game and improve my skills and figure out, OK, why is why is he having the impact in our culture and in individuals lives the way he is? But I immediately thought of what happens after the crusade. And again, if you watch my earlier videos, you'll notice that I regularly compare Peterson to someone like like Billy Graham. The crusade comes to town. The music swells. People go down to the front. They experience a transformation. And then anybody who's worked in that sphere knows. That's just the beginning of the work. All of the hard work comes in community. And. You know, one of the things that I appreciate a little later in the week, I'm going to meet with I'm going to meet with David Fuller's outfit again in a thing and. When I look at multiple efforts now at attempting to create a degree of community online, which I have done to and participated in. You have to come, you have to think about longevity. And in some ways, any community that is based on a technology. So one of the online community that I've been participating in 20 years, it's a list serve. So that's an older form of Internet community that listservs been going on maybe 40 years from the very beginnings of email. It has to do with my denomination and my church. Churches go on for hundreds, sometimes thousands of years. Now, we don't really know the way technology is going to impact these things, but. It's that kind of longevity. Well, maybe I should pull up the tweet that I did. OK, so here's my substack and this is the asset, not a liability. The rest is history did a another excellent podcast on California. I was amazed how well these two Brits sort of captured California. I was sitting listening to it in my backyard thinking about the glorious California life, but I knew, on the other hand, when I went to church exactly what would be facing me, which was a good amount of homeless work I had to do and wrote about that, my substack. And then I come in and, you know, actually he was in the hospital then. And I talked about how a the city had like these intervention teams that were going to go to homeless people and connect them up with services and a an important member of my local community here, not of the church, but of the other non-government organizations in the community, very wonderful guy. He's president of the National Alliance on Mental Illness. And he said, I'm going to send a navigator over and and he's going to help with him. I said, great, give it a shot. You know, if he can make more progress than me, I'll celebrate. You know, I'll I'll buy him a drink, whatever. And the guy comes and and I told I said, yeah, you'll find him. He's right over there. This is before the assault and the restraining order and all those kinds of things. But I said, yeah, you'll find him there. And so then the guy calls me back, says, I couldn't even talk to him. That guy's nuts. And it's like, yeah, what what do you expect? I don't know what kind of people you work with on your job, but this guy's actually in many ways easier to manage than some that I've known. And and then I talked about. The fact that. I remember when I came to this church, people were a little nervous because of all the group homes and all the homeless. And, you know, how would Paul handle that? And they were quite surprised. I I just assumed this was part of the job because I had grown up and for 36 years, my father did this work. And. Truth be told, before he did this work, my grandfather, he took a call to Owen Sound, Ontario, and that was after the Second World War. And when anyone speaking Dutch would show up at the train station, the railroad would call my grandfather. And, you know, I got these stories. My father at that point was already in college in Michigan. But my uncle and my aunt were children living at home. And, you know, grandpa would slide in with my uncle and grandma would slide in with my with my aunt when they were children to give the, you know, the big bed and the good bedroom to whoever came to the train station. And my grandmother used to tell me stories of during the Depression when they were when they had some churches in the American Midwest and Wisconsin and Minnesota, that there were marks on the telephone poles from the railroad. And once my grandmother noticed all the marks, just mark mark on each telephone pole, then in front of their house was a cross. And that meant that anybody riding the rails could. You know, follow the marks and then at the cross, go and ask those people for food. And, you know, my father has memories of being a boy and there'd be a knock at the door and there'd be a man and so his this was during the Depression. And the those churches were poor and they often didn't have money to pay my grandparents and so they would pay them in butter. And in fact, at one point, my grandmother wrote an article for the banner, the CRC publication, you know, like 13 cents or, you know, five cents and 13 pounds of butter. They weren't being paid in cash every now and then. They'd butcher a hog. And my grandfather and grandmother were lifelong gardeners because, you know, they they kept body and soul together during the Depression by growing their own food and by, you know, getting maybe a bit of a cow or a bit of a hog or something from the people in the church. And yet, you know, when someone riding the rails came knocked at their door, they fed them. This is the kind of longstanding community that the world needs. And for all of the problems and liabilities of the church, what are you going to replace it with? And these government organizations, you know, as I talked about in when I was doing a little bit of church history in the book Reformations, you know, a lot of this got going. I mean, it happened in the Catholic spaces via monasteries and churches that happened in Protestant spaces. The towns kind of the cities kind of picked it up in the Swiss Reformation. But this is this is what we do. People need communities to make sense, but not just to make sense, but to to find community. So this morning and I got to church and there was a car during Covid, I was in the habit of setting up computers because not everybody, not all of our seniors can run a computer or have Internet. So I'd set up computers in different rooms so that they could do their small group Bible study on Zoom. And now most of them are vaccinated. So we're getting together. And that's that's a good thing. But I noticed the car of one of my seniors who's who's struggling with memory issues right now, and I don't know how much longer she'll be able to drive. And I was a little worried because the car was empty and she wasn't there. And then another car of another one of our members, one of our deacons, pulled up and both of them got out and pastor, you know, we decided and it was the birthday of the first one that got here, she's 85 pastor. It's her birthday today. And so we went and they got breakfast sandwiches at Burger King and pastor, we brought one for you. So the three of us sat down and ate Burger King breakfast sandwiches. And. That's the life of the church. Celebrating a birthday. Helping each other with very practical things. Listening to each other when we maybe have memory issues and we start to repeat ourselves and we have to buy the Bible study book three times because we didn't remember we bought it at all. And then we misplaced it and we can't find it. And what time does church start and what day of the week is it? And. This is what we need each other for. And so much of this. You know, we don't have enough money to pay people to be people's friends. We need friendships and we need networks of relationships and they need to be local. And, you know, for all the experimenting that we're doing online and it's both and it's not either or. I mean, don't get me wrong. This is this is the kind of thing. This is the kind of thing we need to be doing. Points, was it a reactionary force pushing against the excesses of what Wilbur would call green postmodern culture and where did it where did it reach the points of a resolution of the implicit tensions within between postmodernism and modernism? And that's an absolutely core map that I think if you don't have, you're pretty much stuck in a reactive frame. And that would be my critique of Jordan Peterson is that at times and especially at the beginning, when you like when I interviewed him in 2017, he was a much more warm, welcoming, avuncular kind of person, and then he became more and more kind of pinched, more and more reactive as time went on and to be able to hear who were who were close to him, saw this happen. And I mean, in a way, it's like let's not be judgmental around that. The amount of the amount of attention, the amount of bad faith attacks, the amount of criticism that was just unfair was intense. But another thing that you said to kind of frame that is that often the argument isn't the argument, the argument that so often I think a lot of the reaction to him was unfair. It was incorrect. It was pointing at the wrong things. But I think in some ways there were things that were not fully expressed, like the bad faith criticism obscured the good faith criticism. Right. So, yeah, there was this kind of miasma of partial truth. And what I mean by that is on both sides and by both. There are many sides, but for the sake of argument, those who were broadly in favor of Peterson, who felt he was a necessary and good thing, and those who felt what is all the fuss about, he's not even intellectually that coherent and he's also very reactionary. And they sort of they were both partly right. You know, but the problem is that this this knock on Peterson of not being coherent, he's not perfect. But. You know. Sure, there's always again, OK, the world is too big. Back to the world is too big. There's always selection and relevance realization. I don't know. You know, I don't hear Peter. You might fault him for maybe emphasis on this and that. You might fault him on saying this and not that. You might fault him on, you know, accentuating this and underplaying that, but I never heard him as incoherent. They held on to their partial truth without being interested in the other side of the story. So when I say he struggles with the whole truth, what I mean by that came up, actually, I can explain this developmentally maybe because in that interview prior to going on stage, which is available online, I did try to get to him to say, look, self authorship is not the end of the story. He actually has a company or it's maybe did. I'm not sure if he still does about self authorship, a kind of consultancy arm training people to be self authored, and by that he means don't simulate thinking based on what's in the social surround. Don't just pick up sound bites and narratives and stories and pass it off as thought, figure out for yourself what's really going on and build your identity around that, and there's a case for that. But developmentally, there's a long way to go. There's a lot of other ways of looking at things. And when it comes to the truth, you know, you can get to the truth with your own kind of ideological frame, your own epistemic frame. And I think Peterson did that. But his frame is quite it's grounded in the individual. It's it's it's fundamentally a psychological frame. It's quite Manichean in spirit. It's sort of binaries, a world of polarities, not kind of dualities that sort of interpenetrate, but something more like either this or that. See, and I hear that critique of Peterson, too, but I've heard a lot of his stuff. And. Especially before he was sort of backed into a corner and forced to forced into these fights when you listen to maps of meaning in his college lectures, he'd always both and things. And so, you know, I don't know that that's it. Maybe it's a fair criticism of Peterson after 2018 because, you know, in 2018, after after the interview with after the interview that they're talking about here. It got a lot worse. But before then, you know, I'd always I'd listen to him and he'd both and in both sides, these things quite a bit, so I disagree with that critique. Man or women, masculine or feminine, good or bad, you know, this kind of thing. And from that perspective, he could see a lot and he could explain a lot and he can tell beautiful stories and captivate people for hours. But what he didn't do very often is critique his own model of the world. He didn't very often come back and say, you know, then again, I think he did a lot more before 2018. And basically after 2018, especially once his wife got sick, once he's in the middle of the feeding frenzy and then once he's struggling with his own health issues. Well, if you've ever been in pain, if you've ever been scared, you know, then things tend to get very binary and it's me or you. And so it's going to be you. So. This thing about order and chaos, I wonder where that came from exactly. You know, what kind of mental model was I using to make that binary? And if or does he say something like, you know, I wonder what an anthropologist would say about this or if if a sociologist would hear, how would they critique what I just said? One of the things that that John Vervecky had said a number of times publicly. And so I'm not, you know. The Volgin anything here. And I think Vervecky's critique of Peterson was true on that. He would, you know, he would mention Pink Sapp and and Piaget and Jung and Nietzsche. But in comparison, let's say to Vervecky, who sometimes goes over the other way. Yeah, I agree. This this point that that Roussen is making, I agree more with. You never hear him say that kind of thing. He's not that interested in sort of epistemic plurality. He was quite interested in building a model of the world based on the axioms he had, which were powerful axioms, but it's like one of these sort of cartoon stories where there's a certain power, but it's also limited. And so when it comes to the whole truth, what I mean is very often you'll say something like, you know, you'll give a generic praise of capitalism. Capitalism has made us all so prosperous and, you know, life expectancy is getting better. And again, when I heard this criticism, critique, I thought, well, but again, in the earlier days, he he would often he would talk about, hey, what capitalism is good for. And then he would turn around and say, yeah, it's it's also bad for these. You've got the Pareto principle. And so you'll see, yeah, but it's also deeply problematic, so much unemployment, people are dying young. It's getting worse, ecological impact. And I think to his credit, you know, in a less heated environment, as a thoughtful, intelligent person, he can follow all of that. There's no intellectual limit in that sense. But there is a kind of ideological cultural limit in that he's forced to play this position of having this view of the world and then doubling down on any any attack on it is by definition a threat rather than something that he might learn from. That was what I began to notice. So the emphasis on truth that he makes, the whole truth is actually a bit of a threat to truth as a kind of lodestar or touchstone, because what the whole truth does is it says, yes, you're right to look for the truth, but don't expect it to be sort of absolute and final. It will be a process of revision. It will have multiple perspectives. It will be contested. And it's difficult to build a movement around that. You know, so when he's speaking to his mainstream audience, by that I mean the people who most identify with him as a kind of father figure who can tell them how to live. You know, tentative truth is not going to cut it, right? He wants something firmer rules for life. And that's you know, this point he's making here, I think is a valid point. But one of the things that I noticed as. So, again, you know, just told some stories I've. I've I've worked a lot of my life in. In areas where there are different kinds of churches for a pastor like me who tends to in some ways be part of people who read books, Jonathan Rouse and this this level of society, the frame that he just gave is sort of the dominant frame. But when I work with Pentecostal pastors who are going and hauling, you know, helping young men get out of jail, it's bright lines, rigid rules, strong boxes to to help some of these individuals get off drugs, get out of the gang, get off the streets, save your money. That culture tends to be tends to dominate in spaces. Like jails, streets, gangs, people who are struggling with all sorts of things and they need they need bright, clear lines to help them. And I've had the experience that there was one individual who, you know, we it's often the case, you know, started coming to church. It was in the neighborhood history of gang involvement, violence, a lot of stuff in his life. And all the nuance that I tend to bring to my ministry, to my preaching, I mean, often the kinds of people who will gravitate and settle in my churches are people who are culturally closer to me. They're they're into nuance, they're into both sides, they're into understanding, being skeptical, all of this stuff, that particular game. That tends to be. That tends to be a posture which rather stable middle class life can afford. But if you're. Twenty two years old, you've spent a few years in prison already because you got caught up in gangs, you were selling drugs, you were using drugs, you might have a kid or two out there. Usually the kinds of pastors and so I, you know, I baptized this guy. And his children. And, you know, they became members of this church, but they didn't. I couldn't help him. He eventually would would wander over to more Pentecostal churches with sharp lines and right and wrong, and that helped him a lot more. Now, there are downsides to some of that, which I, of course, could see, but he needed to stay faithful to his wife, not slip back into old ways of getting his way via violence and physical intimidation. He needed bright lines and strong rules in order to help him stay on the straight and narrow, and he wasn't getting those from me. And so, you know, this critique of Peterson. It's fair, but in some ways, Peterson was much more working. See, Peterson could in some ways sort of do both. But many of the people that gravitated towards Peterson and his message needed to clean their room. They needed someone who's going to learn to draw a firm line. And that's what they needed. And that's what he messaged. And sort of this affluent middle class, you can sort of afford to be a functional alcoholic group. You know, I want more nuance. Fair enough. But for many of the people he was reaching, they needed those bright lines. And that's just a dynamic that I've seen over over years in ministry. Where some people lose a bit of interest because they can see that those rules are not really rules. They're kind of guidelines based on one particular view of the world. And to a certain degree, a degree of order already present in your environment affords things like guidelines, whereas if you've got a lot of chaos, you really need some rules. Yeah, I mean, I would frame I have framed Peterson in the past as the last gasp of the heroic individual. Like, I think he kind of articulated that, oh, he won't be the last gasp. This isn't going away. And I think it is true. Like that that that story of the individual, the kind of the sacred individual that's contained within the Judeo-Christian story is absolutely true. And it's very, very it's a very big story. And I also would say that what was compelling about him was this focus on spoken truth and this focus on the logos as articulated truth. And I think the other compelling thing about him was that he he was congruent with that message, there was the sense of spoken truth articulated through what he was saying in a really organic way. It's interesting, like personally, my attention span is just completely gone with the number of notifications we get, kind of the hijacking of social media. The other day, one of his Maps of Meaning lectures came on after another YouTube film I was watching and I watched and I'd seen it before, but I still had to turn it off to go to bed after about an hour. Like I was still compelled because there was something about the way he was talking in those Maps of Meaning lectures that is kind of like he knows the territory, but he's but he's following a thread of inquiry. One of the main one of the really amazing things about Peterson was that he he I mean, he has such range in that he can do the college thing. He can do the nuanced thing. He can do the both and thing, but he can also get down to hard lines and bright lines and rules instead of guidelines. And again, part of that is built into his story. You know, he tells that well, you know, working in, you know, grew up in Alberta, of course. So there's the oil industry, you know, some of these some of these grimy places of hard knocks. And then also, again, if you read 12 Rules for Life, his daughter, I mean, so he he instilled this into his daughter because she needed it, because it would have been easy in our present context to know, you know, Michaela, she's sick. We we got to really cater to her. At the end of my conversation with Benjamin Boyce, we talked about some of this because it's very difficult to know. We talked about reciprocal narrowing and reciprocal broadening. And and I mentioned that, you know, you don't. You don't become you don't become a an impressive and impressive physical specimen by being a couch potato, there's an agent arena relationship. If the arena is the sofa and a big screen TV and Netflix, the agent's going to get flabby. You become an impressive physical specimen in a context of either intentional artificial adversity, which is, let's say, a weight room or a gym or a physical context, let's say the army or blue collar laborer who's working with their body all the time. And so part of what they did for Michaela, which which shone through in 12 Rules for Life was, you know, the bright lines, the rules, Michaela, you're not going to feel sorry for yourself, you are going to fight this, you are not you're not going to be the kind of person that uses this medical situation as an excuse, which will destroy your life. And you see this in Peterson and how he addressed his, you know, his own medical problems. Now, someone in the comments or someone messaged me and talked about their disappointment. And and and, you know, some of that critique, I think, is fair. You know, hey, you're a clinical psychologist. Couldn't you see? Couldn't you have understood the benzodiazepine threat? I mean, yeah, OK, you're not a psychiatrist. You're not a physician, but you do have the Internet. And certainly the Internet has fueled a world of Internet doctors. And and I think it's it's that sense that keeps should keep people from, you know, a messianism about him. Yet. Going back again to the analogy of the kinds of pastors, usually pastors who themselves spent time in prison and you find them in the black community, you find them in the Hispanic community, pastors who who did who who were able in the midst of prison through very hard rules for life. Amounted to something, whereas the vast majority of of everyone else didn't. And so they know those rules and so they instill them. And now, again, that kind of pastor probably wouldn't have helped me as a teen, partly because I had because of the parenting that I had, my mother had rules to freeze and mom. But I had so many of those rules internalized that I could afford guidelines instead of rules. And I've known, you know, I've known. Pastors who could work the Grime Line, if you don't know what I mean by Grime Line, I did a video just probably I'm sure it's the only video on YouTube that that you'll find hits Paul VanderKlein Grime Line, it'll come up. That was, you know, talking about Matthew McConaughey and some of that conversation, and Peterson is there with that. Now. It's not unusual to find those pastors from the school of hard knocks who have rules that can't keep the rules themselves. Or at least can't keep them 100 percent, even if they're demanding 100 percent from those that they are discipling. Why is we're human beings. And we all have feet of clay. So, yeah, the danger of working the Grime Lines with hard lines is it's very difficult for us to to keep it. And some of us, you know, those can also make you rigid, which can also make you weak in a particular way, especially when the the arena or the context changes. So again, that's a part of Peterson that sort of the we and the talking heads part of the Internet, who for the most part have college education and internalized order systems because we had reasonable parenting and, you know, a hard line is no alcohol. A guideline is not too much. Maybe you're one of the people that can live with the guideline and it's perfectly OK, but I know a lot of people who keep the hard line because of how they were brought up and what happened in their life and what they've done when they've broken those rules. So, yeah, this is a part of Peterson that sort of for those of us who are college educated, like to talk about ideas, yada yada yada, blah, blah, blah. It's that's that's the side of him that's not necessarily for us, but don't. Deprecate the importance of that side, because there are probably depending on the culture, you know, two or three or four or five or ten people out there that need a rule because they can't really afford a mere guideline of kind of genuine curious inquiry into. And there's an aliveness that I think I think he started to lose more and more and more as he became as as the story became well known, especially when he sort of went around the world telling essentially very similar stories night in, night out. And that sense of novelty, which is something we've talked about a lot on Rebel Wisdom as well, is like there was this sense of novelty in a lot of the conversations that he was having and maybe a lot of the conversations in this kind of intellectual dark web space were having in 2018, but then I don't know where the novelty is now. And I think I think we're sort of wanting to find, OK, where is the novelty? Maybe it's in the people who maybe it's in the Schmackenberg. And I think, you know, I think David's right here, but there's always novelty again. I'm one who can afford guidelines. Novelty is something that. Give it its due, but. One of the one of the ways we distract ourselves to death is by always following novelty. And so, again, a lot of this stuff is about balance. And you learn this in church work because you need enough novelty. You need some new things, but you need some old things. You need the ritual and the novelty. And actually, the novelty is seen. When there's a context of ritual, so. Because of this world, maybe it's in the kind of some of the other people who are now bubbling under after this kind of epistemic thunderstorm has right has passed. Yeah, that's a great phrase, epistemic thunderstorm. Well, I mean, a few things came to mind there. One was a lovely line by Carl Rogers, the psychotherapist. He said, what is most personal is most universal. And I think that's the key to understanding Peterson's appeal is he's deeply personal. He'll speak about his own troubles and travails and how much anguish he goes through his own. Again, this is part of the preacher in in Peterson. And I remember going to a Rick Warren concert conference early on because I came back from the Dominican Republic and then I had to sort of get up to speed and what was happening in terms of missiology in North America. So I went to Willow Creek Conference and I went to a Rick Warren conference and Rick Warren said the personal is the powerful as a preacher. And he was exactly right when he said it. It was like, yeah, and I've seen that confirmed again and again. The personal is the powerful. And so the personal is universal. Yeah, that's that's true, too. You know, depressive thoughts of darkness. He he really intensely feels these things and people can identify with a perfect YouTube star, like the paradox of being like not a digital native, but YouTube and Internet is all about letting people into your life, letting people see your family, letting people see your struggle. Like he was transparent in that way. And again, that's that's just standard preacher stuff. And there's always a cost. The preacher's kid, the preacher's family, the expectations, all of that. But that's you know, it works on YouTube because it works in people because that's how people build community. They want to know you to one degree or another, sort of 360 degrees. And yet he had this sort of backup of having taught at Harvard and being a professor and clinical psychologist and having written books. So people gave him a lot of benefit of the doubt. And as time went on and he spoke less and more and more about things he didn't know so well and less and less about things he did, he became a different kind of person, I suppose. But in terms of where things are now, I mean, that kind of the most interesting moment for me is the interview I had with him that I also talk about in the paper is I was saying to him, look, you seem to be saying there's something sacred about the individual. And he responded very pointedly and he said, it's not that there's something sacred about it. That's it. That is the sacred thing. And that is, as you say, Judeo-Christian mythology or mythos, even. Let's say and I went back and I, as I said before, I watched the video and he did say that. But also in the video, he has a way of saying that is the thing. But then there are other things, too. And it's like playing around with the hierarchy here is the heart of life is something about the sanctity of the individual, that somehow we're a reflection of the divine in some way and that this is it. To know yourself as an individual in God's image is somehow it. Right. That's the answer. But now there's the individual and then the personal, because what happens in Christianity is that's right. We have the image of God in us in the individual, but we then are part of becoming in Christ and we're part of a body and you're a member. And so this part here, I think, is critical. And I think his I mean, one of my critiques of Peterson is overemphasis on the individual because and this is where he's in danger of of a degree of ideological possession about the individual of falling into individualism, because in terms of in terms of Christianity, you have the individual and you have the body, you have the individual and you have the member and because the individual is a member. And so that then is reinforced in the New Testament. And because, again, Peterson doesn't participate in a body, meaning a church, you're going to tend to fall prey to individualism. But curiously, Peterson himself falls some way short of being Christian. Right. He's not, you know, there's a kind of ambiguity there. My colleague, Ian Christie, put it beautifully when he said that Peterson is sort of suspended between Christ and Nietzsche. That's brilliant, too. When I listened to this, he said, suspended between Christ and Nietzsche, I thought. Yeah, that's. Yeah, yeah. Because he Peterson is sort of suspended between Christ and Nietzsche, because like Nietzsche, he wants away from the herd morality, he wants people to find their own way, forge their own path. But he won't go all the way to the nihilism. He won't go into this kind of and therefore we make everything up. There is no fundamental meaning or whatever. But he's not with Christ. He's kind of like, yes, Logos incarnate, but he's not willing to go to charity and community and communion, which is where that leads. So he's sort of in this awkward place between them. But it's still that place is quite an intriguing spectacle for those who sort of know those intellectual traditions. And this, you know, now we get into I mean, Peterson is a Western Canadian. And, you know, some of the values I grew up on the East Coast, I've lived in the Midwest, I've lived outside the United States, and now I'm on the west coast of this, you know, it's this this Western rugged individualism. That's a part of Peterson, too. And what is lacking is often, just as he says, the incorporation in the body, which is exactly, of course, where Peugeot really leaned into him and says, you know, part of why you're suffering is because you are not part of a body. You're not in submission to a body. You're not surrounded by a body. And you're sort of an individual sticking out in the world. Vulnerable. And he's really struggling to land. So that's why one of the reasons he's so entrancing for people, because it's as if he's trying to land somewhere, but can't because he hasn't resolved those kind of tensions. Yeah. So the interview with with Peterson, I think, grabbed me at the time and still grabs me, sort of makes the hairs on the back of my neck stand up was in the transliminal interview when he talked about he was actually being asked whether he believed in God and he kind of said, I don't know. And that transliminal interview, those are some of the best ones he gave. And they're before all of this. Answering that question, it puts me on one side of a binary. And I don't think people understand what they mean when they ask that question. But he said something like, if you get yourself together, then we don't know the limitations of that. We don't know the limitations of us if we really get ourselves together. And that continues to be, I know a lot of people see migration in Peterson to Christianity, to the church, maybe. But I listened very carefully to his answers and they're actually quite consistent. Now, whether something will change, I don't know. Maybe his wife's journey will will change him. I don't know. But that's been his answer. Tash, some one side of a binary, and I don't think people understand what they mean when they ask that question. But he said something like, if you get yourself together, then we don't know the limitations of that. We don't know the limitations of us if we really get ourselves together. And if we really get ourselves together, who knows what happens? Like what transformations might be possible in the world? And like, and he said, I've had intimations of that. I've had intimations of what that might mean. Kind of interesting, like that whole trajectory that happened to him after that. Was that that feeling of sort of synchronicity of of a similar process to that? But I feel I've had similar experiences like that sense of. And I'm sure many, many people have like this sense of when you just you get into a real state of flow, things start to work, synchronicity start to happen, you start to feel like there's more to life than the kind of materialist framework would would make you think there is. And this sense of tapping into something greater. Like that for me is like the core of what Jordan Peterson was at least meant to me when I when I was and I kind of forgive him an awful lot just for bringing that into the into the cultural conversation. And I think when David says that, that's it's very revelatory of David and his project. And for me, that's when in the Peugeot Peterson conversation, where I wouldn't necessarily frame it quite this way, but very close, where where they want to sort of have the objective and the narrative meet. And again, I would say heaven and earth, you know, the physical and the. I want to say spiritual, and it is the right word, but it's it's can. See, this is this is, I think, where, you know, David is at. And, you know, David has, you know, talked about part of Peterson sort of gave him. Made him wonder if Christianity could possibly once again. For him, be effective, and I don't know where David's at right now, but and then kind of later, you know. This, of course, brings lots of thoughts to my mind. So he did. The question is whether it's still there. Right. So this is three and a half years later. That's why I was excited, too. Right. I created this. See, and I think this is what people are looking for. It's right there because we long we want to know that. We want to know that there's a there there. We want to know that there's a story that we're actually participating in. I mean, that's in many ways the answer to the meaning crisis. And this is. This is where the Claven interview gets interesting, because in some ways. Peterson is just so close when Peterson basically. This is why I want to do a commentary on that. I'm debating in my mind if I'm going to stick with this all the way to the end or if I've actually gotten enough of this to set up the Claven interview, because to one degree or not, if you're relating with and I'll use Peter Sonia language here, if you're relating to being in an optimistic way. If you're leaning into it. That's very close to what Christians talk about with faith. Maybe I should leave this here and then go to the Claven interview. Well, maybe let's let Jonathan Roussen finish what he's going to say. Maybe I'll get hooked on another train. We'll see. The organization with Thomas Bjorkman ostensibly about bringing spiritual and psychological matters to bear more profoundly on questions of socioeconomical and political matters. And so he said. And right there. OK, so to bring these matters to bear out in the public domain. And this is exactly the issue that. Let's say the American experiment, which was copied around the world, separation of church and state, the creation of the secular and agreed upon rule that at least here within this spectrum, within this small time frame, because remember, a cyclone is fundamentally a time frame more than a physical limitation. But within this cycle, we are going to keep within these rules in the public way. But yet our hearts lean into. But is there really more of a story out there? Comes along and people are paying a lot of attention. We think, great, like this is it. Someone else is seeing it and people are responding. OK, maybe this is happening. But what he was saying was quite particular. Right. I mean, yes, there are moments like the moments, particular answers he gives in particular places that are luminous and helpful and for what it's worth. I was never really an atheist. I mean, not clear what I am, but it never really seemed pretty obvious to me that the question was what the nature of God was rather than whether there was something there. And I still haven't really figured that out. But I know that with Peterson, it sounded a lot like he was speaking of a sort of monotheistic God. And in conversation you have with McGill, Chris, they have this toing and froing about being and becoming. And I think from McGill, Chris, God is more of a becoming and for process theology and McGill, Chris's first conversation with Peterson. You know, and when I get into McGill, Chris, you know, it's a lot of what he goes into is is very similar to process theology. Yes, and it's more toing and froing about being and becoming. And I think from McGill, Chris, God is more of a becoming and for Peterson, it's more of a being. But then he doesn't really want to say he believes in God for the reasons you mentioned. So, yeah, you know, I mentioned a little bit early on that sort of we can afford guidelines if you're middle class, but if you're in jail or have a drug habit or have a gang problem, you need rules. And. I think part of this is also true with respect to God. Well, if there's enough. If there's enough herd immunity, I had this conversation with Ryan Bennett. If there's enough herd immunity in the culture so that you can sort of maintain a humanism, which, as I think Glenn Scrivner and Tom Holland talked about, the sort of Christianity light. Well, then you kind of can keep God at arm's length. But if you're if you're on the grime line. If you're in jail, if you have a drug problem. When the slats are kicked out from under your life. But you tend to need rules. And then you want a crunchy God. And a real religion. And, you know, there's a way in which. A certain amount of keeping gods at arm's length is is a function of. Religious affluence, let's let's call it. Yeah, I don't know. I think bringing that into the conversation is is a good point. Like, did that happen? In what way did it happen? Because that was what excited me, too. It was like, look, people, you know, stop talking about marginal tax rates, stop talking about GDP, stop banging on about the change, the slight tweak in education policy and the latest figures of which country is getting better mass results than the other. I speak about the meaning and purpose of life. Right. Here's a guy who's doing it and people seem to love it. There's an appetite for this. An audience. Go and look. That's what was driving me to say to people, Peter has something to say. And at that level, I'm totally with him. You know, raising the tenor, raising the mattering, the sense of significance that life is precious and you need to focus on what it means for you and for everyone else. He did that brilliantly. It's just a question of once you get into the details, then, of what it means for men and women and what it means for getting a job. And then it gets a bit more murky. And he's not such a great guide, maybe. See, and I. Again, this dynamic, this is part of the reason I do these videos, because I've watched this video once and I had a lot of thoughts about it. But they're often just a little vague. And and even if I'm just sort of monologuing in my own head while I'm watching a video, it's just it's just you can be sloppier in your own head. It's sort of like learning the violin. I can hear myself play something in my head. But when I have to do it with my fingers and an actual instrument, it's a whole lot worse. And I realize just how low resolution my mental image was as compared to what I can actually pull off in my life. And that's a that's an analogy for a lot of life. But. You know, at this point here, where. You know, both of these guys who are, you know, they're, you know, to my knowledge, not practicing Christians, they're not going to take really hard line stands about too much. You know, a lot of the a lot of the advice. And again, I look at myself. And the weaknesses of my own ministry and the the limitations of my own ministry. And once you lay down a hard line. And a rule. You know, there's going to be, you know, let's let's let's be fair to those of us with college degrees and middle class incomes and. You know, a lot of order that we grew up with and have benefited from. Yeah, you know. There's there's a problem with those rules often. And they don't always go everywhere and sometimes they need to be broken and there needs to be exceptions, but. There's a lot of people who need them and benefit from them and work them, and if they don't have them, they have nothing. And for those of us who could sort of live with guidelines, I think if you watched us carefully, you'd recognize, oh, there are some rules underneath those guidelines, too, we just sort of hedge the Torah and. Don't cross them, whereas many others are and do. But I agree with you that I'm grateful that those questions were raised. I just know I'm just not sure how much they've stayed with us. How much they've progressed. And I agree 100 percent with this point. And I think this this was again a weakness of the Peterson moment and why the Stoa has all these people, little Zoom squares and rebel wisdom has all these people, little Zoom squares, and I work with the Discord server because. We're making up for what Peterson lacked in his first wave. Progress, but when people like who are not that interested in Peterson, who's maybe, you know, I don't know how many hours you spent, probably more than me. But those who haven't spent more than, say, 20 hours reading or thinking about Peterson and I could probably add a zero to that and you could probably add two. But, you know, those people, they've got some take on him. The take was something to do with maybe young men, something to do with the way he spoke, something to do with women, the Kathy Newman. There's a few little bits. Very low resolution. And again, there's nothing wrong with low resolution. It's just it's low resolution because that's all they have time for. That's all they've given time to it. Pieces, but I'm not sure they brought this. Oh, yeah, we should talk about the logos. You know, I don't think that's really come through. And the way I end my paper, where I really try and, you know, look for the good and what he's offering and what was overlooked by people who were criticizing him, as you know, but I do end up in this position of disappointment, actually. And the disappointment was something like you have the audience, you have the intellect, you have the curiosity, you seem to have the goodwill, even for a more viable civilization. And you have the capacity to understand and posing points of view. You were a father, but you didn't build a house. But you don't seem to be that interested in finding that larger, whole truth. Instead, there's a kind of doubling down on this way rather than that way. And that saddened me a bit. I think there was a chance there. But on the other hand, expecting too much of one person, right? Because the human side of this, the human side of this is just a guy like any other guy, like you or me or anyone else thrown into the world. And, yeah, there is a kind of Christian backdrop to it because there was a kind of sacrifice. And then there is maybe a kind of resurrection going on as well. But there wasn't a church. I want to play this clip from my far too neglected Vander Clips channel. Start maybe with Tara's point about sort of the, you know, the durability of this kind of, I'll conflate your two points and say the durability of imminent individualist religion in American life, right? And the fact that you have plenty of divination and God within spirituality going back to the 18th century. So, so again, this is a conversation between Ross Douthat and Tara. Who wrote God's and can't think of a name right now. This is the problem when I don't do a PowerPoint, I go all over and then Tara is a Tara Isabel Burton, I think so. And and Stephen Smith, this guy who wrote this book. And. So you got rebel wisdom and OK, we need the mythos and and we need the spooky stuff and we need the meaning and we know all of that. Of course, the 19th century had all of that. It seems to me that if you look at sort of the historical pattern in American life, you have sort of either surges of that kind of spirituality or particular religious geniuses who manifest it. And then the movements and institutions that they build have historically then been sort of pulled back towards a kind of normative Christian structure or framework to to use to use Steve's account. Right. So, you know, to take to take the examples of the two biggest 19th century examples, maybe are Christian science, which comes out of New Thought in certain ways. And Mormonism, which gets its start in the sort of in the kind of divination, happy world of upstate New York and in the in the in the early 19th century. And both of those, you know, if you if you look at them from a sort of, you know, how Christian are they perspective at at at the outset, you can make a case that they're both pretty stark departures, maybe not getting all the way to something we call paganism or post Christianity, but clearly really stark departures. You know, in Mormonism case, you know, you mentioned polyamory, right, as a feature of the contemporary political landscape, early Mormonism goes all the way to polygamy. And then over the course of the next strange rights is her book, it always bubbles up 100 years. You get to a point where by the time of the 1950s and 1960s, both Christian science and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, while they're still regarded as heretical or dangerous or cultic by some other Christian denominations, are, I think, reasonably seen as connected to a kind of, you know, a kind of Christian tradition in American life. And there's clearly an aspiration, at least among parts of the leadership of those of those what become those churches to move in that direction. And what that hasn't it seems to me one thing that's been different since the 60s and 70s, right, is that that hasn't happened to the same degree, right. So we've gone through the sort of Mary Ann Williamson presidential campaign, which unfortunately has not won enough support to merit the fascination that I've applied to it. But I feel like a 19th century version of Mary Ann Williamson would have started a church, right, and would have, you know, and over the course of 50 years, there would be a sort of William sony and denomination that had some sort of ambiguous relationship to the Protestant center in American life. And, you know, Williamson has some kind of institution now, but it's very clear that she doesn't regard herself as in that light. And the same goes for, you know, figures ranging from Deepak Chopra to Oprah Winfrey and so on. And so I'm curious what you think spending time in these religious worlds, what happens when that doesn't happen? Right. Like what happens to this kind of spiritual energy if there isn't one institution building or to a sort of pull back towards a kind of, you know, quasi normative Christian framework, does it just continue? Are we in just a sort of endless cycle, right, where astrology was big when my parents were young and when I was growing up, you know, I knew what my parents sign was. And then by the time I got to college in the 1990s, nobody talked about astrology anymore. But now it's back. Like, do we just run a cycle or is there what do you think happens? So I think I would motion that. I mean, you mentioned Oprah and I think I've got a thought that the the lifestyle brand may have perhaps in some senses replaced the church as the kind of institutionalization of a certain kind of spiritual trend, which is to say, sure, Oprah doesn't have a church exactly. But at the same time, there is a degree in which sort of with enough money, with enough of a following, the sort of grassroots fringe traditions do become like astrology, like psychics, which are now at Goop summits, do become codified in some way. Psychics at Goop summits. And so, again, no institution building. And I think rebel wisdom is sort of, but. I think the weakness of this commercial approach as as Tara Isabel Burton made the point. This commercial institution approach is, you know, to me, it's so much less than and so many of the churches right now are so much less than than the the rules, the hard lines, the bright lines that my great grandparents generation when they came to America and they had far fewer resources than many of us do today and they poured them into communal institutions in the Christian reform church, they poured them into the, you know, putting up Christian reform churches, building Christian schools, building Christian retirement homes, building those institutions, sacrificing. And and so they left a legacy and we might leave some videos. But obviously, you know, it sounds ridiculous to say that because, of course, he's just a guy. Yeah. And this is the other question that comes up, which is, and I know this will be this is felt very strongly by people who are fans of Peterson is like, leave him alone, don't criticize him. And, you know, this word fans, that's so struck out in the Peugeot Peterson conversation, you know, and Peterson's, well, I've got fans and Peugeot is like, dude, fan, you know, fans are dangerous. They are fans are dangerous. Yeah, they, you know, they can, you know, they'll buy your books, they'll listen to your videos, they'll show up at your events, they'll, you know, support you on Patreon. Fans are dangerous. You don't you don't really need fans. You know, what if, you know, one of the funny things is, of course, you know, my wife is not my fan. If my wife was my fan, that would probably spell trouble for me. What I mean by that. Because I don't really need fans, I need, you know, I need friends. I also need authorities. Zach Stein, the video that was released by Rebelism after this one, I'm thinking about me doing some commentary on that, at least the first part of the video, because, you know, when he talks about teacherly authority and answers a question about education and he's telling this young man, you should consider homeschooling or unschooling. I'm just like, you know, I was the fundamentalist answer 20 years ago. Fascinating. And the question is, like, certainly I'm asking the question, like, how much did I have personally invested in him as a person? And is that entirely fair? Is that is that fair? And also the questions that we're asking, are we asking for us to learn the lessons and for all of us collectively to move on from what Jordan provided, I think what Jordan provided was absolutely of. And again, even for us to learn the lessons. OK, what does that mean? Maybe it's for us to build the institutions. Huge importance and huge value. Is it right to think that he's the one who needs to kind of take this thinking on? Or is it up to us to take it on? Yeah. Well, I mean, my response to that is. And I mean us, not us. Yeah, I know, I know, I know. The world as a whole. Oh, but us too. Yeah. But I think so it's worth just pausing and think about what exactly we're talking about here, because it's not obvious to everyone. But as you painted it, the world in 2017, 2018, for many people, there was this sense of sort of stasis and decay and a kind of failure to reckon with what was going on and inability to deal with the most fundamental problems of our time, the kind of rise of surveillance capitalism on the one hand, of government not really playing adequate role, failure to deal with the climate crisis, maybe increasing political polarization, a sense that things were slowly but surely falling apart, even if there was also a countervailing story that said things are better than ever. Look at the data, life expectancy, economic growth and so forth. But as Daniel Schmachtenberger puts it very elegantly, when one part of a complex system is is apparently doing well and another is apparently doing very badly, it doesn't mean the truth is some kind of balance in between. It means an inherent instability. And that was the context in which it's like we need new narratives. A new sense of who we are as human beings and a new sense of meaning and purpose in life. Now, I don't think Peterson himself actually brought that, by the way, because for those who know, like, I don't know, Ren Girard or William Irwin Thomson or James Hillman, maybe it wasn't radically new material. It was sort of Peterson's own take on a lot of things other people had said. What was different was the tenor. It was the mattering. It was the intensity of guys. Let's sort of, you know, let's really live fully. Let's figure this out. And he did it in his own somewhat, you know, perhaps limited, perhaps distorted, but nonetheless captivating way in a way that was compelling and even inspiring. It's like, you know, a lot of people were like, whatever that guy's on, you know, it's interesting to watch because when Harry met Sally, I'll have what she's having. He clearly is living at a high degree of intensity. But what you don't see on the cameras, of course, is the behind the scenes, the collapses, the fallout. So it's, yeah, it's a difficult one to to read. But the sense of disappointment, though, is it's not so much with Peterson for me. I mean, I know that there's a little bit of that. For me, it's more like the lack of curiosity about him amongst my peer group or my professional colleagues. It's like, aren't you aren't you a bit curious to know why millions of people seem to think he's so impressive? And they're not. And it bothers me. It's like, that's weird, you know? Yeah. And one of the other paradoxes that I would be interested to tease out, we haven't come to the developmental thing yet, but he was very critical of the new atheist worldview. And this is something that we've talked about, we've written about, like the deeper conception of what we are as human beings and this limiting conception of sort of just the rationalist, just the materialist. But this is the paradox as well of the sort of partial truth. And I think he applied that to the individual really, really well. But what I like the yes and is like, what does a society look like if you build it around a conception of a human being that is so limited? And the other paradox is that in some ways, I think he part of his sort of downfall with the with the benzodiazepines was a medical system that doesn't know how to treat the overprescribes, for example, the medical system that has a very little conception of like the vagaries of human psyche, therefore treats everything with drugs. That's like the corruption of the system under this kind of very narrow conception of people, but also this. It was the yes and like he had a lot to say about the positives of Western culture, which is which is true, like hierarchies of competence, the amazing kind of thing that has been created around these values of Western culture. But at the same time, this sense many of us have of like it becoming increasingly hollowed out, being increasingly exploited by greed. It's being increasingly exploited by a very predatory form of it's not capitalism. It's a certain cancer within capitalism that allows you to strip out of the value from organizations. It's the fact that as the wire showed, like the wire, I think is the perfect kind of meditation on the death of America. If you start measuring everything but valuing nothing, you get people meeting the stats like the police force just busting people on street corners rather than doing actual police work. That was a if you don't know what the wire is, you can find it on HBO Max. I watched it a couple of years ago and found it. Yeah, found it compelling. And you get teachers that are being tested all the time. So they learn to meet the test rather than doing the actual education. But all of this kind of hollowing out and corruption of a system, which I think is implicitly tied to a very narrow conception of what human beings are, an attempt to measure and quantify all of those things. And that was a yes. And for me, it was a huge paradox at the heart of Peterson's thinking is that he talked about the value of Western culture. You know, I can understand that because it's being denigrated by a lot of the people that he's that he's kind of in conflict with, like the postmodern neo Marxists, et cetera. But this was this was also a massive paradox within what became known as the intellectual dark web, because I think you had someone like Eric Weinstein and Brett Weinstein who are much more focused on the hollowing out of the system. And the fact that especially since the 70s, we've had increasingly hollowed out institutions. Ironically, some of the postmodern thinkers like Baudrillard talked about this, that you have institutions that become a simulation of themselves as they go on. And this, for me, was a huge paradox of that. It's like, yes, he was pointing at this. And in a way, I think if he was able to have done this kind of yes. And with that, that would have then opened him out to people more of a left wing sort of disposition who are more focused on the faults of the institutions, the faults of the what do you think Benjamin Boyce and I talked about this a little bit about the left because the. You know, Benjamin highlighted it, and I don't know, I don't know how much editing Benjamin will do to the video, but, you know, talked about there's a strange paradox in the left that on one hand, they're they're deeply critical of institutions, yet their answers are almost always institutional. And I noticed something in my own denominational structure that they're always restructuring as if it's the structure that will if they get the structure right, then everything everything will come into place. And, you know, I really like that little speech that David just gave there. And he's right that there's a hollowing out and decadence. I think about Douthat's decadent book, which I should really probably return to reread and retreat because I thought that was actually quite an important book and. Decadence is when you're when you're someone someone I'll have to find it. I had tweeted decadence is the affluenza, avoidance of consumption of consummation. And I've often talked about Peterson's book tour as decadent and then Aloysia W. Nelson, who I chat with quite a bit on Twitter, comes back with this with this quote, decadence means to be unable to reach the future in body or mind or soul. The only energy that can fight this evil is faith. Faith, properly speaking, never is a belief in things of the past, but in the future. And again, that gets at what Peterson is talking about in the Claven conversation that I will do after this running out of time this afternoon. So I don't know how much more of this I can do. Human language is not complete without the democracy of universal participation by which an underlying speech through the ages is ascertained language survives any individual speaker. But that first thing, decadence means to be unable to reach the future in body or mind or soul. The only energy that can fight this evil is faith. And so decadence is all about moving towards consummation, moving towards telos and your inability to do it. Do you like that for me was just this central paradox in his thinking, because I think he was very easily painted as he's just an apologist for the current system, whereas I think implicit in some of his philosophies was was a more holistic view or a more complete view than that. Quite possibly. I mean, it's hard to say, but there's a few things that came to mind there. One is just before I let him talk some more. Something will remain decadent, decadent until it takes on flesh, until it's incarnate, until it's instantiated. One of the videos that one of the long term videos that's rolling around in the back of my head talks about kind of the the process towards telos that things generally go towards and should go towards and want to go towards. I mean, it's almost like an Aristotelian vision of Aristotelian love moving the world. You know, a satisfying conversation wants to lead to a relationship, at least between a man and a woman, that relationship wants to lead towards physical consummation of a union. That union wants to lead towards the production of a child. The production of the child wants to lead towards the parents filling that child with sacrificial agapic loves. So so that child has reciprocal broadening, that broadening leads to more children and a family and the family leads to a society and the society leads to the coming of a new heavens and a new earth. There's that there's that flow in creation, that that things long for their completeness. And and David Fuller is right here that didn't mean the Peterson moment. I remember talking to Ron Dard about this. And Ron Dard, you know, edited a couple of books on Peterson and was was quite affirming of a lot of what Peterson had done. But, you know, it was also very early on, quite warning and said, you know, this could be a passing thing and exactly right. And well, it's sort of, you know, now now there's the Peterson second wave. And I think the the conversations he's doing are not decadent. The conversation he's doing online are fruitful. And but. Peterson's, you know, depending on his health, I mean, he's only a year older than I am, and he could potentially have, you know, his father and mother are still alive, my father's dead. You know, that's that speaks well for his longevity. I don't know how that beef diet's going to go long term. We'll see. But. So, you know, he's made money, he's become famous, he's written popular books. What now? What's it going to take? He's got to be thinking about these things. At a human level, you know, while he did shoot to fame and did very well, you know, I believe there was then a lot of family crisis and tragedy that, you know, that compounded an existing mental health vulnerability and, you know, at a personal level, I wish him well. Like, you know, I haven't met the guy like any other human being. You don't want unnecessary suffering. It's it has been good to see him convalesce in that sense. So that's just the first thing to say. The second is that where I began to appreciate Peterson again after going through that writing process was when his forward to the Gulag Archipelago came out, the Solzhenitsyn classic text. And what I realized there that I already I think I already knew to some extent is that Peterson's saying something that we maybe don't hear enough of, which is that civilization is a fragile achievement. Like, we're not that far from chaos and anarchy, and he feels that more intensely than most. We kind of take it for granted, you know, stable governments, functional markets, schools to go to, health care available, shops to buy food from. It works. But as we saw with Covid, it's not that stable, right? It can collapse within a few days or weeks if a few things go wrong in a few different places because it's so thoroughly interdependent and we're ultimately biological organisms and we're all vulnerable and, you know, you're not we were moments during Covid where we maybe felt that pressure, like there are no riots on the streets. But, you know, who's to say there won't be if this lockdown carries on for another month or so? So to his credit, Peterson's message about, look, things could be so much worse, they really could be so much worse. And you've no idea how lucky you are to put it in Peterson tenor. And I sort of think that's a valuable point not to lose sight of. And it's probably maybe one of Peterson's better and more important points. Just be grateful for the functional civilization and don't don't lightly mess with it, right, by all means, improve it or try to. But don't sort of casually tinker with it because it's a profound and precious achievement. And I think that, you know, earlier he talked about sort of Peterson's pessimistic dark view. But so I'm glad he brought this point because there's a lightness to Peterson. And this this point is that lightness in many ways. But, yeah, coming back to the issue of yes and and what could be done, I do think there's a little bit of a comedian like quality with Peterson, too. He responds to what he's part of. So I think and well, comedian in terms of the responding, but also the thinker in him, the reflective, you know, able, the highly able thinker in him, put him in a room with other intelligent people talking about different aspects of the world's problems. And he'll be very receptive, I suspect. And, you know, you'll find in him, yes, he'll make more sophisticated judgments about society and the economy. But he was never really meant to be an expert on those things. You know, it's just that he was propelled the combination of life advice and psychological background. And then the culture war dimension meant that people thought he had answers to everything. And maybe the single best insight of the last few months since his new book came out was in a review by Oliver Berkman, where Oliver makes the really astute point that a lot of people don't understand something about Peterson because the way Oliver Berkman says, there's two main kinds of suffering, where there's sort of existential human suffering, which is suffering about the nature of being human. The fact that you get ill, the fact that you struggle for meaning, the fact that you will die, that you have relationships that are painful, that there's anguish. These are just inherent existential phenomenon. And there's a lot of suffering in that. What Peterson would call the challenges of being or bearing the burden of being, as he put it, and he's right about that. Right. But that's more of a concern for people broadly on what's conventionally known as the political right. Right. I don't like the political spectrum. It's not a conversation. But for what it's worth, those who refer to the right see those problems and they think they're really important. Those on the left, as it's described. OK. And so, again, the same point that I made before about those on the right. It's always so funny to me how the left undermines their own positions so reliably. Let's fill this world with immigrants from other countries who have had hard lives growing up. You think they're going to vote like you when they get here? No, because that that point about existential suffering that the political right tends to see and focus on. It's because they lived in the rule, the world of guidelines and not rules. And they need rules and they want rules. And so you sort of have, you know, this this, you know, you're looking for authority, you're looking for a frame and you need a frame. And of course, people who have implicit frames, so they can play with all the guidelines because there's already a frame underneath that's functioning, even if they don't see it and recognize it. And then, you know, it's those kinds of people that go out into the wilderness thinking, oh, it's like, you know, Pumbaa and the Lion King. Now you're going to get eaten by hyenas for sure. Tend to be more interested in sort of problems of the current predicament, whether you can get a job, how good your education is, whether you're paying it up for health care or not, and suffering arising from people who don't have opportunities. So if Peterson says, you know, grow the hell up and, you know, and and for the left, the managerial class in their benevolence, trying to help other people. But this, again, is something that you see all the time in the kinds of spaces that I've lived my life, where many in the managerial class have no idea of the actual lives of the people they're trying to help. And this is where Peterson's conversation with Theodore Dow, Dow Ripple, was really cool because that's the grime line. Sort yourself out and you're saying, well, I've got to look after my sick mom. I'm living on minimum wage. I've just lost that job. How do you propose I do that? You know, they're like, what about that? And Peterson wouldn't say that's not real. It's just it's not really what he's talking about. What he's talking about is not the socioeconomic causes of suffering. He's speaking about the existential and psychological causes of suffering. And there's a lot of miscommunication based on a failure to see that. And a lot of the critiques of him are like, well, and again, I think that's right. And I think that maps on what I was talking about in terms of the two audiences. What about this stuff? And he's like, yeah, it's there, but it's not really my terrain. My terrain is bearing the burden of being right. That's how he I think that's how he sees it. And that's why there's so much confusion around him, because he's speaking of one form of suffering that some people think is the heart of the matter. And the others are not seeing him saying anything about the form of suffering that they see as the heart of the matter. So we also interviewed Ken Wilbur on Rebel Wisdom about Jordan Peterson, about the intellectual dark web. And I'd still direct people towards the Ken Wilbur piece, Trump and a Post-Truth World, which I think gives. So he uses the spiral dynamics map and spiral dynamics is about kind of different value systems being online at the same time. And a lot of what we're seeing in the culture war is clashes between those different value systems. And why? Like, I think this is incredibly useful for making sense of what's going on, I think is essential to make sense of both the Peterson phenomenon and the intellectual dark web phenomenon. And for me, where it went off the rails, because if you look at what Wilbur and spiral dynamics calls green, green is postmodernism. It's challenging dominant narratives and bringing in different perspectives. But when it goes off the rails, it becomes relativistic. It becomes the power, the performative paradox of saying there is no truth, but that's a truth. And why I find that incredibly useful is that you can see that a lot of the the pointing out the the inherent contradictions and warped the warped nature of green can be can be just done from a sort of reactive perspective or what spiral dynamics does, it posits there's a perspective. There's a point beyond these value systems where you see that they're all necessary, that they all have partial truths that then can that they confuse themselves with the whole truth. And that, I think, is an incredibly then you can see what is a kind of purely reactive rejection and what is sort of saying, OK, we can see a partial truth here and we can see an integrated perspective beyond it. And that, for me, is like the central question. It's like what of postmodernism is useful? What is not useful? Where does it go too far? What is the yes and perspective? And I mean, you know a lot more about kind of developmental theories, developmental thinkers than I do. How would you frame it within the context of making sense of the Peterson phenomenon? Gosh, it's a big question. So so we can play with spiral dynamics. I mean, I think from a from a sort of intellectual academic perspective, spiral dynamics is considered quite a crude tool, but in some ways it's a good gateway drug, if you like. It's a kind of as long as you realise it's it's it's a map of something with with lots of assumptions baked into it that may not be entirely valid. Well, it's certainly true that. Peterson was responding and reacting to what you call green. And by that, you it's not so much postmodernism as a whole, but a certain wave of postmodernism, some have called it a third wave of postmodernism, which is identitarian in nature. And it's it takes sort of perspective or standpoint theory to a sort of absolutist extent, such that you can only speak to an issue with authority if you embody that yourself. So a white person shouldn't speak about the challenge of being a black person, for example, which, of course, is not the not. You know, I may have something in it, but it's not the whole truth. And it shouldn't be that strongly expressed. And and that writ large is everything from, you know, feeling that everything is seen through that lens of cultural war in which it's all about what your identity is, what your race is, what your gender is, what your age is, whether or not you're able bodied, what your sexuality is and so forth. But those are the primary features of reality and that we have to see everything through that prism. That's only one strain of one aspect of postmodernism, to be clear. But when Peterson spoke of postmodernism, he was very often speaking of that and he was linking it almost at the same time to a particular view of Marxism, what he called cultural Marxism, which was a kind of collective gone mad, you know, in which the individual giving way to the collective will was always and every time a disaster leading to the Gulag. Right. It was totally overplayed. But the way Peterson saw it, I think, is as an inbuilt dynamic that once you surrender certain individual rights to the collective, the collective has a kind of will of its own and the underlying logic of its own that takes over oppressively. So when he would say things that were a little bit absurd, like equity, liberty and whichever third equity, equality and diversity. That's right. Sorry. Yes. Equity, equality and diversity. Are we sure about that? I'm not sure. It's diversity, equity, diversity, inclusion and equity. It's D.I.E. OK, I think it was probably those three. Yeah. But I remember at one point he attacked these three things as being somehow evil and that they inherently led to this mob rule collective in which the individual was squashed. And that was never really the case. That's something to do with Peterson's own psychodrama. It's not built into postmodernism. It's not a developmental phenomenon. What is true is that there's a shadow to this kind of what sometimes called green worldview. And the shadow is a sort of inability to properly grapple with power and inability to see your own framing of the world as somehow constructed and limited and inability to appreciate the validity of prior worldviews. So that's why a lot of people who who have something like a green cultural code struggle to appreciate maybe the conservative philosophical tradition, for example. Or they'll struggle to appreciate the the stockbroker who really wants to make a success and make a lot of money. They'll just typically see that as an entirely bad thing. Now, these are broad brush generalizations. But insofar as that's the kind of framework, there are a few other things to add in here. The other is that there are so many developmental models, right? Sparrow dynamics that you've mentioned is principally about cultural code. It's about the sort of organizing cultural dynamic of groups of people that individuals have to some extent. But once you get into the theory, how it's held by the individual and how it manifests as the group are quite distinct things. You can't really map them onto each other. What does it mean in the context of Peterson? I feel the more interesting thing about Peterson is to figure out the way in which he was captured by his own developmental limitation. Now, it feels audacious for me to say that, like I have my own limitations. Of course, we all do. I can't see what I can't see about how I'm viewing the world. What I felt with Peterson is that he was actually hiding in plain sight because he kept speaking about ideology and the problem of ideology and how his genesis as a thinker was how on earth could the world destroy itself through the Cold War based on ideology. That's what got him thinking about maps of meaning and archetypes and so forth. He grew up in the Cold War as we did. And the irony that ideology is a crippled religion. Where does Peterson stand with respect to religion? Does he open himself up to becoming ideological with his own little brand of ideology and if he gets a sufficient number of fans, because to a certain degree, you need a critical mass in order to develop the weather, in order to develop the arena in which you can inhabit and then function to be the agent within that arena and in fact to wield the arena. This is a fair point. But ideology is precise. He was ideological. You know, he is ideological because this view of the world that he has, which is a sort of fairly fundamentalist, individualist view, that the individual is sacred. The collective is a threat and that we have to organize society in such a way that we keep the collective at bay and honor the individual. It's too extreme a view. In fact, what we need today, I think, developmentally at a cultural level and an individual level, is something about the co-constitution of the individual and the collective in which the individual doesn't arrive. There is no such thing really as the individual. I mean, you can take a Buddhist view on that or any kind of process philosophy view. The individual is totally constructed by its surrounds and its history and its genetics and a million other factors. Totally? And well, good point. Not totally. And I didn't remember what all the points were in this video. I should probably take notes first time I watch them through, but I'm usually driving or doing dishes or, you know, doing something with my hands when I'm listening to these videos. But I'm so glad that, I mean, because right there when David catches them, then totally, because, okay, well, that's, you know, excellent. Significantly, let's see. What is in its history and its genetics and a million other factors. Totally? And well, good point. Not totally. That's where I would. Significantly, let's see. Significantly, but what you get to though, is a position where a lot of the things we say about the individual being sacred remain true. The construction of the individual through all of these bio-psycho-social processes, it doesn't make the individual less real or fundamental or sacred even. But it's just important to see that those things are there. So what you want in the end is not individual. And the irony of when I look at where many people in our society, I mean, the secret sacred self is sort of the trap door by which people imagine their autonomy and their agency. Whereas, and that comes somewhere from below, but it's still outside. But of course, with Christianity, that comes from above and is a gift. It is built into us by design. And that's part of the reason we relate above and we mirror above and we're drawn above and heaven and earth have to have to somehow meet. Individual or collective. It's not the Manichaean binary. It's something more like collective individuation. It's like, yes, become who you are. Yes, find your own individual way in life. And there is something sacred about that. And again, back to the individual member thing in Christianity, the individual, you know, I mean, Jesus, Jesus and Christianity put the individual on the map, but embedded within in Christ in the body as a member. So there's the individual, but the individual is also partly there with purpose. The eye has a purpose, the apostle Paul in the book of Corinthians, the eye has a purpose, the ear is a purpose. So, so the membership and all of this purpose comes as a function of being part of the body. But do it in the context of the collective that defines you and that you're responding to and serving. Right. And you never really heard that from Peterson, this notion of service or charity. It was, it wasn't a big emphasis, but it certainly was there because, you know, become the person that can, you know, take charge at your parents funeral, become the person upon which, I mean, Peterson in that sense was quite evangelical in that society is sort of built up of all of these individuals. So again, you know, I think, I think it's a fair critique. Well, it's maybe again, this one of these critiques of, well, in my opinion, he should have emphasized the yada, yada, yada. These kinds of critiques, however, are always a little. Peterson has achieved something that I certainly haven't that, you know, David hasn't that, that Jonathan Rosen hasn't to my knowledge. I don't know what he's achieved or not achieved. And so, you know, it's sort of like the, the guy who bats 250. My baseball metaphor is going to be old. The guy who bats 250 in the major leagues, giving tips to Rod Carew how to stand up to pursue. Most of you don't even know who Rod Carew is. I'm, I'm doing like the rest is history, giving, giving a much better batter tips on his stance. I'll say it that way. It was more about getting on in life and sometimes even the domination view of becoming top lobster as people joked. It wasn't, it was less about finding a form, you know, like Bill Doonley you've covered in some of your other programs, you know, learn to become what you have to be to give back to society as you find it in this historical moment. And again, I think Peterson, I heard Peterson many times make that point. So whether that's climate crisis or dealing with AI coming downstream or whatever it may be for you grow in such a way that you can deal with that. So developmentally for me, there was something interesting about the cultural response, about those who couldn't see the partial validity of some of the things he was saying. And Peterson himself may be overreacting to one version of it, seeing a greater threat than was really there. But there's also an issue of how he constructed his whole worldview, having its own kind of development. I don't know that he saw a greater threat than was really there. I think it's a legitimate threat. And so limitations and then that seemed through my developmental limitations, but that's, that's the way it goes. Yeah, I think there's a paradox. There's something very paradoxical about that dynamic between the individual and the collective, because I've heard that argument, I think about divigils. I think it's common within sort of meta-modern thinking that the individual is kind of an illusion because it's, and I think that's wrong. I think it's obviously true that the individual is contingent to some degree on kind of our relationships or our upbringings, all that stuff. But there is, the paradox for me is resolved. Like we have to go through the individual, the individuation process, like the kind of the Jungian process of doing our own work. And I think part of the paradox is that I think a lot of people try and jump to the collective before they've done the work. Like, and this comes from a very... And this gets back to the major bickering point between Roussen and Peterson in the individual, in the interview. And I think David's speaking to it well, that in a, in a properly ordered society, the individual demonstrates their competence during and as the group votes them up the hierarchy and gives them increasing amounts of responsibility for the group. Very, very instinctive place of having done various forms of personal growth work, of spiritual practice. And there is a felt sense for me of when you tap into that place that is kind of almost beyond the individual, like this sort of timeless, transcendental aspect. Transpersonal maybe, yeah. That feels like, and then if you do that work with others who are also doing that work, you get a felt sense of meeting the same person. In some ways, like you recognise yourself in the other in a very felt sense way, in a very kind of like, like in a way beyond the individual. It's very churchy. There is a feeling of a collective consciousness or a collective experience of meeting oneself again, but you can't. And in fact, church has all sorts of far more concrete labels and language that it uses instead of a lot of this language, which sort of feels a little theoretical. Bypass the work of real accountability, of real truth speaking, of real shadow work, of real kind of deep inner inquiry. And you could take almost all of those terms and shadow work. Well, that's confession and mortification. Accountability. Well, that's discipleship and discipline. You know, I listened to this and I just think we've we've opted for words that are new. There's nothing wrong with that. We've opted for words that are more theoretical and less concrete. You know, discipleship goes to a question of disciple. Mortification, but mortification is death. You know, something needs to die in me. Confession. Confession is a. You know, the shadow stuff by no means an expert in Jung. You know, when they use this word shadow in these conversations, it's sometimes evil. You know, Peterson uses it as a a chaotic potential that should be integrated into the fuller person. And, you know, that. In Christianity, there are aspects of that, for example, the the sex drive should be integrated and should be employed to pursue this kind of telotic pursuit of an end of consummation that yields children and family and society and the marriage of heaven and earth before you get to that place. Right. That for me is like the paradox of where it's resolved. I think it's more or less I agree. I mean, there's a lovely folk line about that, which is you have to be somebody before you can be nobody. And of course, people think being nobody is entirely a bad thing. But in certain spiritual traditions, it's precisely to get beyond the illusion of the self. But equally, those people who achieve becoming nobody, as it were, you know, certain advanced Buddhist practitioners, they have radiant personalities, too. You know, they'll they're not they don't disappear into the ether or, you know, blend in the collective. They're actually individuated. And, you know, I want to be careful about all these parallels. But but of course, in Christianity, the person who mortifies themselves and becomes Christ and is in Christ dies to self and lives to Christ, you know, there's there's a parallelism to a degree there. But but in Christianity, the individual isn't an illusion and the person isn't an illusion. There's more of a durable reality to that person. But that person then becomes a member of the body. You long to be in their presence for that reason, because they actually they are an individual. They've become somebody. But there's a sense in which they've seen through it as well. So it is both of these things at once. And one thing to add there is that this is quite a fundamental background tension in a lot of the discussions about the spiritual in general, because there's in the exact science speaks to this better than I can. But there's there's a kind of quality of soul work that's really about something about your unique role in the world, you know, finding the unique self that you're meant to be and are and can become in response to your historical challenges. But there's also this kind of transcendent quality of seeing through the self, seeing beyond the self, realizing that it's kind of an illusion. And you don't have to choose. You know, it's not as though it's either one or the other. They're sort of part of the same what Zach would call metapsychology. But they're they're sort of a view of what the human is going through that don't contradict each other. They don't cancel each other out. But they're just different kinds of work. And one is kind of being somebody and the other is about being nobody in a good way. And you can be both. I think the. Yeah, so. And that for me is the paradox of. The kind of the Buddhist talk about the sort of waking up to your true nature and that sort of timeless thing that a timeless essence within you. But I think there's a kind of Western form of that, which I actually ironically talked to Peterson about when I saw him in in Toronto and he talked about Jung's idea of the four dimensional self. And what I understood from that was the four dimensional self is that is that your potentiality is calling to you through your interests. And I've always felt like I've had these moments of kind of like awakening of like not only do I have a sense of kind of that that inner spirit, but I've had these moments spirit, but also all that in essence. But I also have a sense of like everything that I've done up to this point has given me exactly the tools and exactly the experiences to do what I need to do next, which is an it's one might imagine Christianity. We call an idea like that providence. It's like it's an awe inspiring feeling to have. It's like even that thing that I did that made no sense at the tool at the time has given me this this tool now, which is what I what I feel is like my particular burden to carry, my responsibility to take on. And yeah, we talked about this and he talked about, yeah, that's Jung's idea of the four dimensional self. And that that's kind of a paradox. It's kind of a Western form of awakening. I don't hear many people talking about. Well, there are sources and I'm slightly on the edge of my confidence here, but I can say that when I was coming to the end of The Moves That Matter, my book about what Jess taught me about life and I was trying to get to some kind of spiritual end point a bit like this. And initially it was something to do with seeing through the self and seeing this personal story I'd gone through as somehow something that I'd transcended. But actually, then I began looking into some of this unique self theory, which is a bit more sort of Judeo-Christian, particularly Jewish or even Kabbalah kind of theory. And that it's sort of purpose of life is to find out who you are as an individual, as a unique, precious being is also valid. Right. And so I was sort of grappling because they both seem true to me. And Perspectiva's title, you know, System, Souls and Society, we are, you know, we are sort of premise, there is a premise of the soul, that the soul is something real and valid and worth, worth investing in. But there's also the spirit, which is something maybe a little different. And there I would just refer viewers to Zach Stein's work because he knows it better than I do. It's wonderful to see that he's back, that he's well enough to be engaging in conversations again. And what I would personally love to see would be because I feel like we look back at that sort of initial trajectory and I think partly it was because of the nature of the confrontational media coverage, but also I think something temperamental in him that made many of his conversations into a kind of mano a mano kind of individualist kind of maybe slightly kind of top lobster. Yeah, a battle of interaction. Could there be now more of a sort of dialogue, more of a kind of emergent? Yeah, it's more of a dialogue, more of a... So I'm not sure. So I there was a moment, as I mentioned in that interview with him, where I spoke about his lack of sociological imagination. And I thought to myself for a while, what if Peterson after this first book tour were to spend, because he because he reads text so intensely and got in such great depth with all of the psychology he's done, what if he was to spend two years at some university institute studying sociology or economics or... He tried to spend he tried to spend time at Cambridge studying theology and they wouldn't let him. Anthropology or social sciences away from the just the psyche and then come back and tell us about how this broader integrative pattern was there. I would have been intrigued to see that. But then, to be honest, I don't think it could have happened. I don't I don't know if even before the illness and the reaction and the, you know, everything that happened to him, I'm not sure he wanted to do that. I don't I don't know what his epistemic appetite. It's deep, but I don't think it's very broad. See, and I think, again, here, Peterson's the center of Peterson's mission. He's a clinical psychologist. He wants to save individuals from the meaning crisis. That's what he's done. And that's what he's been doing. And that's when he breaks down. And so as a community builder. I don't know that we're going to get that from him. And so I think that leaves something for me and for David Fuller and for others to say, Peterson's not going to build your community for you. What do you need to do? And but but at the same time, the point that they're making here, I think, is important because Peterson clearly is gaining in strength. His health seems to be recovering. He's or is he going to go? What's he going to do? Is he going to go back to the university? Is he going to found a new style of university? Is he going to what's he going to build? And he's got time in his life to build. And and he he has a capacity, you know, he has business interest and business capacity. So. I don't know. I don't know. We'll see. And I think that's a problem. I think that means there's a limit to what he can tell us. He can certainly go deep into the psyche and he can tell us interesting mythological stories and what they might mean. But you mentioned Wilbur earlier, you know, in Wilbur's classic quadrant map of the different parts of reality, things about social structure and ecological systems. I don't know if he's ever going to say anything particularly profound about them, nor is he going to show that much attention to them. So a dialogue with him. I mean, I must admit, although at a personal level, yes, it's good to see someone recover. And I know also that millions of people literally really cared about him and really think that he helped them and, you know, their lives would have been destroyed had it not been for encountering his work. So that's not minor. You know, he really did help a lot of people. But speaking personally, in terms of my relationship to his work. Well, and again, to go all the way back to the beginning of this conversation, when David Fuller writes a piece that says, can this man save Western civilization, that bears on this question here about systems, society. After I'd written that piece, which took me almost six months to write, I noticed there wasn't that much appetite anymore to go back there. And his new book that's come out, you know, I'm not saying I'll never read it, but I noticed that I'm not reaching for it. I'm not that intrigued. I sort of felt as though I exhausted whatever that energy was that you mentioned. There was a feeling of coming out the other side of it, which is not to say that it won't be good or that others shouldn't read it, just that it's interesting for me to notice that I feel as though I've done my time with Peterson. Curious to see what happens next, but probably not to be very involved in it. Maybe one other thing to reflect on is the thing that I think a lot of people really connected with with Jordan Peterson was the intense practicality of his work. I mean, it was incredibly intellectual. It kind of drew a myth. It drew on all these kind of different kind of. And this is where you get the rules instead of 12 guidelines for life. Evolutionary psychology or evolutionary biology. But essentially, it boiled it down to something very, very practical. Clean your room, do something, which is like very it's very rare for academics to do something like this. For academics to to break out in the way that he did. And there's and obviously a lot of people got a huge amount from that, like people genuinely feel like he saved their lives, that he gave them purpose. Are there any lessons there in terms of? You are. Are you an academic or you're certainly kind of involved in academic denial or a philosopher? Yeah, philosophy. Yeah. What lessons are there for you? What lessons are there for anyone in in that kind of like coming out of the ivory tower and having an impact on the world? Well, there's lessons for good and bad, right? Because on the one hand, what exactly was it that people were responding to? Do people want to be told what to do? Is that is that part of it? And if so, is that there's certainly a lot of people who want to tell us what to do problematic in some way, or is that something that we should offer? You know, there's that joke about giving me a one armed economist because they always say on the one hand, on the other hand. And I think that what people what troubles people about academia is that what academics are trained to do is to problematize things and to show nuance and you get on in your career by the degree to which you can finesse everything. Again, back to guidelines versus rules. And Peterson could do that in his own domain, although he was often very, you know, more dogmatic and absolutist on things he maybe didn't understand so well. But people responded to the I think therefore you should do this. And in that case, clearly you should. Because, you know, this is going to be really hot what I'm going to say right now, so hang on, because he spoke with authority. You know, you read that in the Gospels and you kind of what do they mean by that? Well, that's what we saw in the first Jordan Peterson wait. He spoke with authority. And that's why there was the whoosh, both and the whoosh and then the backlash, because he spoke with authority. Now I'm not saying Peterson is Jesus and I've made abundant many of the shortcomings I see in Peterson as compared to Jesus, but he spoke with authority and people listened. And it was true enough that it made their lives better. And that's what rules can do. They're also limiting sometimes and limited, but that's what happened. You should do this, you know, go and repair your relationships, tidy your room, buck up, you know, don't give up, you know. But this is kind of banal folk advice, right? And you might say, well, it's not that banal. Some people maybe haven't heard it. Some maybe we take it for granted. Maybe the whole generation actually, for whatever reason, hasn't really experienced that kind of direction and are craving it. And that's possible. And maybe Peterson met that need. Is there a broader lesson for those who are in the world of ideas and intellectuals or academics? I think it's more about how he spoke. I don't. In other words, no. In other words, he didn't really come for the academics. I think it's that he gave nuggets of advice. I think it's that they could feel the visceral caring and mattering when they listen to Peterson, they felt their life was on the line because Peterson speaks as if it is. So if there's a message. Well, and for a lot of people, it is. And again, OK, back to the two the two armed economists and academia. About the beauty of powerful rhetoric and getting into that, because most academics are worried about what other people will think and they'll finesse everything so much so that you lose cowardice. It's a train of thought. Not the best ones, of course, but if there's a lesson, it's like how you say things matters almost as much as what you say, if not more so actually. As we've said a few times, you're interested in a lot of the same topics. You're interested in the meaning crisis. You're interested in a lot of the same issues that Jordan Peterson was bringing attention to, but maybe dealing with them, addressing them in a slightly different way. Perspectiva, we mentioned, be interested to hear what have you got coming up? What does Perspectiva got coming up? This is just the end of the interview, so we won't do the whole thing. But yeah, so this was helpful for me and I hope it was helpful for you. So it's good to be back from vacation. I've been busy, so I don't know at what rate videos will come, but they'll come as they come.