https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4SGNyzDFqg0

 Hi, this is Paul. This is actually part two to the video I made last week on Noel plums response to well is his idea that Jordan Peterson is just is destroying Christianity Think Club did a response video to Noel plum and I wanted to interact with this video a little bit because there are some good Pieces in it, but I differ from Adam a little bit and where Adam is going with this. So let's Let's jump in here now Noel's argument seems to be that Jordan Peterson is selling a brand of Intellectual Christianity people are no longer buying Noel finds this reality Fantastic and actually goes on to praise Jordan Peterson for helping Noel in his cause to make the world more Irreligious now the evidence he produces for this argument. I find rather dubious Noel uses quotes from the UK clergy and stats indicating falling rates of church And actually in my video a conversation with Glenn Glenn was really helpful and shining a little bit of light on some of this UK stuff But a little bit later I'm gonna talk about the the decline of the main line What's going on with evangelicals and especially what's going on with nominals? I'm gonna bring Tim Keller into that conversation Engagement to make the argument that this intellectual Christianity is what's causing this decline in church affiliation Now the problem that I have with this argument is Noel draws no causal connection between the declining Church affiliation that he cites and this growing brand of Christian Intellectualism that he cites and without some evidence that one is linked to the other It's very hard to make a case that the cause of this decline in religiosity or church affiliation is actually being driven by the unappealing nature of the intellectual brand of Christianity that Jordan Peterson and others in the UK clergy that he cites are promoting now I have a few clips here one now. I Think Adam is right that it's not the intellectual nature of Jordan Peterson that will cause the destruction of Christianity It's it's that has nothing really to do with the intellectual nature at all because there are intellectuals on both sides I think it has more to do with the secularity and maybe Adam and I will have a conversation about that because he and I have been Corresponding a little bit offline about you know, what makes what's what's with Jordan Peterson's rise? What's the relationship between Jordan Peterson and sex? Excuse me drinking soda and secularity Because that's that's a part of this puzzle So let's let's drop out of here now Where Adam goes with this is a really helpful clip from from Thomas Putnam a sociologist and and if you haven't figured out I mean Adams take on the whole Jordan Peterson thing is really through Jonathan Haidt and Sociology and you know, I really appreciate Adam as a conversation partner in that because he's he's bringing a lot of that stuff in Stuff that I'd read Haidt quite a bit before but he keeps bringing the socio Sociological perspective into this and in many ways against the the anti-theist But I thought this this clip was really a good one and an important one For just one second is this this is this next point may be a little bit of a surprise. It was a shock us one thing that is implicit in what I've just finished saying is that People are adjusting their politics in it to fit their religion or adjusting their religion to fit their politics more and more people have consistent Views in religious and political terms right there more and more you can predict whether someone's going to be Religious or not religious by their politics or vice versa so we have fewer and fewer Church going progressives in America and fewer and fewer un-church conservatives. So here's the question When people are in that in that Anomalous situation there are no of those two boxes in their Religious and progressive or their un-religious and conservative. What do they change? In order because that shows they're changing What do they change do they change their politics to fit their religion or they change their religion with their politics? It's difficult to hear but the woman says they change their religion to fit their politics Yeah, that's I didn't believe that actually I was certain that could not be knowing our data showed that But I couldn't but I just could not believe it because I said to myself remember this stuff at stake here if you're a believer What's at stake is your eternal fate? Okay, that's a very non secular perspective and that's fundamental that's fundamental here because this is his assumption about how believers work and So this was that these were the expectations he brought and he's a good scientist and therefore to his surprise he saw oh People are changing their religion to suit their politics and that goes on for a long time So even with a discount rate, it's gonna be you know A lot depends and I couldn't believe that people would be making decisions with that import about their permanent You know their fate based on how they felt about You know, Bill Clinton or George W Bush It just didn't seem to me that it up people and I thought people be going to church they've hearing the sermons They're becoming more conservative or they've been not at church. They wouldn't hear the sermon. Therefore. They would become more progressive. But no, you're right Most people are changing their Religion to fit their politics and this gets into the question often that people imagine that and I hear this often that Well, it's these pastors that are changing the minds of the people Well pastors do have some influence, but people usually pick their pastor Not usually but people often pick their pastor according to what they want to hear the pastor say and As soon as the pastor starts saying things that people don't want to hear they go and find a new pastor Who's going to tell them what they want to hear? This is not uncommon or not unknown in the church world. This happens all the time I want to get into a little bit of history of politics and religion because actually in the ancient world Politics and religion were one thing Listen to Jordan Peterson's Biblical lectures Marduk is at the top of the hierarchy and the king of Babylon is beneath him It's one hierarchy of politics and religion. They were one thing now what happens in the Hebrew prophets? You can read this in Ezekiel. I've got an online class from that in my church on my church channel You can hear it in Daniel What happens with the Hebrew prophets is that as Jordan Peterson talks about polytheism and how that works What's supposed to happen is that when the Hebrews are conquered the Hebrews become polytheistic Babylonians, but the entire Nature of the entire history of the development of Hebrew monotheism meant that when the Babylonians conquered Jerusalem and destroyed the temple the Jews flipped the script and You can read it in Jeremiah. You can read it throughout the Old Testament prophets the prophets began saying The prophets began saying God was ordaining the destruction of his own temple through Babylon And then basically what the book of Daniel is about is the struggle between Well are the the gods of Babylon the most high God or is the God of Daniel the most high God and that is Negotiated through the book of Daniel Book of Daniel says outright world leaders were ordained by God for his own reason even at the expense of his son Israel that's the language of the prophets you can read that in the book of Hosea out of out of Egypt I have called my son Israel is God's son Israel is God's servant the Hebrew prophets used all these different kind of metaphors Israel is God's wife and these these metaphors all locate Israel in relationship with the Lord the God of Israel now They begin to say that God is on top of the hierarchy and is ordaining this But what happens when your nation loses its independence now Jordan Peterson gets from North or fry? Very much the correct idea that in the Old Testament you have a nation But but when when your God is at the top of the hierarchy, but you no longer have have kings which serve that God Now suddenly you have space for disconnect and this leaves room when we get to the New Testament for as Jordan Peterson would talk about the individual and And this is where we get individual Christianity and what this does in terms of the matrix of politics and religion is it alters it Jesus is the Son of God But he's called out of Egypt and killed by Empire You can only understand Jesus in the light of the Hebrew scriptures if you begin to understand how the Hebrew prophets change the Translation from what everyone in the ancient Near East would assume which is you have the God on top and his king underneath Now what the Hebrew prophets allow to happen is there's a pagan king underneath But God is still on top and God is working through His rebellious servants even when his rebellious servants don't get it and the transition from Daniel 3 4 & 5 is the story about Nebuchadnezzar and how he comes to Respect the most high God even as he is not truly a son of Israel He never uses the the word the Lord in that and I've been preaching about this again. That's on my church channel Christianity comes along and and really embodies this Christianity religion and ethnicity were separated and in the Empire again and that that alignment between Ethnicity and your God meant that the Babylonians had their Babylonian God everybody had their gods now with the Empire and polytheism The polytheism was the lubrication between the gods so you could have your ethnic God you could have your civic God you could have your Imperial God and they all kind of had their sphere of influence and you could have your private God and whatever you needed the gods were a a that was It was like a mall of gods and you could go and find the God that that best fit whatever your needs were or whatever your tastes were and that that idea behind polytheism remains attractive in certain religions that continue to have polytheistic elements and you find that both in the folk religion level it might work in terms of saints I'm going to find my saint for whatever I'm looking for or in say something like Hinduism where you actually have gods that are supposed to be emulation of the gods Hinduism works that in different ways but what happens in Christianity is that there's one God but that God is now working You can be a Hebrew and worship that God you can be in the language of the New Testament a Greek which means that you come from this massive group of nations that are actually First conquered by the Greeks and then by the Romans and and you can be a member of the Empire and you can be a Christian and it's an Antioch when Paul and Barnabas go to Antioch and you can read about that in the book of Acts that they're first called Christians and you can read about that in the book of Acts because they don't know what to call them because you used to designate a person's God by a person's ethnicity well he's a Jew so he's got the Jewish God it's a Babylonian so he's got the Babylonian God he's a Roman so he's got the Roman God but they didn't know what to call the Christians because they're anti-Christian They're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to be able to call themselves Christians because they're not going to And so Peter and Paul then go on in their letters to say exactly what Daniel 4 says is that God puts these these emperors in charge even if they are unworthy emperors and we should submit to them conditionally. But if we refuse to submit to them, we should be ready to pay the price and you see that with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the book of Daniel and both Peter and Paul are killed by Nero. Yet Caesar kills them both, but still they say God still put that Caesar in charge. Now one of the fun things is if you take a look at Melinda Selmas who a couple of years ago she is a Roman Catholic. She has a blog on on She's written a couple of some interesting books on on sexuality. She's gay, but an observant and a submitting Roman Catholic. And so she's in a heterosexual marriage and she writes openly about this about how she navigates this. But one of my favorite things that she it's actually from one of her books that she puts on her blog is well the gay Roman Emperor gene because when you look at these emperors these people were according to any Christian ethic enormously immoral people. And these people would be immoral people no matter how woke or libertine people would be. Julius Caesar had homosexual relations. It is generally thought that they were politically motivated. He was willing to indulge his political patrons in order to gain prestige and dignity within the Roman world. He was also willing to establish such favors from his inferiors as a way of securing their political loyalty and establishing his dominance over them. That's how sexuality worked and what you can begin to see is that you know these constructions we tend to have these fixed categories when you look at them in different cultures well things aren't quite so fixed as you imagine. And this to me gets into Jung's great insight that I learned about as I was reading his autobiography when he begins to see the stuff out there and the stuff in here these things align. And so actually there's a lot of alignment that's always going on inside of us and we're not very aware of it but this is how morality and human beings work. But my point is that these were these these emperors these were not godly people in any kind of sense that the Old Testament would recognize or the new for that matter Tiberius by all accounts was a sex addict. In this case it's not even likely that they were scurrious rumors spread by his worst enemies. We have incriminating evidence in the mosaics in his palace in Capri. If you ever go to a sexaholus anonymous meeting you'll quickly discover that sex addiction often crosses gender lines. It has nothing to do with sexual orientation but rather seeking the largest possible pool of sexual partners and experiences. And if you just Google Tiberius and sex you'll get a you'll get you know an idea of the kinds of things he did. Caligula famous for this. Nero, Hadrian. I mean it just this is what the this is what the Roman emperors were like. And here God says Daniel and Paul and Peter say God put these people in charge and Christians are supposed to submit to them conditionally. Okay. And that's where you begin to see religion and politics separating out. Now with the fall of the Roman Empire the church in the West is the last institution standing. And the church begins to fill the void of the empire in terms of organizing and administering the life of the people. And politics is a huge mess with all these tribal groups these barbarians rises and falls and the church becomes kind of the one founding institution. But over time through the Middle Ages the political environment begins to stabilize. Nation states begin to form and kings then we begin to see our become get into power struggles with the institutional church. In other words the empire the empire fell the church takes over. Civic governments begin to express themselves and challenge the church. And now the church and the civic governments have to work out this relationship. And it's within this it's within these struggles that the Protestant Reformation is born. And it's noteworthy that the Protestant Reformation is born in the role Holy Roman Empire which was probably the most chaotic patchwork of Europe with all of these levels. The Reformation is suppressed in France. The Reformation doesn't really go anywhere in Italy but it does take root in northern and western Europe in Germany the lowlands in Switzerland and in England. And you have Henry VIII and his famous struggle with the pope and his separation of the church in England from the Roman Catholic Church and the civil wars that were fought over that. Eventually there's the Peace of Augsburg where the civil authority determines the religion of their region. This is where in a sense the civic governments have religious power over the institutions and that's a way of trying to bring peace and order and structure to Europe as in the in the aftermath of the rest of the Reformation. Chaos just abounds in terms of what's going on in northern and western Europe. Now America comes along with this secular experiment of government. In previous videos I've talked about the loss of authority of the text in the ancient in the early Middle Ages up until the high Middle Ages about the time of the Reformation and after if you were going to study physics you studied the texts of Aristotle and you looked at the text of the text of the Reformation. Of Aristotle and you learned physics from Aristotle. You didn't learn it from the real world. You didn't have science experiments where you're dropping balls and these kinds of things. This is what happens with Galileo and Newton where there's a turn from texts and a turn towards the natural world. Okay. And in the Reformation, the Reformation led to these inter-Christian wars you have the kind of a loss of confidence in texts and so certainty is looked for in reason from above and purism from below. But you still have the question is the world a forum for action or a space of objects? This is the question that Jordan Peterson begins maps of meaning with and now this eventually leads to the split world where and this is something that many of you will be familiar with because to one degree or another many of you inherited this split view of the world where science teaches us about this external world of objects and the truth is revealed in material. But the Bible and religion reveal moral truths and so right there you have the split between a world of objects and a forum for action and you'll hear it said again and again the Bible isn't a science textbook but it's a moral guidebook on right and wrong and how to get to heaven when you die. And in the modern period this is the split that happens between the world. Now in Europe World War I kills and ends Christendom in a big way. This is a deeply religious war. It marks the end of the optimism of this split world agreement and the European Church begins a long steady retreat. That doesn't happen this way in the Americas. World War II and the Cold War America recruits God to fight its battle and church attendance reaches its peak during the Cold War in North America and they continue to practice the split world where you have science and material reveal truth in that realm and that magisterium and the Bible reveals moral truth and that continues to govern. And the mainline churches, the United Church of Canada where Jordan Peterson was a little boy, mainline churches throughout the United States, these were the forms in which this split world was practiced. In fundamentalist churches the world wasn't split. You had things like creation science and we're getting all of our ideas about truth in the world from the Bible. Now it's important to recognize that the roots of religion in America is very different than what it was in Europe. Look at the first two colonies in the Americas, New England, Plymouth and Jamestown. Plymouth is made up of religious refugees trying to found the new earth, the new heavens and the new earth, trying to have found God's perfect society, God's perfect religious society in New England. Jamestown, their economic opportunists, and again you can read the book 1493 to get into how in Jamestown when they find tobacco, boy that booms and tobacco is this new drug and it goes all throughout the world and they're growing it like crazy in Jamestown and in the Caribbean. Now these two motivations mark much of American immigration. What are the two reasons people come to America? Refuge from political and religious oppression, economic opportunity. This remains the same even today. American culture seems to fertilize religion in a particular way that's different from the old world, from Europe and the US has been both secular and religious and the US has kind of carved that out whereas say in France you had, you put up the idol of reason in Notre Dame after the French Revolution. In America it was much more let a thousand flowers bloom. You go ahead and you practice, your community can practice its individual religious expression and will have kind of two sets of rules in the public sphere, will have democratic process and a majority determines for much of American history that was very waspy, white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant. Late 20th century Roman Catholics start to assert themselves, other religions come and assert themselves so but basically you have keep church and state kind of separate, be as religious as you want at home but out in the public sphere we're going to have a majority rules process and so if religious people in the majority you might have prayer before football games, you might have prayer before public meetings but you know those are the two rules that are going to be there. And that kind of aligns with the split world. Now Putnam assumes that religion proposes and politics disposes and what he sees from the data is that it is not that simple. Our perceived position in a status hierarchy is powerful and this will powerful enough to change many people's religious orientation. Now this is where we get into the question of how religious is someone. We have this category called nominals and you have very observant people, very, hang on. So you have nominal believers and they tend to be second, third, fourth, fifth generation. You have these practices that linger in the family and you do it just because you've done it, you've got language that lingers, you believe in God but you don't necessarily attend church very faithfully, you don't necessarily give a lot of money, you don't necessarily have a lot of the practices and the disciplines such as prayer and fasting and some of these kinds of things. So you have nominals that are just kind of weak Christians or formal Christians, it's the word nominal means and then you have highly observant believers and not just Christians but Jews and Muslims and all the other varieties of religious too. So you have nominalism as a factor in American life and the height of religious, the height of church attendance during the Cold War had a lot of nominalism in it because to be a good American meant to go to church. After the Cold War, this is what falls away. Now, George Marsden actually does a lot of writing about this and there's a really interesting video out there that I found this morning and listened to where he goes through the history of Brown University and George Marsden is an expert on American religious Christian history and he's written a terrific book, The Soul of the American University where he actually chronicles the history of the American University. And he's written a great book about how the details of how Christianity founded the universities and how the universities were made in service of Christianity and how different that world was and then the, as he says in the subtitle, from Protestant establishment to establish non-belief. And that's what happened in the American University. So Harvard, Yale, Princeton, Brown, these were all religious organizations and from the end of the 19th century into the 20th century, religion recedes from them. And one of the best people that talks about this that you can find clips on is in fact Dallas Willard and what Dallas Willard notes is the splitness, how the splitness continues to go. In secular status hierarchy, you lose status by asserting the supernatural. It's the reverse in Christian and church context. World views are promoted and enforced by social status. So I'm going to play a little bit of this Veritas Forum clip from Dallas Willard. When it comes to these worldview questions, you see the same issue of truth is there. And the question of how do we know the truth still applies to those, not just about whether they're in your pocket, but for example, whether you're going to continue conscious existence when your brain is no longer functioning. That's a good question of fact. And now how we settle that, that's a difficult thing to argue about. But if it is true, then it's true regardless of what you or I may think about it. I often shock my students, we're discussing Descartes or someone, I ask them, what if it turns out you can't stop existing? Well, I mean, there you have Hamlet's problem, don't you? He wasn't sure he could make an end of himself with a bare bodkin to sleep, perchance to dream. Aye, there's the rub. So now here's a question of fact or truth. And it has incredible bearings on how we approach our life. Am I fundamentally a material object that exists, gets organized by DNA and exists for a little while and then I stop existing? Or am I an unceasing spiritual being within eternal destiny in God's universe? Wow, what a difference. Now, the main worldview questions, we can go on to slide five. Basically, you can boil them down to three, you can add a couple more here and there. But the main ones are the nature of reality. What is reality? And then of course associated with it is what counts as knowledge of reality? Because knowledge enables us to negotiate reality and to hopefully live in some comfortable relationship to it. I often define reality as what you run into when you're wrong. And often that is an unpleasant experience. And so, you know, if you're counting on there being gas in your tank and it's not there, well, you will run into a reality that will strand you on the freeway. And who knows what will happen to you then? So, I mean, the nature of reality is a crucial question. Is a human being, go back to the case I'm using to illustrate, are they just a physical organism? Is all there is to thought and will and artistic genius and aspiration and knowledge of a whole field of French literature or something, is that just chemistry? So now that's one of the major questions. Another major question is who is well off? And you would immediately reply, of course, students at UCLA, because they have a bright future, right? And at USC, we promise everyone they're going to be successful. But this is a profound question. Who is well off? And can you still be well off if you have cancer? Or if you don't get your PhD? Or you don't have enough money to go on and get your BA degree? Can you still be well off? Who is well off? And that is a profound worldview question that reflects itself in nearly everything that we do. Who is a really good person? That's another big one. Actually, people are more concerned about that one than they are about who's well off. You can get a fight out of someone by questioning whether they're a really good person much quicker than you can by questioning whether they're well off. You know, you must not be well off. You don't drive a Lexus. They'll look at you and shrug. But I can give you some other language that they will fight you very quickly, you see. And that's one of the deep questions. Am I a good person? Am I a good person? That's one of the deepest worldview questions that human beings deal with. They're constantly concerned about it. If you have any doubts about it, your blood pressure will immediately go up. Hmm? Right. I mean, try it. I am a stinker. Blood pressure goes up, right? Or even, Joe thinks I'm a stinker. Blood pressure goes up. These are really pervasive questions that trouble us all the time. Well, let me hasten on. I mean, the truth of the matter is, we could list others like how do you get to be a good person? That's a good one. Questions about what counts as knowledge is very big on the campus. See, those are worldview questions. They organize our lives as a whole. Now, what I want to say is that all teaching institutions, great teachers, even little teachers, give answers to these questions. This is what you saw in the abolition of man. This is what you see in almost everything. Because these are the questions that dominate. And they used to dominate in the university. And the university used to orient these questions in religious terms. These questions still remain functional out in society, and they are fundamentally religious questions, but they are also deeply embedded in politics. And so that's why politics is kind of the technology to religion being the science. These things are deeply intertwined. And this is why, as Putnam notes, these two things are varying together, but people are in a sense wagging the dog. And that's why Putnam is surprised, because people are changing their religion to fit their politics. People are changing their science to fit their technology. And I mention here Jesus, because he's one of the most obvious people to mention. There never has been anyone who has been more influential in his teaching about these things than Jesus. And this then gets into the interesting conversation with Sam Harris, because what Peterson notes is that Sam Harris, Richard Dawkins, many of the celebrity atheists, actually have implicit within their moral structure the teachings of Jesus. But Jesus becomes a persona non grata. Jesus becomes a dirty word. We cannot say Jesus when we talk about treating people as individuals. We cannot say Jesus when we talk about being sacrificial towards other people. We cannot say Jesus when we talk about the very ideas that Jesus promoted in the Sermon on the Mount and other places in the New Testament. We just call them, well, this is just modern morality. But don't say we got it from Jesus, because then suddenly it's religious. And actually, I would argue that religion on the right and the left both have within them ideas about Jesus. I do not believe the West would have gotten to the idea of same sex marriage or LGBT rights without underneath it the ideas of Jesus talking about respect for the individual and respect for individual's choices and generosity towards the outcast. The entire movement in some ways of the left, the entire movement of the ethics of the left is generosity towards the dispossessed. And this you can find in the Old Testament prophets and you can find it in Jesus. The question is, how does that one value function within the hierarchy of values? I've been getting into this in my Sunday School class on 1 John. The hierarchy of values as respects to love. But of course, he's not the only one. Plato, the Buddha, Freud and UCLA. UCLA answers these questions. They convey an impression of the truth of a certain worldview. In the university setting, the dominating worldview is expressed through what is accepted as research and what counts as possible knowledge. Now, when you get to Peter Boghossian and his assertion that intersectionality is the new religion, that's their beef because they're saying this has gotten into the university knowledge structure. I ask you about the dinosaur and whether or not any of you thought about being eaten by one on the way here tonight. Well, let me give you another one. Is there a single course of studies on this campus? And I don't, you know, I'm just picking on you because that's where we are. USC, Berkeley or wherever it is, all the same. Is there a single course of studies on this campus that you're engaged in that regards knowledge of God as a part of the subject matter? Listen to that again. That regards knowledge of God as a part of the subject matter? A single one. Where you might be a part of your expertise in that field or your grade might be determined by something you had to say about God. You see, that's the sociological reality. What Dr. Kuhn said is so cogent. And I wish they had included that in this lecture. I have no idea what Dr. Kuhn said. And so forceful. And when you know, you understand what he said. You just wonder how can people not understand this. But the truth of the matter is people who are caught up in the sociological wave will hear it all and dismiss it. Because to them it's just like the dinosaur. And what I want to do this evening especially is to just take the time to insist that you are in a society that is not a society of knowledge. And what I want to do this evening especially is to just take the time to insist that you are in a system which teaches a worldview without responsibly defending it. How is a worldview taught? Well, mainly it's taught by body language, facial expressions, tones of voice and inflections, looks, offhand remarks about people and events, by what is permissible. And this is where I'm surprised that Putnam didn't pick this up. Because a worldview is taught by sociology. It's taught by all of the implicit status markers that, well, who is a good person? Who is a person better than another person? How does the hierarchy work? That's how worldview is taught. And so therefore in the political realm, because politics is in a sense the application of religion, this is all the subtle things. And you're losing status by what you believe about homosexuality. Watch the news. Watch homosexuality. Watch, it was a Roman Catholic woman who was getting raped over the coals. She was up for a judge nomination. And watch how this is often, how often conservative judges that are brought before the Congress for confirmation where they get tagged on the question of the morality of same sex unions. It's different, and Tim Keller is going to talk about this. I don't know if I'll play that all the way through. But the question of whether or not same sex unions should be permissible in the United States is actually different from the morality of same sex unions. Because for example, most people will agree that adultery is immoral. But almost no one in the United States is saying that adultery should be illegal. That the government should be enforcing marriage. Now it enforces marriage in some respects, but if you commit adultery on your spouse, you are not going to jail for it. And so you have the definition, but you might say, well, that's immoral, but it's not illegal. And so there are many people in the United States, frankly myself included, that says, I don't have a problem with same sex marriage being legal. But the question of its morality isn't necessarily identical to the question of its legality. Now people will push back and say, ah, but if you call them immoral, then they're second class citizens. Ah, but if you say that people who don't embrace the morality of same sex unions, now you've made them second class citizens. And the difficulty is that often certain groups will say they're a little bit more comfortable with understanding a hierarchy than other people. And so they can't have any hierarchies. Well, actually, if you listen to that George Morrison video, he'll get into that a little bit too. So one of the amazing things that I saw this last week was the Peter Boghossian James Lindsay Joe Rogan experience. Where, and I actually seen the earlier video that Peter Boghossian did at Portland State University. Where here you have these, and Peter Boghossian is a full out anti-theist. He has written a book on how to make atheists. And he's had some interesting conversations with Phil Vischer. One of the things I like about Peter Boghossian is Peter Boghossian seems to be the kind of guy that will have productive conversations with Christians about these things. And he's a reasonable guy. And he actually says this. It's easy for him to talk to Christians about these kinds of things. I think his reason, I'll probably play a clip of that in an upcoming video at some point. I think he's wrong in terms of the reason why Christians can talk to him about these things. But Peter Boghossian is an atheist that I can have a long and fruitful conversation with. And what Peter Boghossian is saying, he can't have a conversation with this new secular religion. Because they're not looking to have a talk. They're just looking to win. And win at almost any cost. And this of course gets into the Jordan Peterson stuff. But now we've known for a while that religious communities have been shifting in the United States. And again I've said church attendance reached its peak during the Cold War. The real question is, well Mr. Plumb is right that mainline Christianity like secularized Anglicans, like secularized Anglicanism, see it's not the intellectual function, it's the secularizing function. And you get this in Dallas Willard's conversation. Because Dallas Willard says, well what's happened in the university, and George Marsden makes the same point as that, at least in secular university, the dual practice of America that keep your religion private, the secular realm is supposed to, the public sphere is supposed to be secular. No God talk. Unless the majority agrees with God talk. And you can still find that in certain segments of the United States, but that's embattled. People are drawn to church for a lot of reasons. Sometimes they're not conscious of them. So you have this ongoing conversation. Well, are evangelical numbers falling? Mainline numbers are going through the floor. And that's what Noel Plumb sees in England. Now, one of the most interesting conversations in this was done by Tim Keller in 2013 with an organization called the Faith Angle Forum. And Martin Cromartie used to be the leader of this. He did an excellent job stewarding fascinating conversations between religious leaders and the press. And unfortunately they haven't kept all of their videos up. This Tim Keller conversation was in fact a video. The first time I saw it, it was a video. Now I can only find the MP3 online. And so I'm going to play some of that. But they also have a transcript, so I'm going to play the recording and the transcript. But what Tim Keller does is begin to walk through what's been happening, which is what Putnam is looking at. And Tim Keller begins to diagnose what's been happening in the culture. Now, this conversation is five years old. And so things have actually changed quite a bit. Obviously we've had the emergence of Donald Trump, which I think makes sense given how Tim Keller lays this thing out. So let's, let me pull this up. And let's listen. Okay. And you know, I'm conservative Christianity after the Christian right. I am used to speaking about things that I am absolutely certain of. I'm used to speaking about things I would take a bullet for and things I would die for. I would like the record to show. That is the definition of not nominal. Or that I'm not willing to die for my opinion on conservative Christianity after the Christian right. As we're just like everyone to see that. Because this feels like surmise all the way down. But you're journalists and that's what you do. You surmise and I'm surmising with you. It's not totally stupid. The reason I said yes, it's not stupid to ask me about this. Because first of all, I'm old enough that I was a conservative Protestant Christian before there was a Christian right. I was raised in a kind of a liberal Lutheran church, the LCA, the old LCA, Lutheran Church in America. I became a Christian and therefore, and an evangelical one at that during college by reading John Stott books and C.S. Lewis books, that sort of thing. And at that time, if you were a theological conservative, it didn't mean you were a political conservative. So I predate the wedding of those two things. And this is similar to me. I have the same thing. I became, well, I grew up Christian, but I wasn't a political conservative. But I was a religious conservative. And as Putnam noted, that middle is getting squeezed out. There's still plenty of us out there, but those things don't necessarily track together. And Tim Keller is famously opaque in terms of his political opinions because, you know, probably he like me. I've got elements of conservatism in my matrix and elements of things more to the left in my matrix. I'm not purely, I'm definitely, I'm not purely on one side or the other, I see. And I think many, many people actually have bits of, bits of both sides in them. And now the other thing is, many of you know the church that I pastor and have pastored for quite a while. He's retired now. It's interesting to see Luis's, the whole thing was, Luis's presentation was great. But when he shows me the, you know, the millennials, what a high percentage of them are unaffiliated. And then the next, you know, the 18 to 29, the next, those are the people that are there. My church is average about 32 is the median age, which makes it about 80% under 42 or something like that. And so I live in that world that is totally allergic to institutional religion. And I live amongst what you have to call younger evangelicals. And so it just is, well, I do speak to this, I guess, because I'm old enough and my church is young enough that maybe I can say something about it. Let me, I should also, here's some definitions. Number one, I'm actually a conservative Protestant, as you know, not a conservative Christian only. And conservative Roman Catholics and Orthodox folks, I'm not going to be able to, actually, I'm not a scholar here. I'm here as a practitioner. And as a practitioner, I don't feel like I know enough about those worlds and their numbers and their and the issues to talk much about them. So about 80% of what I say is really going to fit more conservative Protestant Christianity. So actually it should say conservative Protestant Christianity after the Christian right, because that's mainly what I'm going to talk about. Even though conservative Roman Catholics and conservative Protestants really overlap in so many of their values and they'd have so many, they could make common cause in so many areas. Nevertheless, I'll make reference to them, but I'm basically thinking about Protestants. Secondly, what is a conservative Protestant? I'll use the Bebington Four plus one. Now, David Bebington was a sociologist, a British sociologist some years ago that tried to define evangelicalism and came up with these four. I mean, I always, I don't, I haven't found the autograph of what he actually said because it keeps coming down through everybody else, but this is my understanding. His four characteristics were the authority of the Bible. By that I think it means the Bible as in Trump's reason and experience. Secondly, the necessity of conversion, of a conversion experience of some kind. Thirdly, salvation through faith in Christ's work on the cross, not good works. Fourth, mission, the idea of activism, you know, needing to take this message to the world. And my fifth one I would add, just even though it may be inherent, it may be implied, I would call it supernatural Christianity. Liberal Christianity tried to redo all of Christian doctrine in terms of naturalistic assumptions, no miracles. And I would say no, I mean, to me, an evangelical Pentecostal conservative Protestant definitely believes in miracles, believes the resurrection really happened. Okay. Now this is where we get into all the way back to Noah Plumb and the conversation because Noah Plumb basically says, well, intelligent Christians jettison this stuff. And that's where he redefines intelligent as someone who doesn't believe in the gospel. And that's where he redefines intelligent as someone who doesn't believe in all the things that scare Sam Harris. Tim Keller is saying, well, this is his Bebington Four plus one that conservative Protestants do believe in miracles. They do believe in the physical resurrection. They do believe in these things. And that's critical for understanding how the different groups have been moving. And I think this is why Noah Plumb doesn't understand how secularization has been impacting the Church of England and the main line in the US and Canada. Somebody once told me, if you ask an Episcopalian minister, did the resurrection really happen? And if he says, well, it depends on what you mean, that means no. So a conservative Protestant says, you know, he asks, did the resurrection really happen? He says, yes. And other people say, well, it depends on how you look at it. In fact, Andrew Delbanco, who I really respect, secular. And so when you get again, obviously, to Jordan Peterson with his long complicated answer, he sets himself apart from the evangelicals. But it's the other aspects that I presented in the other videos in a response to Noah Plumb's video that also sets him apart from the main line. Jordan Peterson doesn't fit in to the main line or the evangelicals. Jewish professor of humanities at Columbia University. One time I was on a panel with him and he was trying to figure out where I was. I was trying to say, and he says, oh, I get it. You don't take the apostles and Nicene Creed metaphorically, do you? Bingo. That's it. I don't take it. Okay. Conservative Protestantism. And who are they? Now, see if I were to have Jonathan Peugeot in this conversation, it would get interesting because how the Orthodox and the Catholics deal with this question of metaphorical in a Protestant conversation, the secular Protestant conversation, metaphorical becomes the line. The way Peugeot, like Peterson, metaphorical is not a line because the world is sacramental. So the stuff of this world is the glove on the hand of God. And so see, there's a lot of moving pieces here. I would say, I really appreciate what Louie said yesterday, that if you back out what I would call the soft part of evangelicals, which would be you have some big denominations like Southern Baptist and the very centered Lutheran church that are so large that they're actually, I think, experiencing a lot of the nominalism and the disaffiliation that mainline churches are experiencing. Okay, so this is where you get into the numbers. So what Keller is going to say is that what's been happening in the church numbers, now again this surprises a lot of people who aren't aware of it, church numbers are rigorously studied in terms of statistics. There are numerous organizations that are tracking these things carefully. The Pew Studies track the numbers. Lifeway tracks them. The Barna Group track them. People are watching church numbers very, very carefully. And so there's lots of pastors like myself, we track these things. And what Keller is saying, what's been happening in terms of the culture is what's getting the church numbers, the church numbers are getting the church numbers, the church numbers are getting the church numbers, the church numbers are getting the church numbers. And so there's lots of pastors like myself, we track these things. And what Keller is saying, what's been happening in terms of the culture is what's getting rung out of the church are nominalism. And here he says there are some conservative denominations like the Southern Baptist, Missouri Senate Lutherans, certain ones that the churches have become so large, such large powerful institutions, there's a degree of nominalism that gets built in there. Now when the nominalism gets rung out, you're going to see numeric decline in those denominations too. But the vast majority of nominalism is going to be in the main line. You have to back in the churches and people in the main line that are really evangelical. You back them in, you back them out, it comes out about the same. The 7% of black Protestants, regardless of what else you know, the vast majority of them would fit the Bebington four plus five, there's just no doubt about it. So that gets you right now to almost 30% of the population or close, less than the third, more than a quarter. And that's what I want to talk about. See now this is where, this is where we take, see Noah Plumb says well it's when people become intellectual, when they begin to take the Bible metaphorically and not historically, in other words they fail the Bebington four plus one, that's the death of Christianity. Okay, I'll agree to that to a degree, but a lot of people aren't going there and they're the ones who are not nominal. And I think Putnam is right that this is impacting their politics, but there'll be some cases in which people's change in politics impacts their church. There'll be other cases in which people's religion will impact their politics. In other words, it's not either or, it's both and, and the way to track these numbers is by tracking the nominals. And the nominals are people who aren't practicing. Now here's the thing about Peterson, given his religious experiences, which I've talked about in the previous two videos about this, I do not consider Peterson nominal, even though he doesn't go to church. Peterson is kind of in his own place and in that way Peterson is so difficult to track because in terms of mission he's evangelical, in terms of worldview he's semi mainline in terms of his scientific side. But in terms of his religious side, he's sacramentalist, which is Orthodox and Roman Catholic. And that's why part of the reason he is getting such a wide audience because the Orthodox and the Catholics look at Peterson and say, oh, a sacramentalist. The evangelicals look at some of Peterson's conservatism and say, and look at his missional heart and say, oh, he's one of us. And then the mainliners look at him and say, yeah, but he's scientifically rigorous, so maybe he's one of us, but we're worried about his politics. But even within the mainline, you've got a minority of groups who are still conservative, who are not nominal, and who are in a sense keeping the mainline alive. And so I'd like to give you three things that I think I'm fairly confident of at street level, admittedly. Fairly confident will happen in the future. And then I'd like to talk to you about some things that might happen in the future that could move the needle either way. So first of all, three things that I'm fairly confident of happening. And I'll actually read you these three things and then go through them down here. One is that conservative Protestant Christianity is going to be growing moderately in numbers and greatly in cultural diversity and racial diversity in a fragmented culture. Secondly, and I'll repeat them, conservative Protestant Christianity is going to become consciously outside the box politically, but not consciously outside the box theologically. See, this is where Trump is going to get really interesting because Trump puts pressure on the morality of the morality of Christians because Trump is a libertine. Compared to Barack Obama, Trump is a libertine and Barack Obama is a Puritan. But this is where the politics and the religion really get complicated. And the black church, you know, lot voted for Obama, obviously, because he's African American. But religiously, Obama was complicated. And thirdly, it's going to get both more and less culturally influential at once with the end result. So there's just three points. One is that conservative Protestant Christianity is going to be growing moderately in numbers and greatly in cultural diversity and racial diversity in a fragmented culture. Second, that conservative Protestant Christianity is going to become consciously outside the box politically, but not consciously outside the box theologically. And right now, we're in the messiness of that mix and it's not clear exactly because I don't think Tim Collar saw Donald Trump coming. And thirdly, it's going to get more and less culturally influential simultaneously with the end result in doubt. Okay, number one, when I say growing moderately, I, you know, Louis pointed out that that that that the whereas the devout people in the country and over here, the secular people, what's the where the big changes the erosion is in the middle. The devout numbers are not actually going down that much. You know, it depends on how you read them that you could. But basically, they're not they're not in free fall by any means. What I think is fair, and I'm really glad I can I can actually come in. Hopefully, this will be really driven in everybody's psyche because I'll basically say the same thing that we said that you don't see so much see secularization as polarization. And what's really coming away is the middle. So, you know, we've seen radical polarization in the last few years politically. But what Keller is saying is that in a longer term, we've been seeing religious polarization. Now, for example, here's what this means. It's actually very important for what's happening right now. It used to be that the devout and the mushy middle nominal Christians, people that would identify as Christians, people would come to church sporadically. People would certainly respect the Bible and and Christianity. The devout and the mushy middle together was a was a was a super majority of people who just created a kind of Christiany sort of culture. Now, what's happening is that erosion. And Louise is right, saying a lots and lots of unaffiliated people are not atheists or agnostics. But what's happened is it used to be the mushy middle used to be more identified with the devout. Now it's more identified with the secular. That's all. So what's happening is the roof has come off. Now, what's interesting about Peterson is that. It's been the mushy middle, I suspect. That Peterson has been robbing the new atheists of because I think initially the mushy middle went for the new atheists because they'd hear their critiques about Christianity. And oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, that sounds good. But Peterson is grabbing them and he's changing them. And we're seeing them go to the sacramentalists. And we're seeing them move away from the celebrity atheists. And we're seeing some of them go to becoming more devout. And this is where Peterson is interesting, because Peterson, there's nothing mushy about Peterson. And he's not he doesn't fit the evangelicals. He doesn't fit the main line. He doesn't. But there's enough main line in him and he doesn't fit the sacramentalists, the Catholic and the Orthodox. But he is robbing the mushy middle. And that's the ground that he is harvesting for the devout. The devout had a kind of a shelter, an umbrella. You couldn't be all that caustic toward traditional kind of classic Christian teaching and truth. I mean, I spoke on on Friday morning to the American Bible Society's board. American Bible study does a lot of polling about the Bible. I don't know why, but they use use of the Bible, reading the Bible attitudes for the Bible. They said the very same thing that I heard from Luis. Actually, the number of people who are devout Bible readers is not changing that much. What is changing is for the first time in history, a growing group of people think the Bible is bad. It's dangerous. It's regressive. It's a it's a bad cultural force. That was just never there. It's very tiny. And that's because the middle ground has shifted. So it's more identified. I'm sorry with I don't know which should I be left right on this. It's more identified with the more secular, the less religious, and it's less identified now with the more devout. OK. And again, this is another change that Peterson is bringing. Because so what Keller is saying is that it used to be when you have the devout and the nominals, they made a super majority. And people in America could agree on a whole number of things like, well, and look at the numbers. And I actually saw some interesting numbers recently. But all the Bible is a word of God. But words of God, not so much. But word of God, Americans and and Jesus rose from the grave and all of these things. Americans, even the nominals would say this. What happened with the with the anti theists is they kind of came in and said, OK, the Bible is evil. And then the left, the rise of progressive liberationism on the left, also began to say that the Bible is evil. So what happened is the nominals kind of caved in and left the devout exposed. And when the left the left began or when the devout began to feel exposed, they began to look for cover. And I think, you know, Trump was not the devout's first choice. Somebody more like Marco Rubio or Ted Cruz, they were the devout's, at least the Southern conservative devout's first choice. But Donald Trump ate their lunch. And so when you have the binary decision between Hillary or Trump, Trump would offer them cover by Supreme Court nominations and by other judges. And we know that politically. But again, to understand it is because, again, the the nominal got harrowed out. The the anti theists came rushing in. The devout feel exposed and they start looking for cover. Now, it's interesting that part of the reason the devout, some of the devout look at Jordan Peterson with hope is because he is harkening back to a time in which a certain nominalism offered the right to cover. And that nominalism offered that super majority that gave the devout cover. All right. That's what that's what Keller is going through here. I don't know why, you know, that Luis has to, you know, because he's a scientist, he's not supposed to give too much idea, too many ideas about where all these trends came from and what is going to happen next. But I have no such. I have no handcuffs on me. I can pontificate all that I want. That's what I am. I'm a pontiff. I would say I'm pontificating away. Yes. Oh, yeah, yeah, we have them. Calvin thought there was no problem with Presbyterian bishops, by the way, just let you know. They took that out of the script. My friend Eric Dirksen would be greatly heartened to hear that. According to Wikipedia.org. The script are an Irish pop band formed in 2001 in Dublin, Ireland. Apparently Cortana is listening to me on another computer. I can prove that. Well, that's right. This is not off the record, is it? All right. I would say to try to understand what's going on. If you go to a guy like you go to Robert Bella or you go to Charles Taylor, you go to the people that say that what's happening now is expressive individualism. Charles Taylor calls it exclusive humanism. And it's the fruit of the Enlightenment. And the Enlightenment said that my my reason not Trump by revelation or tradition or anything else is the way I'm going to find truth. I was interested. Luke Ferry, whose French philosopher has written a book of his. That's a really good book. In fact, I read it after I heard Keller mentioned it a number of times. Luke for a brief history of thoughts. Really, really wonderful little book. I can't read French. I can only read stuff this translated. He wrote a book called A Brief History of Thought. And he actually says that that idea that individual consciousness and reason is the is the arbiter of truth. It says is actually like an acid that eats through its own container. And this is basically what Jordan Peterson says Nietzsche pointed out. Otherwise, what it does is it not only eats away at tradition and religion, but it actually eats away at everything. It's a way all institutions. It's a way anything that is going to trump my sovereign and sacred ability to decide what is right or wrong for me. And and so that's the one side. On the other side, there's the sociology of knowledge approach, which says yes, social media and mobility and, you know, the iPod. All those things. I mean, the iPod was the death of the music industry and the idea that I have to get an album and the idea that I should come to a conference, a concert and sit down and listen to all four, you know, movements, the symphony, even the part that I find boring. So all that's going away. So you can do the sociology knowledge side. You do a history, you know, intellectual history side for whatever reason. The the center is coming off and the people who are able to overcome the acids of individualism, you might say, are people that have to be really devout. Now, it's just not enough to simply say I go to church. I'm you know, my father was Methodist and my grandfather's Methodist. So I'm a Methodist. I don't go to church very often. That's just all gone away. Now, here's why I think probably two things about this. It'll that the conservative Protestantism will grow moderately or stay. But I think it'll grow. Now, here's the reason why I'm going to be a little optimistic. First of all, as we have already seen, it's white people mainly that are getting more secular in the world. White people just keep that. Now, again, look at the Jordan Peterson movement. Now, again, its whiteness keeps getting trumped by trumpeted by the left. But it is a pretty white thing. And I think the reason it's white is again, because this entire movement that Keller is pointing to has been a white movement. It's been the white. It's been the whites that have gone secular as an echo of Europe. And mine, since most of you are, there's a tendency. Most of the people right here are. Yeah, I'm sorry. Let the transcript show. I'm talking about the people in the room. And there's a tendency for us to think like, you know, it's just impossible not to overcome to overcome this practically that, you know, we're reality. And because so many of our people are getting more and more, you know, secular and unaffiliated and so forth, this is the way the world's going. It's just not true. I understand that by 2050, 2050, maybe only 30 percent of the world will be white, something like that. So white people are definitely getting more secular. And I am in a spot where I've seen for reasons I'll tell you under my second heading here that I've seen a lot of disaffected Anglo type people who have, you know, go off to college, decided I can't find a Christianity or a faith that really works for me. And then it gets recaptured by this is a lot of the Jordan Peterson crowd. I know because I talked to you all Redeemer and churches in Manhattan. I can see that. And I do see I don't know how statistically significant it is. Maybe it's not much, but I do know we can hold our own with that crowd. I just know it can be done. We actually did a survey a couple of years ago in which we looked at inside the center of New York City, which is Manhattan, south of the top of Central Park and maybe extreme western New Jersey and extreme western Queens and Brooklyn. As many of you know, that's the sort of professional core of the city is about 1,000,050,000 people. We went through there and as generously as possible. Windshield survey tried to identify every evangelical ish Protestant church. And we like I said, when I said evangelical ish, I mean, we were pretty, pretty fairly generous in our the Bevington four or five. And and also how many Manhattan residents go to those churches. And it took a lot of work. But we realized that in 1989, there were about 100 of those churches, about 9000 Manhattan residents in it, which is less than 1% of the population. And in 19 in 2009, there was about 200 of those churches. My church helped start about a third of them. And there is a now 34,000 Manhattan residents in those churches now from one side. You know, that's a big uptick. For another side, still a fringe phenomenon. Nevertheless, it means holding your own or something like that. However, the reason why I still think that evangelical ism or maybe conservative Protestant ism is going to probably hold us on and grow is because of the rise of global Christianity. Many of those folks are coming here, especially in the city. So in what in other words, what he's saying is that the conservative Protestant churches aren't going to cave necessarily. But what's going to happen is that there's going to continue to be influx from other places in the world. And here at Living Stones, our church continues to struggle. But there's a Nigerian Anglican church that that that uses our building for a while. We had a Tongan church that used our billing. So there are plenty of what would be Bebington four plus one Christians coming into the United States from other places in the world. Some some real quicks. And these are I don't totally trust any. I trust when I when I read about 10 different versions of religious statistics and the fact that they kind of converge, then I can give you the I trust that. And so here's what I do know. Korea in a hundred years went from about zero to 40 percent Christian. Africa in a hundred years from 1900 to 2000 went from nine percent to about 50 percent Christian. China is probably probably on a hundred year trajectory to do about the same thing. Probably go from about two or three percent to maybe 30 or so. By the way, that's going to change history of the world right there, because some of you may know China is a little bigger than Korea. And and as course, technic and of course, not as troubled as Africa. And so there's already more kind of coastal evangelical Christians in in China than there are in all the United States. So now what does that mean? It means that that Christianity is growing in these non-Western places at seven to ten times the population in many cases. And they're coming in to Western cities. The biggest churches by far in in London right now are African churches. And what happened in New York? Very interesting. In 1965, the Bronx, Brooklyn and Queens were largely outside of a set of black Protestants. There was like it was basically a Catholic Jewish place. There was a few scattered mainline churches and that was about it. You know, there's been an enormous influx and there are now almost certainly 10 percent of all New Yorkers out of the eight million New Yorkers, 10 percent are Pentecostal Christians. My son is a urban planner, works for the city of New York. He's a city planner. He says when you go to Manhattan, community boards, they are very secular. But if you go out into the Bronx and Queens and Brooklyn, places like that, he says community boards. And you know what a community board is. It's a public, you know, it's where zoning decisions get made. It's half the community boards are appointed by the mayor and things like that. It says they're open and closed in prayer, especially in the Bronx, because it's all led by black and Latino Pentecostal ministers. They're the community leaders. What did I say before about the split world? Well, in these areas, in the United States, when you get a majority of a certain people in a certain religion, the religion will come into the public sphere and by process, by the will of the people. And we guess that 12 to 15 percent now of, it's a guess, of the Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn are probably what we call Bebington Five Pentecostal or evangelical. Now, what happens is those folks are very ethnic. They're not from the eastern southern Europe, which is what used to dominate America, you know, New York. It's from the eastern southern hemisphere. And when they come, they they win their own folks and they and they and they and they grow and they plant tons and tons of churches. And then when their kids grow up, go to college, learn to speak English, they come into the center. And that's why if you go into Redeemer, you'll see we're only about 43 percent white. Redeemer is five or six thousand people coming. It's very 15 percent of the people who go to Redeemer either have their doctorate or are working on it out of the six thousand. It's 70 percent single. It's pretty unusual. And it's still a fringe phenomenon, actually. It's not it hasn't captured the cultural imagination. But the fact is that I to a great degree, we are fueled by. I'll put a link to this recording, the whole the whole recording. And it goes on for quite a while because he has question and answer and goes into this. But you can see that the picture is a lot more complex than the no plum paints. And it's even more complex than, let's say, let's say, Adam sees in terms of think club. That's it's a very live picture in terms of what's happening religiously. And you can begin to see how Jordan Peterson fits into this. Now, what's amazing is that the professional atheists, what they really care about is the politics. If you're going to be a Christian and you're going to keep your mouth shut and you're not going to bother with the school system and you're not going to bother with the political realm, usually about the kinds of things that the celebrity atheists or the career atheists are are pushing out, they'll they'll leave you alone. And Richard Dawkins, the daddy of this group, says so basically on this. Unbelievable here. I still worry about people who I know you're not one of them, but there are people who think the Bible is literally true. There are people in America, many, many of them, who want to have the Ten Commandments hung up in courthouses contrary to the Constitution. And although you can find a decent commandment among the ten, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor, etc. Most of them you wouldn't actually want to base your life on. And yet there are people, I know you're not among them, but there are people who do think that we should derive our morals from the Ten Commandments from the Old Testament. What do you think about? Justin Brierley doesn't think that? Obviously, Richard Dawkins doesn't know a lot about Justin Brierley. But this is where, in a sense, we come to the Jordan Peterson moment, because Peterson, he's all over this in different ways. He's not an evangelical, but evangelicals can hear him and they're thinking he might give them some cover. He's got mainline credentials, but he doesn't fit into the mainline at all. He's got sacramentalist aspects to him through the symbolism and the archetypes and all of this. And you have Jonathan Peugeot saying, you know, I don't read Jung, I read the Church Fathers. I get my, I don't call them archetypes, I call them symbolism. So Peterson comes in the middle of it, and it's this mushy middle. It's the nominalism, it's the individuals that maybe gave up Christianity from a semi-devout family or from not a devout family. This is the group that Peterson is basically robbing the celebrity atheists of. The celebrity atheism is in very many ways in its last legs. And I actually found this little video on Tim Keller and the new atheists, and he basically makes that point. One bad thing about the new atheist books is they weren't just saying that religion is wrong. They were actually saying that even respect for religion was wrong. That's this mushy middle thing. And before with the nominalists they had the cover, and the new atheists went in there and said, we're going to take away your cover. And that we shouldn't even be courteous and respectful to religious believers, but we really just need to get rid of it all. And now Peter Boghossian finds that the progressive liberationists are doing to the celebrity atheists what the celebrity atheists did to the nominalists and the Christian camp. And boy, I think that's a recipe for disaster. That certainly doesn't bring about civil discourse at all. And so what we see now is that not only do you have Sam, well, they're continuing to go after the nominal Christians and try and get them. They're, you know, the devout, they're fighting, but now more on the left are coming in. And so now you have increasing, increasing chaos and in civil discourse. The other thing that's weird about the new atheists was most people in the last 30 years came to understand that knowledge is perspectival. We seem to move away from this idea that you can have this objective view from nowhere. This is again what we dealt with Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. You know, the old enlightenment, you know, scientism. And I've talked to a number of philosophers who are not Christian believers, who are themselves atheists, actually, who told me it seems like all the guys who wrote the new atheist books just refused to take philosophy 101. They just did not listen to what's happened in the last 40 years about about knowledge. They're just so sure that if you can't prove something, then we don't have to believe it. And so there's a kind of epistemological naivete about the books. And there's also something about them that I think really doesn't help civil discourse at all. So I, I do hope that they'll get past a not what Tim Keller didn't know. And what he couldn't see was that it would actually be Jordan Peterson who comes in and he hits all these different elements that were in practice. And what Jordan Peterson has done in some ways is everyone assumed that the trends that Tim Keller saw in 2013 would simply continue. Well, Jordan Peterson comes in and it's it's a totally different ballgame. And that's, in a sense, how he fits into this. So let me know what you think of my thesis. Put comments in the comments and I'll wrap it up here.