https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FXPAJdxjRj0

 Hi, this is Paul. Summer's here in Sacramento, so it's hot outside. I was gonna make a short video, but the more I worked on the PowerPoint the longer it got. And this is sort of in preparation for the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversation. I think the De La Honte conversation was helpful in terms of figuring out what to expect from this. And so I think this should be helpful in terms of listening to the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris, Brett Weinstein conversation with a little bit more, let's say differentiation. When we listen to the different arguments, we can locate the different arguments in terms of whether we're talking about morality, whether we're talking about ontology, whether we're talking about epistemology. How does this whole big picture get together? Where does God fit into this? Why are these people scrapping? Now in my last video someone said, Peterson always calls them the celebrity atheist. Maybe career atheist is a better title. And I thought, yeah, that's probably a better one. So I changed the title to career atheist. And of course there's the Susan Blackmore video or the Susan Blackmore video. I think the Blackmore video was a good video. I think it wasn't that we learned a lot more about Peterson in that video, or maybe I learned a lot more about Peterson in that video. But a lot of his stuff was well put together. He seemed fresh. At our meetups, it's a strange business that we're in. A lot of our meetups we speculate about Jordan Peterson's health. It's like we're wondering about Melania Trump or you're reading the tea leaves. And oh, he looks tired. And it's like we're a bunch of moms worrying about Jordan Peterson. But he seemed rested with talking to Susan Blackmore. And yeah, so Blackmore, Dillahunty, Sam Harris, Brett Weinstein, all these conversations in the last video we talked about, why these pairings? What's going on with this? And we talked, and I had made the comment in the last video that Dillahunty, instead of getting defensive about Jordan Peterson calling him a Christian, should probably come back and say you're more materialist than you want to admit, because I think that's very true. And so in this little series, I'm talking about motivations, why Jordan Peterson and the materialists keep sparring, why the materialists keep attacking religion. We're going to talk about ethics or morality today, and its complete failure within materialism. And at some point, we're going to probably talk more about God and ontology, because that is where we often go. We'll see. There were a number of comments saying, get back to the biblical series. And I do want to do that and get back not only to the 15 videos on Genesis, but I have to finish up Easter in that video. And then I realize I often take things in reverse order. But what often happens with this is that I'm always learning more as I do this. I've had a number of conversations for the last couple of days with YouTube watchers. And one of the things that I emphasize is that these videos, these are not refined videos. These are thinking out loud. And at the end of almost every video, I know more than I began the video with. This is part of the reason there's freedom of speech. Some of you might have also noticed on my Twitter feed that I was doing a lot of talk about the Christian Reformed Church Synod. The Christian Reformed Church Synod was in this week, and I was watching some of that on YouTube, or not on YouTube, some of that's on YouTube. It was on live stream. And so I was engaging with a fair amount of that. And there will probably be some more videos in my stream where I'll be doing some more church talk. And my channel isn't just about Jordan Peterson. I've spent a lot of time on Jordan Peterson, because Jordan Peterson is helping me think through a whole range of things that are very interesting in me. And now I've got all these new relationships with a whole bunch of you, whether it's one-sided, me talking at you via YouTube, or if it's in the comments section, or if it's in emails, or in the meetups that are in Sacramento. So this has become a very, obviously a very interesting part of my life, one that has been extremely fruitful in terms of learning and growth for me. And I'm indebted to all of you for that. But I'm focusing now on Jordan Peterson and the materialists. Now, some of you have said, I don't like the name materialist. There isn't a nice word for this. Materialist has some things to be said for it. Naturalist has been some things to be said for it. Career atheists, I'm kind of lumping them together, but there are very much nuances between this. So you'll hear me use naturalist and materialist interchangeably. C.S. Lewis in Miracles usually uses naturalist. Alvin Plantinga will often use naturalist. Thomas Nagel, who we'll hear quite a bit from in this video, often uses materialist. So we're getting at kind of the physical layer of reality. And I think actually physicalists wouldn't be a bad thing because they differentiate in terms of physics. It's the universe governed by physics. And now we've talked quite a bit about the laws of physics before. But the failure of naturalist ethics or naturalist morality, and I'm going to go through some of this briefly. I'm going to read some C.S. Lewis too. We are adapted for fitness, not reality, says Don Hoffman. We are products of physics, says Matt Dillahunty. Our experience of choice is illusory, says many of the naturalists. And our knowledge of truth is achievable. And now right there you have the tension in this system. Truth is correlate with the material reality or physical processes. This is one of the definitions of truth. And so if you listen to the Dillahunty Slick video, Slick, who is a Christian and Dillahunty, who is an atheist, agree on what truth is. And we're going to get into that in this video because is Jordan Peterson consistent with his Darwinian idea of truth? Is Jordan Peterson consistent with his pragmatic definition of truth? Listening to a lot of him, I would dare say no. He's not consistent in the same way that the career atheists are not consistent in their idea of morality. Stuff is coming in from the past that is nearly unavoidable and that is deeply impacting these conversations between Peterson and the career atheists. And so all of the career atheists say our knowledge of truth is achievable and we achieve this through reason. C.S. Lewis would agree. But C.S. Lewis would assert that to a certain degree reason is not so much tied to the bottom, but reason is tied to the top and God. And when we are using reason, we are using something that is, it's hard to put words into C.S. Lewis's mouth, but we might call it to a degree a gift of the supernatural to us. Now, obviously, the career atheist would sharply disagree with that. But that's essentially what's happening in C.S. Lewis's book Miracles. C.S. Lewis is saying that reason is a type of supernaturalism that comes to us from above and comes to us, C.S. Lewis would probably make an argument that reason is part of the imago dei or the image of God or what Peterson talks about in terms of a spark of the divine or a shard of the divine in us. Now, the imago dei or the image of God is something that's been hotly debated through the history of Jewish and Christian theology. Is it reason? Is it our role as sub-creators? And throughout different times, many different theologians from many different cultures have put things forward. I think implicit in Lewis's Miracles, he argues that reason is this signpost to the supernatural. Now, Lewis will not say it's the only sign, but it is the sign that Lewis picks when he engages the career atheists of his generation. And so, truth according to the career atheist, according to the naturalist, according to the materialist, truth is something achievable. Now, truth correlates to material reality or physical processes, says a naturalist or a materialist. They believe evidence plus reason can yield direct knowledge of reality. Okay, now we're going to get into this question about how we relate to reality. Do we have a direct relationship to it? I think the naturalist and the materialist would argue direct, even though there's a long history of philosophy that suggests it's indirect. And a lot of the contemporary Darwinists, let's say such as Don Hoffman or maybe Jordan Peterson would also say it's indirect. So that's where Don Hoffman says we have hacks and tricks. And his evidence is this jewel beetle from Australia that nearly went extinct because it kept confusing beer bottles for females. And jewel beetles mating with beer bottles do not help jewel beetles get along. And this adds to his argument that Darwinian fitness is what we are evolved to know, not reality. And his assertion that in the ways that he has asserted he has reduced Darwinian evolution down to mathematical formulas, he says it is only fitness. And again, you can go past into the back in the past videos and we've talked quite a bit more about Don Hoffman. So we are adapted for fitness, not reality. And what that does is tends to cut the legs out from under the assumption that, well, maybe there's a lot of confusion that gets passed down, but there's enough truth that we know via Darwin that we can have truth. And so I think in some sense, the naturalist or materialist, that amount of truth has been getting skinnier and skinnier and skinnier and skinnier. And now in a sense, Don Hoffman wants to cut it off and say, nope, we all deal with tricks and hacks to actually interact with this strange material world that physics has told us is more basic. And this isn't unreasonable to think about. I am sitting in this room right now and there are a myriad of things going on around me. There are spectrums of light that we know via science that I cannot see with my eyes. There are ranges of hearing that we know from science that I cannot hear with my ears. Even a dog whistle demonstrates that. There is electromagnetic radiation all through this room. Right now, this computer is working wirelessly. And so it is communicating with the internet over the air and I could be a magician and just pass a hula hoop around this computer and say, look, no wires and I'm still connected with the internet. So it is not hard for us to believe that there are layers of reality that we cannot access in terms of the senses, the natural senses that we have as human beings. And there are layers, some of those layers we know about via other animals that are connected on with those layers. And then there are layers that we are creating and participating in that we have discovered through technology. And then there is always the question, might there there not be additional layers that we have no technology to engage with? And in a sense, the Jungians would say, well, there's the collective unconscious. And so when Jung predicts the report in the bookshelf that freaks Freud out, you can read about this in Jung's autobiography, Jung would say, well, there's the collective unconsciousness manifesting itself in our reality. And there's a variety of stories like that from Jung's autobiography. There's the broken knife and the broken, I think it's a broken table. And so that asks the question, well, we are engaging with a reality, there is a reality independent from us, but our experience of it is not exactly what we experience, what we naively imagine it to be. And when we later on, when we get to the heretic again, and Thomas Nagel, the materialists agree with that. They call this the, you know, what do they call it? The manifest image that we have around us. And that's what we're engaging with. So, you know, there's not necessarily a big division between Hoffman and the career atheists. And I haven't done much research into Hoffman's background. I was talking to a pastor friend of mine, and he said he had found a video of Hoffman talking to his father. Now, if any of you out there in the comments section, find that video, post it in the comments section, because I'd love to see it. Because according to this pastor, and this pastor might not be wrong, and Nick, if you're listening to me, post the video in the comments section. That's my friend Nick Blystray. He's the pastor of the Fairfields Christianity Forum Church. Shout out for Nick. But Nick said that he thought he remembered a video where of Don Hoffman talking to his father, who was an evangelical Christian. And so, I don't think Don Hoffman is a Christian, but Hoffman, I assume, is an atheist, materialist, because almost all scientists are Christian. And we're going to hear from some of them actually in this video. But one of the things that we're going to have to deal with is, in this video, in terms of Jordan Peterson talking to the career atheist is, to what degree is Peterson's materialism also a factor, and that gives rise to the comeback that Dilla Huntie or Sam Harris could use. You know, you're more of a materialist than you care to admit, even if the career atheists are way more Christian than they care to admit. So, we are adapted for fitness, not reality. This takes place, this makes for two huge problems when it comes to ethics or morality. They assert that the ethics, morality is based on a reality plus rationality. Part of the difficulty of the materialists is that so much of what they focus on is the material layer, and their argument is that the entire universe, as we know it, our relationships, including the mind, is a product of the physical material universe. Now, that is in many ways what is at the core of the argument, and again, we're going to get to Thomas Nagel at the end of it, because that assertion is an assertion. It is not a provable assertion. In fact, we're going to take a, we're going to listen to a little bit from a chemist who's going to throw a lot of doubt, hold on here boys and girls, a whole lot of doubt on the story of life developing from non-life chemicals, and so we're going to get into that a little bit. I'm not an expert in that, so we're going to listen to some other people, and some of you are going to freak out a little bit when we come to that, but if we're going to be open in our conversations, let's be fairly, let's be open to a lot of different sides. That is in fact the definition of openness, and of course you can reject it or agree, which is exactly what you do in the comments section. So the failure of naturalist ethics or the failure of naturalist morality in theory, not necessarily morality in practice, is that they assert ethics or morals are based on reality plus rationality, and they betray their assertion that choice is a losery. Even if their theories were true, it is pointless because none of us do or should live life that way. Now if you get into the Susan Blackmore conversation with Jordan Peterson, Unbelievable has the main video that's on YouTube, but then if you sign up, they're pretty tricky, they're much better than I am, my daughter's saying, you should do more with Patreon, maybe I will, I don't know. But Unbelievable has another video or has more videos that they're releasing from the conversation where Susan Blackmore is basically denying free will and deny that her actions imply it. And when she goes there, Peterson just has a big old smile on his face because he might as well say, gotcha, because there's just no way to pull this off. So Susan says, I understand my husband and I'm more compassionate when I see the sources of his struggle in a sense in his constructedness. That's not a direct quote, but that's essentially what she says. She says, I'm a better wife because I understand my husband because of all the things in his past. Now I agree with this, I understand my wife because of the history of her past and hopefully she understands me because of our long history together. We've been married 30 years this summer. And so of course, there's to believe in, I don't like the word free will, but I'm going to use it, to believe in free will, to believe in real agency, which is what I'd rather say, is not to deny the constructed nature of our reality. It is constructed. There's no question about that. The question is, is it merely constructed in all of the ways we can drive it down to the physical layer? And in fact, is that driving down transparent to us or even potentially transparent to us? Jordan Peterson says, why don't you demand of your husband or your daughter something better for them? Don't you? And then she shares a story exactly how she does. And again, Peterson doesn't say it. He learned from Kathy Newman, doesn't say, ha, gotcha. He just smiles because he got her. And here's the thing. It is impossible, I would say practically impossible for the career atheist to convince any of us they don't believe in choice or agency or will, because it is manifest completely in our systems. So she seems unable to realize that even the choice and implicit admonition to understand her husband denies the application of her position. In other words, ah, I have a choice to understand my husband or I have a choice to just be offended by his behavior that annoys me right now. And well, then what are you going to do? Yell at him to stop? There's no getting out of this. Now, again, you have the question, could we imagine some clean room human being that never had an opportunity to live in a culture by which they picked up the mind virus of choice? And I would say, I don't think such a being, let's assume, Darwin, for sake of this argument, I don't think such a being would survive. And we're going to hear a little bit from Thomas Reid on this, because what this does is expose the naturalist materialist to imagining a world that none of us live in. And in fact, none of us can imagine living in it. It's extremely difficult. And now some of you have recommended The Diamond Age, and I'm going to have to check out that novel, I think. In fact, I have it on audiobook. I started it once, but I'm going to check that out. I don't think even our science fiction writers, who are some of the most imaginative people out there, can imagine a world in which choice is divorced from us. And what's amazing is that this is argued with a straight face in a culture that has nearly made choice sacred. In our culture, choice is next to godliness in terms of you can tell someone, well, you've got cancer, so you have a choice. You can take chemo and feel miserable and maybe not beat it, or you can die in pain of cancer. And then people say, well, at least you've got a choice. What kind of choice is this? Or another one that I mentioned often, don't worry, the universe will slowly lose energy and the sun will run out of fuel and die and all life in the world will go extinct. The other choice is you will surely die before then. Oh, great choice. In fact, there's no choice at all. Or I suppose take your life. Well, there you go. So Susan Blackmore can't even see, she can't even use language to express this world without free will and without choice. And I'm sure some in the comment section will say, of course I can, excuse me, of course I can do this. Well, I really have a hard time imagining what that looks like. C.S. Lewis begins chapter five in Miracles with this, with a quote from Reinhold Niebuhr. Even as rigorous a determinist as Karl Marx, who at times describes the social behavior of the bourgeoisie in terms which suggested a problem in social physics, could subject at other times a withering scorn which only the presumption of moral responsibility could justify. In other words, if there's someone out there who should really be trying to apply determinism to humanity, which is Karl Marx writ large, he sounds like a preacher. He can't help it. So responding to a naturalist, if you mentally realize that a naturalist is offering a corrective admonition, you should be embarrassed for them because they have just publicly betrayed their own position. And it is as hypocritical as a Christian violating the worst sin imaginable. Now, this is where it's nice to be a Calvinist because you can say, ah, and you're a Christian and say, yeah, and I'm a Calvinist, which means I'm not preaching perfectionism, baby. My depravity runs deep. And in fact, sin binds and blinds. And the person probably most out of touch with my own sin is me. So if you're able to spot a sin in me, congratulations. Talk to my family and my friends. They'll tell you more. And yet, we fill print, YouTube, podcasts with their admonition to give up religion. In other words, every time a career atheist decides to become a celebrity atheist and admonishes someone to give up religion, they violate their own creed. C.S. Lewis again. Such a doctrine, I have admitted, is not flatly self-contradictory. This is from C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, for those of you who are listening. The naturalist can, if he chooses, brazen it out. He can say, yes, I quite agree that there is no such thing as wrong and right. I admit that no moral judgment can be true or correct and consequently that no one system of morality can be better or worse than any other. Now, the career atheists are not saying that. They are all advocating for one system of morality or another. In fact, a big part of their admonitions to abandon Christianity is for the sake of morality. So every time you hear a naturalist admonish a Christian to give it up for the sake of morality, you simply have to ask, what are you doing? This makes no sense for your worldview. All ideas, again, back to C.S. Lewis. I hope those of you listening can distinguish between my voice and when I'm reading C.S. Lewis. Those of you who are watching on YouTube can see it in print. All ideas of good and evil are hallucinations, shadows cast on the outer world by the impulses which we have been conditioned to feel. And you can hear Dilla Huntie say this to Jordan Peterson. Why don't I, why do I, why do I value life? Because my ancestors valued lives and survived. Why as I, why as someone who has a large degree of Dutch DNA in my body, can I drink milk? Well, because I inherited that from my ancestors. It's the same business. Why do I go bald and go gray young? I inherited that from my ancestors. It's the same business. Morality, hair color, lactose tolerance or Incaut tolerance, it's all the same, baby. Indeed, many naturalists are delighted to say this. Back to C.S. Lewis. But then they must stick to it. And unfortunately, and fortunately, sorry, and fortunately, though inconsistently, most real naturalists do not. A moment after they admitted that good and evil are illusions, you will find them exhorting us to work for prosperity, to educate, to revolutionize, to liquidate, live and die for the good of the human race. And you will hear the today's career atheists do this too. A naturalist like Mr. H.G. Wells spent a long time doing so with passionate eloquence and zeal. But surely this is very odd. Just as all the books about spiral nebulae, atoms and cavemen would really have led you to suppose that the naturalists claimed to have been able to know something, so all the books in which naturalists tell us that we ought to do would really make you believe that they thought some ideas are good, their own, for example, to be somehow preferable to others. For they write with indignation like men proclaiming what is good in itself and announcing what is evil in itself, and not at all like men, recording that they personally like mild beer, but some of them prefer bitter. Yet if the aughts of Mr. Wells and say Franco, that's the dictator of Spain in the middle of the century. Yet if the aughts of Mr. Wells and say Franco are both equally the impulses which nature has conditioned each to have, and both tell us nothing about any objective right or wrong, whence is all the fervor? So what are the impulses of Donald Trump versus the impulses of Sam Harris? Obviously that's me and that's C.S. Lewis. Do they remember while they are writing thus that when they tell us we ought to make a better world, the words ought and better must on their own showing refer to an irrationally conditioned impulse which cannot be true or false any more than a vomit or a yawn? My idea is that sometimes they do forget, and that is their glory. Holding a philosophy which excludes humanity, they yet remain human. At the sight of injustice, they throw all their naturalism to the winds and speak like men and like men of genius. They know far better than they think they know, but at other times I suspect they are trusting in a supposed way of escape from their difficulties. It works or seems to work like this. They say to themselves, ah yes, morality, or bourgeois morality, or conventional morality, or traditional morality, or such addition. Morality is an illusion. Just like choice. But we have found out what modes of behavior will in fact preserve the human race alive. That is the behavior we are pressing you to adopt. Pray don't mistake us for moralists. We are under an entirely new management. Just as if this would help. It would help only if we grant firstly that life is better than death. You can hear echoes of Peterson and De La Honte in that line. And secondly that we ought to care for the lives of our descendants as much as or more than our own. Why would we want to do that? Why that idea? In fact, well let me finish reading Lewis and we'll go back to that idea. And both these are moral judgments which have, like all others, been explained away by naturalism. Aught we to care for the lives of our descendants? Well, we might say, well only those who cared for the lives of their descendants procreated. Well now if you say that caring for the lives of your descendants by virtue of it being useful for passing on genetic material, we would by that definition have to say passing on that gene to others is good. And then we would all maybe also have to say all those people who are not desiring to engage in the kind of practice that passes their genetic material down to the future. And that would be, well you can fill in the gaps there. All those people would therefore be bad. But atheists don't say that. They don't say anything about birth control. In fact, the career atheists I would imagine are quite uniformly pro-choice for abortion. That position makes no sense if their belief of good is something which is defined by passing your genes on to future generations. Well, he said, well, but reason. We have too many people around and so you can see very quickly that this definition of good and bad really breaks down pretty quickly because you really don't have good and bad. Of course, back to C.S. Lewis, having been conditioned by nature in a certain way, we do feel thus about life and about posterity. We do feel thus about life and about posterity. But the naturalists have cured us of mistaking these feelings for insights into what we once called real value. Now that I know that my impulse to serve posterity is just the same kind of thing as my fondness for cheese, now that its transcendental pretensions have been exposed for a sham, do you think I shall pay much attention to it? When it happens to be strong, and it has grown considerably weaker since you explained to me its real nature, I suppose I shall obey it. When it is weak, I shall put my money into cheese. There can be no reason for trying to whip up and encourage one impulse rather than the other. Not now that I know what they both are. The naturalists must not destroy all my reverence for conscience on Monday and then expect me to still venerate it on Tuesday. And that, of course, is the writing of C.S. Lewis. And his point is, well, you've just told us that we don't have choice, that we're running through a program, and without choice, without any real choice, and you'll often hear the career atheists make this knock against Christianity, especially Calvinism, and maybe sometime I'll talk about Calvinism. I've talked a little bit about Calvinism. Anyway, Calvinism, never mind. If there's no choice, there's no more responsibility. So if there's no more responsibility, we might as well stop talking about it. And if there's no more responsibility, why are we admonishing anybody on anything? If there are true naturalists out there, and perhaps there are, we are not hearing from them. And that is absolutely reasonable, because the true moral naturalist would admonish nothing to anyone because it's not worth their energy. And they would be basically, they would be wasting their time in the same way that religious people pray or go to church. So perhaps if you're a naturalist, all the silent naturalists out there are going to be the ones who inherit the earth, and all the noisy career atheists out there are, in fact, a Darwinian dead end, because they are not actually playing out their program. Now we're going to have to, of course, remember Brett Weinstein, who says, no, we have to transcend our programs. But then you have to ask the question, upon what basis might we transcend our program? C.S. Lewis might say, well, there might be reason, and now you're going to have to account for that. And good luck with that. So naturalist moral realism is, in my opinion, thoroughly discredited, and it's been discredited for 100 years. Now, career atheists should understand something being discredited and still surviving, because that, of course, is their claim about religion. What does that lead us to believe about people? People maintain ideas in community. Here's a root, here's a bigger question. Do people maintain ideas in community for reasons? Do people maintain wrong ideas in communities for good reasons? Now we're back into the metaphorical type truth conversation. You're more of a Christian than you wish to admit. Well, you're more of a materialist than you wish to admit. So again, in all of these conversations, what we can expect to hear from Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris is Jordan Peterson basically again and again and again leveling at the atheists. You don't live this way. You can't live this way. In Jordan Peterson's terminology, although I haven't heard him use this, they would be just as much liars as pastors. But now we got to talk about naturalism and truth. Now we have to talk about what Sam Harris and Dilla Huntie could come back to Peterson with. The naturalist ethics problem is an embarrassment and it's the easiest thing to point out, and this is Jordan Peterson's big card against them, and he will play it again and again and again. And it's implicit in Jordan Peterson's first part of his Easter talk where he says, these are Newtonians who see the world as a space for objects. And via Heidegger and being, he would advise that a bigger reality, one which can in fact embed how we actually live, and therefore it's a better or more apt reality, it takes in more of the evidence would be that the world is a forum for action, better than a space for objects. And again his argument for that is basically, so if I have a story that account for my pen and my book, that's a story then what can only account for the pen. But if I can have a story that can account for my pen, my book, and me making videos to talk about Jordan Peterson, that story is probably more real. It encompasses more facts. And the problem with the career atheists is that they tell a story that makes sense of the pen and the book, but they're really weak at making it, telling a story that accounts for YouTube and rationality rules or Matt Dillahunty or Sam Harris. Their story can't account for themselves very well, and it can't account for their action in the world. They are objects in space, which they are, but they are not actors in a world and their story leaves huge parts of it out. And so when Jordan Peterson sang, tagged Susan Blackmore on that, he's basically saying your story can't account for your behavior. You should give it up. Okay, but the naturalist truth problem is less embarrassing or, but the naturalist truth problem is less embarrassing or exposing in practice. This is where, this is why a lot of naturalists, including the debunking of rationality rules, wants to attack Jordan Peterson on truth. This is why Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris bogged down on truth. This is why we are going to have to see if Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris can get beyond truth. So here's the thing. If Sam Harris can't see Jordan Peterson adding himself and saying my world accounts for all three of these things better. Now, for those of you listening, I'm doing funny things into the video. You missed it. We're at something like minute 40. Gosh, this is going to be long. Sam Harris might be able to come back and say, yeah, but there's something about truth that you aren't owning because there's a great deal of objects in space that you treat like I do. We're going to have to talk about that. Oops. Naturalism and truth. While no one can live like a naturalist when it comes to morality, almost everyone lives like a naturalist when it comes to truth. This is why their posture on truth is so persuasive and productive. This is why Jordan Peterson, who I think is simultaneously using pragmatism truth, and let's differentiate that from Darwinist truth, a lot of people would say, yeah, but you're still using a lot of materialist truth too. This is, and Don Hoffman's assertion, not knowing reality is as difficult to live as the naturalist denial of real agency. In other words, Don Hoffman seems to have some impressive arguments, but as Don Hoffman will also suggest, he's having trouble living out what he's telling us is the truth about the world too. Physicists have the same problem. Now, let's look a little bit again at the lineage of modern philosophy. We've got Descartes, I think therefore I am, and we go all the way to Husserl, who in a sense goes all the way back to Descartes, but Descartes would say, I think therefore I am, and before the last 500 years where Charles Taylor says belief in God is no longer axiomatic, René Descartes can say, I believe therefore I am, I know I exist, and of course God exists, we all know that, God wouldn't let me be deluded by that demon that fools me. How can I be sure? God. Well, by the end of the 19th century, Husserl can't say God anymore, and so contemporary naturalist dilemma, my perception is constructed by my brain. We all know deluded people are a reality, are certain of their delusions as we are of reality. How can I be sure? And so now we're getting into the mind matter problem, and in a sense, Descartes didn't deal so much with it because he had God. Now we're beginning to see the division we're going to see from theists who are making these arguments against celebrity career atheists making these arguments. Theists in a sense still have God to have their back. Atheists won't accept that argument. Well, here we have another one of these impasses. They're not going to get beyond this, and in fact neither will Thomas Nagel. I'm not going to play any of this video, but one of my favorite YouTube channels lately has been Philosophy Overdose. I don't know who makes it, but good on you. What they do is they pull up a lot of videos. Some of these seem to be from TV, from university lectures, all about philosophy, and there's some really awesome stuff on that channel. One thing that if you want to get up to speed on phenomenology, Heidegger, existentialism, is check out this video. There's this guy on the right who's got the big glasses, and he usually has a guest on the left side of the couch, and they have wonderful conversations, and the explanations about philosophy are lucid and brief and to the point, and I really love those videos. They look like they used to be on some TV channel, probably in the UK. The UK seems to have better TV than we have here, you know, going all the way back to Monty Python's Flying Circus, but this expert in phenomenology talks about Heidegger and his at-handness, and he makes the point that when I hold the pen and I'm writing, my mind forgets the pen, and there's this at-handness in Heidegger and this experience of being, and so watch the video. I'm not going to go through that, but there's a lot of stuff that's germane to this conversation, and so Heidegger basically says, you know, these philosophers, they forget what it means to live out here in the real world, and we're going to hear someone that said that a couple hundred years before Heidegger. See now, conventional wisdom, the conventional wisdom definition of truth, which I think is so deep, this, which is not as deeply built into choice as we experience, because I would dare bet we acted out, oh boy, what's, who wins the foot race, choice or truth? You tell me in the comments section. Who wins the foot race, choice or truth? Do we know choice? Do we act out choice before we act out truth, or do we act out truth before we act out choice? When we choose on less than certainty, is truth involved? Well, some of us might say, well, now we're talking actually about faith, huh? So conventional wisdom's definition of truth is that which correlates to reality, and you'll hear that with Dillahunty and Slick. Rationality rules debunked Peterson on this because he says, ah, he doesn't have a referential, correlative definition of truth. Is this a green pen? Yes, this is a green pen. Jordan Peterson says we can only know that which contributes to survival, and Jordan Peterson has a pretty powerful argument. Now it messes with us. This might be one of these hacks that Don Hoffman is talking about, because when Jordan Peterson says the H-bomb isn't true, we say, of course the H-bomb is true, we saw it go off. Well, but if the H-bomb destroys us, then in our Darwinian sense it isn't true, and so rationality rules jumps and says, ha, that's not truth. Well, that's another definition of truth. But no, we are only going to allow one definition of truth. That's going to be problematic, and I'm not saying there isn't such a thing as truth, so don't hear me as a relativist, but I am saying that our application of the word is pretty broad, and one of the things that Sam Harris is undoubtedly going to start picking on is in what way would let's pick a story from the Bible that almost no one will argue is historical. Let's pick a parable from Jesus, the parable of the prodigal son. Almost no one will argue that there were a material son and father, a material father and two sons, and that they played out that Jesus is telling us a story about this, about the lost son and the prodigal son and the elder brother and all that stuff. Nobody's going to say that. Is that story true even if there wasn't a father, an elder brother, and the prodigal son? Is there truth in that story? See, right away when I say it that way, is there truth, or are there truths, or so on and so forth? Already we're into the mix of how we use this word truth. If there were a man and his sons, would that make that story more true? Boy, that's a really interesting question and that kind of gets into the question of the resurrection. Is the story less true if Jesus' bones are moldering in some ossuary somewhere in some cave buried around Jerusalem today? Is it story less true? See, I will, I have argued and will continue to argue that the greatest truths are true on every level. They are the truths that, let's not use hierarchy, I would say those are the truths that colonize other truths. And this again, I'm getting into C.S. Lewis's miracles because the reason C.S. Lewis says that reason is because rationality and reason have a supernaturalness, supernaturalist quality to them is because reason colonizes nature. We have employed all the things of nature that go into this pen. Let's pick up something that's way more complicated. We have colonized nature to the degree that we can write a book. That is an extreme level of colonization of nature. And as many people have said, well, if you have enough monkeys with enough typewriters, you can get to Shakespeare. I don't think you can do it in 16 billion years. Okay? I'm still here. Sorry for pause. I'm thinking. Sometimes I think and my watchers get busy and they get noisy on my consciousness and, you know, hey, dudes, I'm making a video here. But I think out loud through these videos. And when I get a thought, it's like, again, maybe if I'm going to insert something into the truth conversation, I would argue that the dominant truths are those which dominate more layers than others. Okay? So then you have the question, how about a bullet to my heart? A bullet to my heart would cease Paul VanderKlay as you know him right now. All right? So is the bullet to my heart a dominant truth? Well, that depends. That depends if Paul VanderKlay is existing on other layers. Now, Paul VanderKlay is existing on a whole bunch of layers because even if tomorrow I get hit by a car, all of these YouTubes will likely remain. My memory with my family will likely remain. The ways that I have impacted this world would likely remain. The impact that my words have had on some of you will likely remain. The impact of my decisions on this world will likely remain and will reverberate on throughout the history of the world to one degree or another. And so does that bullet to my heart actually dominate all the layers that Paul VanderKlay is? I would say no. I would say that's a serious, serious as a heart attack, but this is an example of how I am a multi-layered being. Far more multi-layered than this pen. This pen has tremendous power, but this pen is both a function of colonization, of reason over nature, and an implement of it. And I would argue science is such a thing. So Jordan Peterson on knowing. It concedes to Descartes and Husserl. I can't doubt my own being. I can only know that which enables being and add to that Heidegger's being, which we talked about in a couple videos ago. There is of course an implicit materialism in Darwin here. Okay. And so as we've seen. So someone asked me to debunk a rationality rules video that Western civilization is the product of Christianity. I have a hard time taking that assertion seriously. Now Western civilization is not. Christianity is not the only contributor to Western civilization. I don't think we would have Western civilization without Christianity, period. I just can't see it. But we all, we are living nested within history. That's part of our constructedness. And anyone whose worldview is replete with constructedness as a materialist's worldview has to be a materialist's worldview. I don't understand how you can just begin selectively removing elements of that constructedness. Okay. So let's again assume Darwinian evolution. There is genetic constructedness in me way, way, way, way down. There is, there is, there is environmental constructedness in me. Look at how pasty white my skin is. My ancestors did not live. Well, I probably, I might have, I have some ancestors that were in Africa, but over the last how many thousand years they weren't in Africa. Cause look at how pasty this skin is. Malaria. If you read the book 1493, now there's the book 1491 and 1493, they're two books and they're both worthwhile. If you read 1493, he and many others basically say slavery got going south of the makes and dicks in line because of malaria and because West Africans had a high degree of resistance to malaria. They were imported as slaves, even though they, if malaria weren't in the picture, they indentured servitude would have been a better solution for plantation life, growing tobacco in the Americas. Okay. So what Charles Mann basically presents, he's a journalist, not a historian. He basically presents the argument that what is responsible for slavery in America to be tied to dark skin pigmentation. One motivation may be racism. Certainly is part of the picture, but another mo another reason is malaria. And that's why there's almost always multiple factors. Now with this constructedness, you can't start pulling blocks out like a giant game of chenga. And if you pull Christianity out of the history of the West, you don't have the West. Now you can argue whether it's good or bad, but again, now if you're materialist, you're back with your problem with argumentation, but of course that doesn't stop you. And that's a good thing because the fact that we can argue productively means we share tons of Christian, as it were, DNA in our shared ethical systems. And that's a good thing. So in the same way, Darwin has a ton of materialism built into him already. These adapted creatures are genetic and physical. Now go back to the Metaphysical Club, a book that Peterson recommends again and again. On the Origin of the Species was published on November 24, 1859. The word evolution barely appeared in it. Many scientists by 1859 were evolutionists. That is, they believed that species had not been created once and for all, but had changed over time. And many, many of these evolutionists were theists too. The French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck had advanced his theory of progressive adaptation in his Zoological Philosophy in 1809. The English philosopher Herbert Spencer had published his Evolutionary Theory of Mind and Behavior, Principles of Psychology in 1855. Darwin's book decisively tipped the balance of educated opinion to evolutionism. But even in 1859, more than 19th century evolutionists were, whether they identified themselves as such or not, Lamarckians or Spencerians than Darwinians. The purpose of On the Origin of Species was not to introduce the concept of evolution. It was to debunk the concept of supernatural intelligence, the idea that the universe was the result of an idea. Remember where we're going, mind and matter. If you're a materialist, you say mind is a function of matter, dependent upon matter, derivative of matter, produced by matter. And if we look at history as a long story created by matter, there was no intent involved. It just happened. It was random, accidental, a function of much, much time, much, much space. This is of course where the rare earth or where the fine-tuning argument really attacks this issue and the question about did someone design us? Are we made for something? Can you have meaning without story? Can you have story without mind? And in fact, the entire debate behind language when we use random, perhaps the best definition of the word random, we'll have to look this up in Tyler's book, perhaps the best definition of the word random is without story or intention. Also random means too complicated for us to track or control. Now think about that word random. We've bumped into it before. We'll probably keep bumping into it. More from the Metaphysical Club. For belief that species evolve is not incompatible with a belief of design. This is why I'm not an audiobook reader. For belief that species evolve is not incompatible with a belief in divine creation. Big question, but that's what the book says, so I'm reading it. Or with a belief in intelligent design. Progressive adaptation might simply be the mechanism God has selected to realize his intentions and many Christians believe this. What was radical about On the Origin of Species was not its evolutionism, but its materialism. Darwin wanted to establish something even as most loyal disciples were reluctant to admit. Why? Because of social pressures. We're going to get to social pressures in a little bit again. Which is that species, including human beings, were created by oops, we shouldn't say created by so much design in that word and evolved according to processes that are entirely natural, chance generated and blind. In other words, mind. Mind is at the center of this entire discussion. In order to do this, he had to do more than come up with a new scientific argument. He had to develop what amounted to a new way of thinking. I'm trying to figure out where to break this video up because it's going to be really long. I'm going to play James Twerforce. I've got to stop saying hum. I never know quite. So you know who sent this to me. And if you want me to mention your name in videos, I will. And if you don't want me to mention names in videos, I won't. But I've been having an extended and a very fruitful email conversation with someone. And he keeps saying me really good stuff, stuff I never would have found. And one of these people are James Twerforce. And if you look at James Twerforce's scientific credentials, they are spectacular. James Twerforce is skeptical about abiogenesis. And he has a very long and involved video about that. And at the beginning of the video, he says basically he makes no apology for how scientific this video is. And basically what it is, is a very smart scientist telling us how in some ways the emperor has no clothes when it comes to our understanding of the chemical and biological origins of life. I am not a scientist. The last biology and chemistry classes I had, I had at Eastern Christian High School in North Haldane, New Jersey. Not exactly hotbed of cutting edge science. Let's listen to James Twerforce because he knows something that I don't. And maybe something that you don't. And those of you who know this stuff, chime in the comments. All right. Now, let's just change directions. Let's just give prebiotic chemistry proposals a chance. You say Twer, you're just too hard on. Okay. Let's assume that all the building buildings are going to be in the same building. And let's assume that all the buildings are going to be in the same building. And let's assume that all the building blocks of life, not just the precursors, but all the building blocks could be made in high degrees of purity, including homo chirality, were applicable for all the carbohydrates, all the amino acids, all the nucleic acids, and all the lipids. Let's further assume that they're comfortably stored in cool caves away from the sunlight, away from oxygen, so as to be stable against environmental degradation. Let's further assume that all existed in one corner of the earth, not separated by thousands of kilometers, and not on different planets. All in the same cave. We'll give them that. All in the same cave. All chiral and pure. We'll give it to them. And that they all exist not just in the same square kilometer, but in neighboring pools where they can conveniently somehow selectively mix as needed. Now what? How do they assemble? Without enzymes, the mechanisms do not exist for their assembly. It will not happen, and there is no synthetic chemist that would claim differently. Because to do so would take enormous stretches of conjecturing beyond all that is realized in the field of chemical sciences. You can't do this in chemistry. All right, now let's assemble the dream team. You got good professors here. Let's assemble the dream team. Let's further assume that the world's top 100 synthetic chemists, top 100 biochemists, and top 100 evolutionary biologists combine forces into the limitlessly funded dream team. The dream team has all the carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleic acids stored in freezers in their laboratories. Taking it out of caves, you can use your labs. All earn 100% in anti-merit purity. Even give the team all the reagents they wish. The most advanced laboratories and the analytical facilities, and complete scientific literature, and synthetic and natural yet non-living coupling agents. Now ask the dream team to assemble their building blocks into a living system. Nothing complex, just a single cell. To merely scratch their heads and walk away frustrated. Remember, call me a liar if I'm lying. So let's help the dream team out by providing the polymerized forms, the polypeptides, all the enzymes they desire, the polysaccharides, all the carbohydrates, all hooked up, DNA, RNA, in any sequence. I'll even give you the sequence, whatever sequence you want. You tell me the sequence. You got it. Ask the dream team to assemble those into a living system. The level of sophistication in even the simplest of possible living cells is so chemically complex that we are even more clueless now than with anything discussed regarding prebiotic chemistry or macroevolution. The dream team will not know where to start. Moving all this off earth does not solve the problem because our physical laws are universal. You see the problem for the chemist? Welcome to my world. This is what I'm confronted with every day. And then people will flippantly say, oh, these are made from small organic compounds by the foremost reaction from formaldehyde. Oh, okay. I get it now. So here's a summary. Those that think that scientists understand the details of life's origin are wholly uninformed. Nobody understands. Maybe one day we will. But that day is far from today. So to make ad hominem attacks upon those who are skeptical of the science today can be inhibitory to the progress of science. Would it not be helpful to express to students the massive gaps in our understanding so that they, as the next generation of academic soldiers, could seek to propel the field upon a firmer and possibly a radically different scientific basis, rather than upon increasingly ambitious extrapolations that are entirely acceptable and unacceptable in the practice of chemistry? The basis upon which we as scientists are relying is so shaky that it would be best to openly state the situation for what it is, a mystery. That might catalyze some fresh scientific thought on abiogenesis. I just saw a presentation by a Nobel Prize winner modeling the action of enzymes. And I walked up to him afterward. I said, I'm writing an article entitled, A Biogenesis Nightmare. Where do these enzymes come from? He says, these things are synthesized biologically. I said, no, no. Starting from the beginning, where did these things come from? He says, what did you write in your article? I said, I said it's a mystery. He said, that's exactly what it is. It's a mystery. It's a mystery. It's a mystery. I think it might be a little bit more. Let me see. Why do so few chemists speak up regarding difficulties with origin of life? Few think about it intently. They're just too busy with other things. I mean, we got one synthetic chemist here. The guy's trying to get tenure. I mean, he's got a lot of things to think about. He doesn't think about abiogenesis. How often do you wake up in the morning thinking about abiogenesis? Not very often. Yeah. He's got a lot of other things to do. He's got a lot of emails to answer. They think that someone else understands. That's what they think. They think someone else understands. It's just like you. You think someone else understands. I'm telling you, nobody understands it. It's viewed as the only ball game in town. Okay, we don't have another thing. You shouldn't shoot it down to her. You shouldn't shoot it down until you have an alternative proposal. Oh, really? Is that what we teach our students? Do we teach our students that you can't contest with that mechanism until you have a better one? No. If the mechanism doesn't explain the facts, you discard that mechanism or you change it to fit the facts. That's your proposed mechanism. You don't say until you have something better. No, you just shoot the thing down. And also for fear of being ostracized and fear of reprisals. Some think it's even justified to go after people who won't buy into this. They think it's even justified. They deserve to be disenfranchised. It's a sad state of affairs. When will the scientific community confess to the world that they are clueless on life's origin? That the emperor has no clothes. When will they say this? Here's what Max Planck had to say. We have Planck's constant, the great physicist. Here's what he had to say. A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die. This is what I think is going to happen. I don't think that those that are entrenched and keep saying that there's plenty of understanding when there's not. And when you push them on it, you see not only that there is little, that there is none, none. You're going to have to wait for them to die. Here's the hope that I see though. Science is self-correcting if abiogenesis proposals are correct. So anyway, watch the whole video. If you understand it. I don't understand hardly any of it, but watch the whole video. What does he say? Well, what do we know? What do we know? We have no idea how life started. And you take, take the dream team, put them in a lab, give them, give them, give them all the inorganic stuff that they need and they can't do it. And that's the state of affairs. Don't believe me, believe him, because I don't know anything about this. So where are we? Naturalists don't live out their creed. And we should all be grateful for that. Failure to admit this is just common pride and ego, just like waiting for everyone to believe in God to die. Problem is, this God virus seems really hard to kill. The rider wants the elephant to look good. The elephant believes in herds. The imagined scientific account of abiogenesis is a fiction maintained by the dynamics of community pride. We are afraid to say, we don't know. What system of epistemology do we assume in this pursuit? Now, this is where it gets interesting with the Peterson stuff, because when a scientist uses his or her eyes to see a color, to read a gauge or a printout or stare at a computer monitor or read a paper under light or touch some slime or listen to a colleague or smell or something, what definition of truth is that scientist using? We are assuming the common sense truth of the physical world and the veracity of our senses. Okay, so let's give rationality rules his due. So, this verifiable element of truth is the common sense one that we use. If I put $100 in a drawer in an envelope and I put it in a desk drawer and I come back a day later and I open it up and there are not $100 in there, I assume someone did something, because I assume this common sense view of the material world. Now, we're going to have to come to terms with this, because we've already talked a great deal about the fact that the material world seems stranger than this common sense, but now a pragmatist might come back and say, but our common sense use is good enough. For example, Newtonian mechanics. The Newtonian mechanics break down in very large and very small applications, but Newtonian mechanics is good enough. This is where the pragmatists come in. Okay, but which definition of truth are we using? See, this is where, in a sense, Peterson is using multiple definitions of truth and it might be cumbersome, but in conversations with the materialist, it might be helpful to note when they're all using which definition of truth. Part of the difficulty is, part of the argument is the materialist keeps saying there's only one kind of truth and everybody else kind of says, well, I don't know if that's true. That doesn't seem true at all. Jordan Peterson on knowing. We can't know if the H-bomb is true. Career atheists freak out. This violates their referential definition of true and they say, this is the only kind of true there is. Okay, that's part of the problem here. It illustrates Peterson's Darwinian epistemology. That which is true contributes to reality. So this is going to be something that Peterson and Sam Harris may not be able to get beyond in their conversation. But can you live like Jordan Peterson's other definitions of truth? And maybe this is where pragmatism is going to bail him out because here's the thing. Is Jordan Peterson's knowledge of his wife true? Now, I just pulled this picture off the internet. I think it's a lovely picture. These two seem to have a wonderful marriage. They've been married probably at least 30 years. His wife travels with him everywhere he goes. I think she goes to the gym with him because look at that arm. This woman is, you know, she's putting in the reps here. She's getting those gains. Peterson better watch out. I think his arm is smaller than hers. And I mean that in a good way. Anyway, now I mean that in a good way for her. Anyway, what kind of knowledge does Jordan Peterson have about his wife? It's all this common sense knowledge that we have. This kind of truth that rationality rule says is the only kind of truth. And we would say this is a valid kind of truth. This is our working kind of truth. This is our common sense definition of truth. And Jordan Peterson needs that common sense definition of truth to navigate his world, as do all of the scientists. And so now we kind of have this double bind. Naturalists can't live every day in their moral worldview. There's no ethics or morality without choice. But it's hard to see how Jordan Peterson can live every day with his Darwinian truth. That truth doesn't seem to scale down to us just like we have problems with other kinds of let's say quantum mechanics scaling up to us. There's a scale issue here. Reality is really complicated. And so part of what's going on in these conversations is that it's really easy for us. There's a double bind. It's really easy for us to listen to the materials and say, yeah, you don't live that way in terms of moral realism. But it's really easy for us to listen to Jordan Peterson talk about Darwinian truth and say, yeah, you don't really live that way either. So who to believe? And our watchers, I think, are listening on all these levels. Well, why? Again, philosophy overview. Found some really cool lectures by this guy out of Oxford. Now, when I was a lowly student at Calvin College taking my fifth year because I was so bad at declaring a major, I still had to take more Greek. I took a class with Nick Waltersdorf and we used this textbook which was edited by Alvin Planteca and Nick Waltersdorf in Faith and Rationality. And a big part of this class I had with Nick Waltersdorf was on Thomas Reid. And so I was doing all this stuff. I haven't thought about Thomas Reid for years. And somewhere in the back of my mind, Scottish common sense realism. That might be germane to this whole thing. Some of those little memory watchers were pinging me. And so in the car yesterday, I just said, I can't say, hey, Google, because my phone will light up. I said, Google, find me a YouTube on Thomas Reid. This was the first guy he pulled up. Listen to this. Responsibly. Now, how are we to understand the nature of Reid's critique? Well, first, it's methodological. This is Reid's critique of David Hume. And it's methodological. Now, pay attention here, because Peterson's use of truth and the truth he does is primarily, I mean, not primarily, maybe it's most of his entire life, 99% of his life. But it's, this is a methodological question. He is satisfied that philosophers who have come to defend what he calls the ideal theory have never adduced an iota of proof in its behalf. The ideal theory is what he calls David Hume's idea that we don't have direct interaction with elements in the world, but we're having direct interaction with the ideas. They have introspected on whatever it is is taking place, as far as they can tell, in their own minds. And each of them individually has then advanced a theory that is supposed to capture the operation of the human mind in all of the affairs of life, wherever mental life is found, in whatever culture, presumably any age group, under any condition of health or disease, short of madness. And this is a very grandiose way of proceeding. And on Reed's account, Reed being a strict Newtonian and Baconian, this is simply not the way science is done. This is what has always given philosophy a bad name. People sitting around spinning off conjectures and theories with absolutely no access to methods by which to determine in a systematic and scientific way whether the theory is grounded or groundless. So part of the critique is methodological. You see that very early in chapter six. The focus of your reading should be on chapter six of the inquiry, the chapter on seeing. He says, if we pay proper attention to how our mind operates in our use of this faculty, we shall become aware that the visible appearance of objects is something we hardly ever notice. That is, if you were setting out to test the ideal theory, remember the ideal theory is generally is offering, is stipulating that the impressions formed by an external stimulus constitute that level of appearance at which you are aware of things. Nobody pays attention to this. I shall get to this a little later in lecture. For example, would you look up here right now? You see this, don't you? But the minute I do this, the pattern of visual stimulation is profoundly altered. And if I do this, it is incredibly altered. And in fact, with every breath I take and every breath you take, the distance between us changes. And the projection on the retina changes. There will be changes due to cloudy days, changes due to time of day, changes due to whether we've just eaten or haven't eaten yet, and on and on. Changes when we first get up in the morning, changes very late at night. How is it that we have a stability, a recurrence, a repeatability, a constant identification of stimuli as what they are, not withstanding these profound changes at the level of appearances, so to speak, or sensory impressions, of which we take no note at all. So that's going to be something that recurs within the chapter of seeing. So as Reed says, wise men now agree, or ought to, that there's only one route to knowledge of nature's works, namely the path of observation and experiment. We have built into us a strong propensity for bringing particular facts and observations under general rules and applying such general rules to explain other effects or to show how to produce them. He goes on to say that the method is very much like the method used by ordinary people when they're attempting to satisfy certain objectives and goals. Quote, this intellectual process is familiar to every human creature in the common affairs of life and it is the only one by which any real discoveries in philosophy can be made. Conjectures and theories are created by men and will always be found to be very unlike the things created by God or by nature. Reed interchangeably uses God, the author of our being, the mint of nature, etc. It's quite clear what he's getting at. He labors under what Professor Dawkins would call the God delusion, I guess. Now Reed's own background gives him an authoritative position with just how it is science proceeds. On his mother's side he was a Gregory. Gregory was one of the successors to the Lucasian professorship of mathematics at Cambridge. Reed was an expert in optics. He was original in his thinking in mathematics and he was tied in with a Scottish educational scheme that only fairly recently had abandoned what was called the regenting system. I don't know if that's a term familiar to you, the regenting system. Under the regenting system when students arrived at university they would be assigned a tutor, a regent, who for their entire undergraduate years, their preparatory years, would teach them every subject. So the regent would teach, yes, Latin and Greek and mathematics and astronomy and rhetoric and philosophy, etc. Now they gave it up. Sooner or later I guess you think you have to. Why? Well advances in all of these fields having been considerable, particularly from the 17th century on, the thought was that nobody could have the kind of commanding knowledge necessary to teach all those subjects over a course of years. But Reed himself was part of that cadre, prepared to do that and his grounding in the sciences was expert, highly developed and known to be. We've now seen published a fair amount of his previously unpublished papers. The first huge collection of unpublished papers by Reed were held at Aberdeen on microfilm as part of what was called the Birkwood collection and when it came out I had an opportunity to go through every page of it. It is quite remarkable, particularly the fraction of the Birkwood papers devoted to physics, optics and mathematics and astronomy, general solutions to the problem of the aberration, I mean highly sophisticated solutions to astronomical problems and consequence. So Reed is not simply tooting a horn, he's not wagging a finger. He has a scientific cast of mind shaped by a close and long study of the sciences and is persuaded that the methods advocated by Bacon and by Newton are simply not followed by philosophers who nonetheless make all sorts of claims about our knowledge of the external world and the nature of the external world without ever getting out of an armchair. And when they get out of an armchair what is it they discover? Well Reed says they discover what Hume discovers when he got out of his armchair. The first thing we learn in the treatise when Hume is finished discussing causation, which I shall take up later in this term, is that of course when he goes out into the world he thinks the way everyone else does, that it's only in the privacy of his study that he realizes that there are these conundrums associated with the concept of causation. What does Reed say about that? He says we see then that Mr. Hume's philosophy is very much like a hobby horse, which a man when he is ill can keep at home with him and ride to his contentment. But just in case he should bring it into the exchange, bring it into the marketplace, his friends would quickly impanel a jury and confiscate his estates and have the solicitude never to leave him alone. The point being that a skeptical position on something as fundamental as causation puts you at peril. And now the question is whether the dictates of common sense which are serviceable throughout the animal economy are to be abandoned on the basis of a conjecture that has no more authority associated with it, certainly no observational or scientific authority, no more authority than the particular argument advanced by a particular conjecturer. So I say again there is this critique of method. And then not only is the method an introspective one, but rather bravely the introspective proceeds to generalize his results to nothing less than the entire human population. As Reed says, no man has ever been able to sell his own product. No man has ever been able to set out for us distinctly and methodically all the operations of the thinking principle within himself. But if some philosopher did achieve this feat, this would reveal only the anatomy of one particular subject. And if applied to human nature in general, it would be both incomplete and wrong. For you don't have to think very hard to realize that the differences amongst human minds are greater than the differences amongst any other beings that we regard as belonging to the same species. We differ from each other more than cats differ from each other, he wants to say. In other words, the n equals one model is simply inapplicable in a domain like this. All right, who's the culprit then? Well, you can go all the way back to the ancients. Reed finds the most influential of the current culprits being Descartes. And about Descartes' position, he says this. Descartes wants us to think that he got out of all this craziness through this logical argument, cogito, ergo, sum. But obviously, he was in his right mind all the time and never seriously doubted his own existence. That argument doesn't prove that his existence, it takes it for granted. I am thinking, he says, therefore I am. And isn't it just as good reasoning to say, I am sleeping, therefore I am. Or I'm doing nothing, therefore I am. If a body moves, it must exist, no doubt. But if it is at rest, it must exist then too. Furthermore, supposing it has been proved that my thought and my consciousness must be had by something and consequently that I exist, how do I know that all the series of thoughts that I remember belong to one subject and that the eye of this moment is the very same individual eye of yesterday and of times past? Descartes didn't see fit to start this doubt, but Locke did. He's getting to lock on personal identity. And in order to resolve it, he solemnly laid it down that personal identity consists in consciousness. That is, if you are conscious that you did X a year ago, this consciousness makes you the very same person that did X. And Reed says this is transparently preposterous. Madhouses all over the world are filled with people who will tell you to a moral certainty battles they lost a year ago and duels in which they suffered mortal death, etc. Some of them will have hands inside their jackets lamenting their sad fate in Belgium at the Battle of Waterloo and wanting to know where their three-cornered hat went. The fact that you recall having done something surely cannot be the basis upon which you've established that you did it. Now all of this speculation on Reed's account finally leads to solipsism. As he says, Descartes, Malebranche, and Locke have all used their talents and skill to prove the existence of a material world, but with very little success. For these three great men with the best goodwill have not been able to draw from all the treasures of philosophy one argument that is fit to convince a thinking person of the existence of anything other than himself. This is an anticipation of something we find in Kant's Prolegonema and in the second edition of the first Critique of Pure Reason. What does Kant say? The continuing scandal in philosophy is that philosophers have been unable to establish the reality of the external world. This is precisely what this mediational ideal theory leads to. You simply do not have epistemic resources to get outside the narrow boundaries of your own conscious life. So for all you know there isn't anything external to that, do you see? And Reed's point in defending common sense precepts is if that's where philosophy wants to place its bets against the common sense understandings of the human race since a time out of memory then they are on a collision course and the consequence of this is that the most thinking parts of the world will come to regard philosophy as simply ridiculous. So he is at much and when he uses philosophy he's talking about essentially a natural science approach to addressing problems. So what is the real theory finally? It's the ideal theory, the theory that's central to David Hume's copy principle and so we can ask is it really the case that every simple idea is the copy of a simple impression or more generally that the contents of thought are derived from impressions rather than from the facts of the external world. The culprit you see is a radical empiricism that begins not with the nature of actual creatures but with a theory. The nature of actual creatures is such that it requires us to understand what kind of adaptive mechanisms they have. If you think I'm reading a kind of Darwinian element into Reed's account it's there. When Reed talks about the lowly caterpillar that crawls across a thousand leaves that crawls across a thousand leaves until it finds the one that's right for its diet. Do you think the caterpillar learned that? There would be no caterpillars for the amount of time it would take to learn which leaf is the right leaf and who's doing the teaching. Suppose you just happen to come across a bad run of leaves. Goodbye caterpillar. So nature must fit creatures out with a readier means of adapting to the demands of the environment. It can't all be experiential. When Locke says I answer in a word from experience this simply won't work. You know there's almost an anticipation of oh my goodness am I going to say this name all right with apologies. There's an anticipation of Freud in some of this. All right I'll leave it there and if you want to watch the whole video you certainly can and maybe that Freud is a little teaser. So he goes into Thomas Reed and Thomas Reed basically begins to say that you know philosophers almost can't be serious and nobody can take them seriously. And so what we sort of have here with Jordan Peterson and the career atheist is that there are elements of both of their arguments that no one can take seriously. Naturalists can't live out their theory. They default to common sense practice of acting like people that have choice and holding them accountable to their choices. Peterson pulls that on them all the time and it'll do it again and again on Scott Harris. Darwinian truth is unworkable between people in the lab in a social research project. It's Darwinian's truth of only that which contributes to survival is true. Jordan Peterson must default to common sense notions of verification at the physical level and this is what gives the career atheists the strength of their position. When people when the career atheists are out there saying look pen no pen pen no pen. This is how truth works. God I don't see one so there it's a story. When Harari sits down and meditates he tries to get rid of all story. Well we're gonna have to talk at some point I'm probably gonna talk more about Harari interesting cat but what are the consequences of getting rid of this story. So in a sense both Peterson and the career atheists are stuck living with legacy behaviors. Legacy mechanisms in Peterson's terms might be legacy circuits that they have received up through history that they can't get rid of. Career atheists can't live without choice. They can't really live as determinists. Jordan Peterson's Darwinian truth maybe he can default to some some pragmatic truth but I think for the most part he lives like all the rest of us with kind of this common sense physical layer verification one-to-one correspondence notion of truth. But again there are limits to that that just like say Newtonian mechanics will get you so far and what's difficult is to actually have conversations where we're having conversations at multiple different layers and we're not being terribly intentional at knowing what layer we're talking about and this is where truth and choice all get flipped around and in the context of a conversation where you've got a whole audience behind you and everybody's looking about who wins boiling it down to a tiny binary. Well of course almost nothing's no one's going to be satisfied in that. We've got armchairs and hobby horses. The materialists say we are moist assassin robots who must undo our programming. Is there other programming? Where does this programming come from? Who must exercise superstition from our lives get rid of it. Oh okay we're gonna get rid of story and but must is an illusion so you cannot do this now Peterson we can only know what with that which promotes survival how long of us how long will we live and this is part of the dilemma of Peterson's approach is that he is is in a sense saying the stuff we are playing with takes hundred maybe thousands of years to know the ramifications of and none of us are alive to see it and in a sense his argument therefore is you must look back and the only way to orient your future will be be looking behind you and in that way Peterson is very much an ancient person. This is not very popular because we imagine we must only look forward I went to a high school graduation heard all they trotted out all the usual tropes Steve Jobs at Stanford you know you are yourself don't listen to anyone but why are you talking to them be your own person don't let anyone tell you what to do you've just had them for four years schools are in a sense these little these little concentration camps where you try to wring all the expression out of students and channel it into certain preferred realms and now you tell them go out and don't listen to anybody what do you what are you demanding anarchism of them you didn't tolerate anarchy when they were in school they had to make lines they had to walk around but now they act as if there's no such thing as moral knowledge moral realism is a fantasy look for your own secret inner self and live that out doesn't anybody listen to what we say no why because we're chattering riders and we look at the elephants for Jordan Peterson we can only know that which promotes survival well how long do we have to figure this out who of us lives long enough to know such a thing shall we stop doing anything until we have such knowledge no you can't and that's in a sense where pragmatism comes in i gotta act now i might not know truth i'm gonna do a quick cost benefit analysis my elephant beneath me is really good at that kind of thinking and he's gonna choose and the rider's gonna make up a story that says i did it on purpose why Jordan Peterson is important he is confronting the eight the career atheist that their project died a hundred years ago and they haven't given it up even worse their assumption continues to govern the intelligentsia why because this is a method this is a methodological reality about how scientists do their work and this is the only game in town and even if that first class chemist says i'm in agreement with the noble laureates life is a mystery we have no idea how it started zero zilch none we're all going to stand around and say that the emperor has clothes because the thought of not doing that shakes us to the bones naturalism is spent and we have no idea how to reintegrate mind into the conversation without theism this is why Jordan Peterson's even god and scare quotes is so terrifying to them they're really nervous about him well Peterson is not alone and i would love him for him for him to get up on stage and say Thomas Nagel but he probably won't i know many of you think well Paul you sir you you know now i had one conversation with Jordan Peterson that's it he doesn't call me up and ask my advice he doesn't say what should i talk to Sam Harris about doesn't do any of those things remember status hierarchies these things matter he doesn't have time to watch two-hour videos of some pastor in Sacramento yammering on and just because you like to watch them thank you Nagel comes in and Nagel basically is an honest skeptic atheist who comes in and he writes this book mind and cosmos why the materialist neo-darwinian concept of nature is almost certainly false it doesn't work why we've reached a dead end that's what the chemist says it's a dead end well maybe we'll keep working at it we should keep working at it but it doesn't help if we keep saying oh we know how this happens and then you get to a certain level in your career and you decide you discover we have no idea how this happens so keep working at figuring it out so Nagel comes around and says materialism is spent it's it's spent it's corrupt it's bankrupt it should be gotten rid of the reason just like with chemicals in life the reason we don't get rid of it is we don't want to look bad the chattering riders are worried about how the elephant looks my skepticism now i'm reading Thomas Nagel from mind and cosmos my skepticism is not based on religious belief or on any belief in any definite alternative it is just a belief that the scientific the available scientific evidence in spite of the consensus of scientific opinion all of this leftover baconianism and newtonianism that is still in the god part has been taken out but the the common sense realism is still in there along with the common sense yeah i have choice is in there it is just a bit it it is just a belief that the available scientific evidence in spite of the consensus of scientific opinion does not in this matter rationally require us to subordinate the incredulity of common sense that is especially true with regard to the origin of life the world is an astonishing place and the idea that we have in our possession the basic tools needed to understand it is no more credible than it was in Aristotle's day boom progress we haven't progressed since Aristotle well we certainly know more but something's gonna miss that it has produced you and me and the rest of us is the most astonishing thing about it if contemporary research in molecular biology leaves open the possibility of legitimate doubts about a fully mechanistic account of the origin and evolution of life dependent only on the laws of chemistry and physics this can combine with the failure of psychophysical reductionism to suggest that principles of a different kind are also at work in the history of nature principles of the growth of order that are in their logical form teleological rather than mechanistic i realize that such doubts will strike many people as outrageous but that is because almost everyone in our secular culture has been brow beaten into regarding the reductive sign the reductive research program as sacrosanct it is the church of science not Scientology on the ground that anything else would not be science it is scientism the great advances in the physical and biological sciences were made possible by excluding the mind from the philosophical world this is exactly what Peterson says in many of his videos this approach this methodological approach has been enormously productive i'm speaking i'm not reading Thomas Nagel Thomas Nagel basically says it's mind time to bring the mind back to the physical world and to bring the mind back in which is exactly Peterson's point this has permitted a quantitative understanding of the world expressed in timeless mathematically formulated physical laws these are now again i'm i should when i'm quoting what i'm not quoting it's going to be hard for those of you only listening but at some point it will be necessary to make a new start on a more comprehensive understanding that includes the mind this is what Thomas Nagel says and it's essentially what Jordan Peterson says we have worked a process with a methodology that has been enormously productive for doing things in the world now Peterson would say in terms of his Darwinian truth we don't know if what we are doing is suicidal as a species and we had better be careful because we're a pretty dangerous species and we're getting more dangerous rather than less again i'm going to read this paragraph from Thomas Nagel these two sentences the great advances in the physical and biological sciences were made possible by excluding the mind from the physical world this has permitted a quantitative understanding of that world expressed in timeless mathematically formulated physical laws but at some point it will be necessary to make a new start at a more comprehensive understanding that includes the mind in other words he's saying to all of his colleagues Dan Dennett Richard Dawkins Sam Harris you cannot keep playing this game it's time to stop if we can't include the mind we're just keep bumping into this dead end well why can our gains survive that we had from the mind mind as a development of life must be included as the most recent stage of this long cosmological history and its appearance i believe casts a shadow back over the entire process and the constituents and principles on which the process depends think about that the question is whether we can integrate this perspective with that of the physical sciences as they have been developed for a mindless universe the understanding of mind cannot be contaminated within the personal point of view since mind is a product of a partly physical process but by the same token the separateness of physical science and its claims to completeness has to end in the long run we can't keep ignoring the mind matter problem and that poses the question to what extent will the reductive form that is so central to contemporary physical science survive the transformation if physics and chemistry cannot fully account for life and consciousness how will their immense body of truth be combined with other elements in an expanded conception of the natural order that can be a con that can accommodate those things now why would he say something like that well i would encourage you to go back and pick up a 200 year old science book and read it think about thomas reed talking about god thinking think about newton talking about god thinking about think about bacon talking about god now however what however you discern the quality of their christian morality god was built into that deep even decart and so this process and philosophy has basically been an exorcism to try to get rid of god and thomas nagel is saying basically it hasn't worked well what does that mean the theists have never left us why god's always been with them we're trying to get rid of god the theists keep him around well why do the theists keep him around he's really handy well why is he really handy he's really handy for all kinds of things he's handy in terms of morality because we have a should and an ought and it's built into the god system he's handy because of the truth this common sense truth works for christian philosophers and christian scientists and they don't do circles about can i believe this it's it's still working for them because god is still in the picture and in a sense what nagel is saying is that philosophy is in a blind is in a corner and science may be in jeopardy because we can't figure out how to get rid of dot god and we're going to have to replace them in other words we've been trying to get off of heroin and the dts are threatening our life maybe god is methadone we need methadone something other than god or we're cooked that's essentially what he's saying whatever one may think about the possibility of a designer the prevailing doctrine that the appearance of life from dead matter and its dead matter and its evolution through accidental mutation and natural selection to its present form has involved nothing but the operation of physical law cannot be regarded as unassailable it is an assumption governing the scientific project rather than a well-confirmed scientific hypothesis in other words you're still that you're still but you're still betting on miracles you're betting on the miracle of the big bang you're betting on the miracle of life because you don't have an answer for those and you've been going for a few hundred years without the answer for it and it you're at a dead end it's time to stop i confess to an ungoverned assumption of my own it is not finding and not finding it possible to regard the design alternative as a real option in other words he doesn't opt for god i lack the census divinitatis why does he get that he gets that from alvin plantiga where does alvin plantiga get the census divinitatis from john calvin i lack the census divinitatis that enables indeed impels so many people to see in the world the expression of divine purpose as naturally as they see a smiling face the expression of human feelings in other words christiancy meaning christiancy purpose why is jordan peterson the gateway drug to christianity because he is giving them a taste of meaning and they're getting the taste here and they look over at church and say gosh that place is lit up with meaning they see meaning all over the place but what about my pride what about my reputation again i'm you can you can tell by my voice when i'm reading and when i'm not back to reading so my speculation about the alternative to physics as a theory of everything do not invoke a transcendent being but tend towards complications to the imminent character of the natural order that would also be a more unified explanation than the design hypothesis i disagree with the defenders of intelligent design and their assumption one which they share with their opponents that the only naturalistic alternative is a reductionistic theory based on physical laws of type with which we are familiar nevertheless i believe the defenders of intelligent design deserve our gratitude for challenging a scientific worldview that owes some of the passion displayed by its adherence precisely to the fact that it is thought to be that it is thought to liberate us from religion in other words motivation thomas nagle looks at his atheist colleagues and says come on people be honest there's real reasons you don't want there to be a god you don't want to sing oh be careful little eyes what you see for the father from is looking down in love ah we're not sure about him we don't we don't trust him it is assumed not only that the natural order is intelligible that it but that its intelligibility has a certain form being found in the simplest and most unified physical laws governing the simplest and fewest elements from which all else follows this is the assumption of these processes that is what scientific optimists mean by a theory of everything so long as the basic laws are not themselves necessary truths the question remains why those laws hold but perhaps part of the appeal of this conception is that if the laws are simple enough we can come to rest with them and be content to say that this is just how things are noticed come to rest with them and be content are emotional terms we are not doing this as moist robots we are not doing this as non-thinking computers we are doing this as people we are nested in personhood after all again back to the book what is the alternative that is really my question thomas nagel says i want an alternative to god and i want an alternative to naturalism because naturalism is spent the implausibility of the reductive program that is needed to defend the completeness of this kind of naturalism provides a reason for trying to think of alternatives alternatives that have mind meaning and value as fundamental as space matter and space time and an account of what there is in other words again the naturalists say i know a book i know a pen but the naturalists really can't come to terms with what's in the book or what's in my head or because i am much more a merger of story and matter than this book me i have choice i am not a book i am not a robot and to say that i am go ahead and say it the minute you try to contradict me you betray your beliefs just as much as if i did something horrendously unchristian right now i know there are christians out there thinking what i'm doing is horrendously unchristian every now and then you can find them in the comment section but this is the game the fundamental elements and laws of physics and chemistry have been inferred these are supposedly dilahanty's axioms they have been inferred to explain the behavior of the inanimate world and the inferences keep wobbling if shell drake is correct that the constants keep changing something more is needed to explain how there can be consciousness thinking creatures whose bodies and brains are composed oops i guess i missed the sentence at the other bounds of the world encompassing everything in it including the law governing natural order revealed by science he is in place some kind of mind or intention which is responsible for both the physical and the mental character of the universe in other words peterson's argument that if you can explain more things if you can both explain the book and the pen and not just my physiology but my behavior you have dominating colonizing truth in other words you can stop my body with a bullet or a heart attack or a car accident but i've already gone viral out into the world now i may not be a very big virus but i've already made ripples in the pond and unless your theory can really account for that your theory is weak and will be colonized prepare to be assimilated so long as the divine mind just has to be accepted as a stopping point in the pursuit of understanding it leaves the process incomplete and this is the frustration just as the purely descriptive materialist account does mago looks at both and says they're dead ends why is it so frustrating when you say okay what caused the big bang materials something or i was listening to the the unbelievable in the in the podcast prior to the the jordan peterson one and nothing rolled over into something yeah right that's poetic what caused the big bang god it all ends with god doesn't it and again i understand people atheists frustrated that he can't get behind him well you can't get behind either well what might that suggest that there are limits here's what it really suggests there are limits to us didn't we know there are limits to us we have had pretensions all along that there are not limits to us regenesis 3 we've always wanted to be god and in fact this entire project is in search of trying to become that back to nagel for either materialistic or theistic explanation to provide a complete understanding of the world it would have to be the case that either laws of physics or existence and properties of god and therefore if his creation cannot conceivably be other than what they are physicists do not typically believe the former but atheists tend to believe the but theists tend to believe the latter this doesn't mean that a theistic view must be deterministic god's essential nature may lead him to create probabilistic laws probability pragmatism and beings with free will whose actions are explained as free choices but some kind of divine intervention would underpin the totality it's called providence it's called miracles it's what people have believed from the start it's what the majority of the world has always believed and i don't think the belief is going away anytime soon the interest in theism even to an atheist one person made a comment to me why do all the atheists keep talking about religion why can't they leave it alone well the career atheist can't leave it alone why the interest of theism even to an atheist is that it tries to explain in another way what does not seem to be capable of explanation by physical science the inadequacy of the naturalistic and reductionistic world picture seem to me to be real says thomas nagel there are things that science as presently conceived does not help us understand and which we can see from the internal features of physical science that is not going to explain they seem to call for a more uncompromising mentalistic or even normative form of understanding theism embraces that conclusion by attributing the mental phenomena found within the world to the working of a comprehensive mental source of which they are miniature versions thomas nagel i'll continue however i do not find theism any more credible than materialism as a comprehensive worldview nagel doesn't believe it my interest is in the territory between them i believe that these two radically opposed conceptions of ultimate intelligibility conceptions of ultimate intelligibility cannot exhaust the possibilities there must be more layers all explanations come to an end somewhere both theism and materialism say that at the ultimate say that at the ultimate level there is one form of understanding but would an alternative secular conception be possible that acknowledges mind and all that it implies not as the expression of divine intention but as a fundamental principle of nature along with physical law if you look again at transliminal 2015 peterson says but by the time we know this our idea of matter will be different has peterson been reading nagel i'd really love to know that if i talk to him again i first asked about c.s lewis and i asked him about institutions maybe i'm gonna have to ask him about when i see him i'm gonna see him june 27 and shake his hand i can say hi niceties have you read thomas nagel maybe i should buy a copy and put it in his hand even then will it get through who knows could it take the form of a unified conception of the natural order even if it tries to accommodate a richer set of materials than the austere elements of mathematical physics but let me first say a bit more for dialectical purposes about the opposition between theism and materialism materialist naturalism and what is lacking in each of them this is this complaint about about theism structurally it is still a cartesian ideal but with the leading role played by evolutionary theory instead of by an a priori demonstration of denying divine benevolence oops sorry he's talking about materialism but i agree with alvin plantiga that unlike divine benevolence the application of evolutionary theory to the understanding of our own cognitive capacities should undermine though it need not completely destroy our confidence in them well don hoffman's gonna have his say mechanisms of belief formation that have selective advantage in everyday struggle for existence do not warrant our confidence in the construction of theoretical accounts of the world as a whole i think the evolutionary hypothesis would imply that though our cognitive capacities could be reliable we do not have the kind of reason to rely on them that we ordinarily take ourselves to have and using them directly as we do in science in other words he sees the different levels of the common sense that we rely on every day when we do science and particularly it does not explain why we are justified in relying on them to correct other cognitive cognitive dispositions that lead us astray in other words this is slick talking to lehanty and saying you cannot correlate to correct because if the correlation is done in the same brain it too has knows no difference between a yaw and a vomit the evolutionary story leaves the authority of reason in a much weaker position unless of course your c.s lewis and have a supernatural tie into it that's me that nago this is even more clearly true of our moral and other normative capacities if this is true of trying to figure out a pen it's really true about morality i agree with sharon street that an evolutionary self-understanding would almost certainly require us to give up our moral realism the natural conviction that our moral judgments are true or false independent of our beliefs evolutionary naturalism implies that we shouldn't take any of our convictions seriously including the scientific picture on which evolutionary naturalism itself depends c.s lewis came to that conclusion in the 1940s did whitehead come to that conclusion even earlier why is jordan peterson important there are some dead ends right now that we don't like to own up to there's a popular front of optimism and confidence the riders like to make the elephant look good this is a non-religious eschatological propaganda we have some working theories that have yielded benefits but we don't know how much and even whether or not they can last thomas nagel has doubts what we can pull into the next attempt to construct our world without god this gets really interesting in the light of the whole jordan peterson thing why why have we gotten here with jordan peterson jordan peterson is saying the next stage that our democracies seem to be in is an anti-scientific dogma we've got the secret dogma we've got the secret sacred self which is fundamentally religious and if we embrace that if we deny let's say the relationship between biological sex and gender we're going to lose science is jordan peterson talking and seeing as are his watchers seeing some of what nagel is talking about 50 years 50 years from now will thomas nagel be considered a prophet i think what's happening is we've got some working theories oh no no cortana oh cortana sorry those of you watching the video know what happened we have some working theories that have yielded benefits but we don't know so much and we don't know what we'll save and peterson is making this popular i looked at thomas nagel a few years ago didn't click now because i'm working through the jordan peterson stuff reworking through the lewis stuff looking at sam harris looking at all the various aspects of this i'm starting to see what nagel is saying now of course i've always been on a theist side so i didn't have all the angst on the other side but i understand what nagel is saying why so why will there be so little satisfaction from the jordan peterson sam harris conversations well is there going to be a winner well no why for the same reasons that in terms of the the abiotic genesis of life is an emperor with no clothes on and the fact that materialism philosophically has been in rough shape for a long time but scientists won't give it up because it's seems too darn useful for doing their everyday work at least if you don't have god backing you up so little satisfaction because what's governing here are people we are back to peterson's nests we are back to okay so again if if you're not listening if you're only listening i've got the book and the pen up in front of the screen objects in space peterson says forum for action objects in space get my camera to focus forum for action close up of my forehead why so little satisfaction the questions are hard really hard and maybe beyond us and something in terms of our ego in terms of our riders we don't like that we really don't like that thought we see what we want remember we become what we worship we are small weak dominated by the story that is our self and that is the center of our tiny little lives and the vast majority of human beings will never think any of these thoughts except armchairs and psychologists sitting in armchairs because if they took their hobby horses out into the marketplace and a jury would take away all their property thomas reed our self can't be divorced from our context especially our communities we're not going to play chenga and try to pull christianity out from the bottom and imagine nothing will fall this is from a sermon tim keller preached in february 2012 thirdly you must know you are not objective this should be obvious but we don't like thinking it our riders and our culture like to imagine themselves objective if you don't know what you believe about if you don't know what you believe about christianity this isn't a sermon i'll take i'll take my life in my hands here because i'm in new york city please don't think you're objective you can't be objective aldous huxley later in his life was doing some sort of autobiographical stuff in a book called ends and means if you think i've read a lot listen to tim keller that dude that dude has read far more than i ever will he says something so intriguing he basically says when he was in college i realized i didn't want there to be a god i wanted atheism to be true i wanted life to be meaningless because then i could do whatever i wanted he admits it this is how i found thomas nagel through tim keller thomas nagel philosopher prominent down here in nyu now retired i believe in one of his books says something astoundingly honest he says belief in god makes people nervous it's the fear of religion in now to quote now quoting nagel in speaking of the fear of religion i don't mean to refer to the entirely reasonable hostility he has by the way towards established religion and religious institutions in virtue of their objectionable moral doctrine again see it's those who don't have a morality that are pointing at the morality of christians and saying you should give your christianity up because of our materialist morality but if you watch this whole video you know that is the weakest part and nagel himself in his later book says we can't have a hope for moral realism based on materialism but in his earlier book he says i object to their i object to their their morality in other words he says i don't like church i don't like a lot of religion i have a right to um i have a right to do whatever he wants he doesn't he's just like the rest of the atheists been brought up and inculturated into christianity and hallelujah we're all better and worse than we pretend and realize probably then he says i am talking instead of i am talking instead of something much deeper in all of us namely the fear of religion itself i speak from experience again this is thomas nagel being strongly subject to this fear myself i want atheism to be true and i am made uneasy by the fact that some of the most intelligent and well-informed people i know are religious believers it isn't just that i don't believe in god and naturally hope that i'm right in my belief it's that i hope there is no god i don't want there to be a god i don't want the universe to be like that my guess is that this cosmic authority problem is not rare i am curious whether there is anyone who is genuinely indifferent as to whether there is a god the real reason to take the real reason to take away from all of these debates with career atheists this is me now again the most obvious one is the futility of the process because now we have to go into one of the smartest men in western civilization augustin the heart wants what it wants oh that's woody allen woody allen acts that out woody allen's rider tries to justify what he acts out by the heart wants what it wants augustin read his confessions we're we're prisoners of our hearts and the thought of a god is terrifying why well have you ever been married have you ever been part of a family have you ever had a body plus have you ever had a situation where another person exercised choice over you we don't like it we hate it where do we want to be top of the pyramid top of the hierarchy that's how we are we don't want there to be a god god this is exactly what the bible says heideberg catechism we have a natural tendency to hate god and our neighbor why is the commandment at the talk of the commandment hierarchy love the lord your god with all your heart soul mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself religious people have been talking about this forever christianity has been talking about this forever even when i talk to really smart atheists i've got a whole bunch of new ones that are my friends and when i say this you know who you are i won't out you it's love right loves everything even if you've given up christianity you're not giving up on love well what about those societies that say it's power no they're wrong well suddenly we found moral realism suddenly we found moral knowledge this is built into us it's coming from below and it's coming from above and we're right here in the middle is it so crazy to believe that what we believe comes down to interpersonal and ego i've been talking to a lot of buddhists you go listen to joe rogan listen to a bunch of the bunch of these folks in the intellectual dark web they will fess up very quickly ego is a problem well religion has been dealing with this forever none of this is new it's so crazy to believe that what we believe comes down to interpersonal and ego we are loathed to give up our god-like pretense that's it i was going to split it i didn't split it that means i got a long rendering of this i'm trying to think if there's any show notes thanks for watching these have been long i know i don't really think they're all going to be this long one of the things some of you who've been watching me for a while may realize is that i'm pretty spontaneous and when i get an idea i make my powerpoint and i make a youtube and sometimes they're long and sometimes they're short and you're just that sitting at the mercy of my of my personhood so sorry about that fortunately i'm easy to if you if you lose your attachment to me there won't be many consequences in your life but i hope this is helpful again for me this is thinking out loud upcoming things some of you have asked about meetups one of the things that i'm seeing is so many people are making contact with me and saying i really want to talk about jordan peterson but i have no one to talk to and i don't live anywhere near sacramento and i really want to talk to other people and i'm trying to figure out how i could organize this now if you've ever organized these kinds of things you have to realize it's not just a matter of grabbing people and doing it when you're in meat space or nose to nose or belly to belly there are lots of other things that are involved that we're certainly not conscious of that help make these things work and so just having a big hang out with a whole bunch of people won't necessarily be a pleasurable experience to either participate in or watch but one of the things that because i'm not so high up on the food chain that i have enjoyed is all of the wonderful things that many of you have sent me books um who i thanked one guy who sent a book on some yungian stuff this looks really interesting so thank you i intend to take a peek at it um someone else and you know who you are sent me this fascinating thank you and i'm really honored and privileged this came all the way from europe so i i again i i'm i'm humbled by this and i'm blown away and this has been one of the most fun little whimsical experiments i've ever had in my life it's been cool so we'll keep going and some of you you know that the patreon thing is funny because i wasn't going to do that and i'm still working with the deacons to set up online giving for church because if you know you wanted to support this and you wanted a tax deduction and you're an american citizen who pays u.s taxes obviously contributions to the church are tax deductible so cool and but i did start a patreon account and i was a little leery too because i knew that you know you start sending me money i start feeling obligated to keep doing these videos it's a very crafty way of keeping me in this game so here i am and it's been great so thanks for watching thanks for everything um what does truman say