https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZPHPf82mC6M

 Hi, this is Paul. This is commentary on the second hour. We'll see if I can get through the whole second hour because we'll have to talk about the psychedelic thing. I just watched the Jonathan Pigeot-Bishop Baron conversation, which I thought was very good. Jonathan Pigeot basically says it's always the psychedelic thing. I'm reading it in the comments. Just take the mushrooms, Paul. Well, why should I? I mean, it's so funny. I know all these people who are antagonist about standpoint epistemology. They pull a standpoint epistemology move when it comes to mushrooms. Part of the validity of standpoint epistemology is I don't know what it's like to be you. You don't know what it's like to be me. When we sort of talk together, we try to imagine we get some things right. We get some things wrong. Let's dive into the psychedelic portion of this conversation. Now I debated whether or not I would do this. Symbolically memeing got at this thing fast. It's entitled What Jonathan Thinks When Jordan Talks About Psychedelics. Symbolically memeing. There's no hiding from the camera. He always does this with Jonathan when he does these things. Ontological significance of psychedelic substances. Psychedelic substance into the mix. That's a thorny problem if there ever was one. That's a problem of the lower meeting the higher. That's for sure. These chemical substances that can. Lips purse, eyes narrow. Jonathan's under stress. Reliably induce overwhelming mystical experiences. You can just set that up. He puts his little voices in the background. Side and say well that's a form of insanity but it's not schizophrenia. And Bishop Barrett adjusts the chair and he sits up and he purses his lips. It's like alright brace yourself Effie. This is doubt fire. It's not obviously within the category of mental illness. Facial stuff going on for George Jonathan. And then. And to you know to drugs. Don't do drugs. If you're doing it stop it. Get some help. Yeah it's it's it's cheating. When you're using drugs. It goes on from there. Oh great. Sign into the editor. No leave me alone. Sorry about that. People say well the church is going to have to deal with it and that sounds like that's kind of what we're doing now is we're having to figure out how to deal with it. And the way we deal with these things is we have conflicts and we have conversations and we have discussions the way the church is dealing with the same sex marriage debate and the way the church is dealing with the women in office debate and the way the church is dealing with all sorts of issues with respect to sexuality and how many other issues this is how the church deals with things. It'll probably play out more in the Protestant churches because Protestant land tends to be the big experimental place where stuff gets tried. And you know it was atheist churches were tried. They didn't go anywhere. You know maybe someone's going to start an entire psychedelic denomination. Well let's see. Let's see if you can scale it. Let's see if it's stable. Let's see if it passes the Darwinian test. You know I can only decide for me. My answer is no. That's the way I feel about it. But let's let's let's hear. Let's get into this here because I think I think actually a really good conversation can be had about this but maybe we have to talk about it directly. And I thought actually again in this conversation John Vervecky did a really good job of laying out some things some things that that that Bishop Baron could agree with. And so maybe maybe it's something I had a conversation with Sevilla about psychedelics our last conversation we had. So who knows who knows where we'll go with this. But there's there's a number of lines to think about this that don't tend to be addressed. The point is right we've suffered. This is this is the context. John talks about the tyranny of the propositional. And of a propositional tyranny from Occam on where we reduced all of knowing to the propositional. And I would argue that most of what I call religio is being carried on by the procedural and the perspectival and the participatory. And so that is in a fundamental way how it's it's not just out there it's like right in the guts of our of our self interpretation. Yeah the question I think one of the questions is what what is the ontological significance of that let's say. I mean one of the. OK now that question with respect to what's the ontological significance of the tyranny of the propositional. Well I think an easy one is that as John earlier sort of critiqued everything was imagined to be based upon the material because the material lends itself material and space and time lends itself to the propositional. So if in fact we are discovering that the tyranny of the propositional has. And us to to know and engage and flourish in the world then perhaps some of the foundational presuppositions of that should be challenged. I'm not going to play any of the video but John Vervecky just did another conversation with Sam from the Bridges of Meaning Discord server on purpose non theism and Christianity and it was it was an outstanding conversation. They covered a wide range of things sort of following up on my conversation with JP Marceau with John Vervecky and also Sam's previous conversation with John Vervecky. And it was I thought an excellent good faith exploration of between this non theist and a non Trinitarian Christian. It was a good conversation and it has to do with what on how to what degree can we make on to lock on to logical presumptions based on our experience. I mean that's JP Marceau and I you know explored that quite a bit with John and so and Jonathan Peugeot just on Twitter told me next week he's going to talk to Vervecky about do angels exist so so that will be barking up the same tree. So I think in the. As we're trying to. Recalibrate from the. Propositional overreach this tyranny of the proposition there's going to be a lot more examination on what we're doing with respect to ontology. What do I mean by ontology. With respect to being epistemology. Has to do with knowing axiology has to do with morality. But ontology has to do with being and so our knowledge of. Our knowledge of existence. And putting aside the truth or lack thereof of various religious claims one of the weaknesses I believe of the rational atheists position is that. First of all that their argument is carried out almost entirely in the proposition landscape they treat religious they treat religion as if it's a set of propositions. Atheism modern atheism really is a development of of. Of modern Protestantism in many ways or I think for vacay would push it back to the the rise of nominalism and seeing modern atheism as the rise of nominalism nominalism again the idea that all categories as we talked about in the first hour all categories are impositions from us on to the world that the categories are in no way a whole bunch of things aren't really out there in the world meaning. But the morality becomes a big debating point but categories nominalism. Is is the assertion that all the categories come from us that are in some sense expressed in a manner contrary to this propositions that constitute science and then I think well wait wait a minute guys you're you're missing the point here and there's a propositional element to religious claim and I often think that's the weakest element of but but what do you make of the fact that people have religious experiences what do you make of that exactly well you say well that's epiphenomenal it's like well yeah and again epiphenomenal meaning these are the things that we are we as human beings those agents are projecting on to the phenomenon okay. Is it really like are you so sure about that so let me give you an example so I talked to Brian Murorescu and Karl Rock a while back and they'd be doing some investigation into the hallucinian mysteries and Murorescu's book is predicated on the idea that what the Greeks were doing was using a an LSD spiked wine essentially to produce a collective mystical experience that and they had technologies to harness that so it was collective and okay so I did a treatment of that video a little bit using the after school video because I thought Murorescu's treatment his his thesis was summed up fairly well in the after school video maybe I can find it okay I did this back in July I entitled it ontological presuppositional presuppositions impact take on psychedelics I guess in some ways not dissimilar to the little short video that I made before and that that constituted the core of the hallucinian mysteries and that that enterprise was practiced by the ancient Greeks for thousands of years continuously and that that experience was at the basis of the unity of Greek culture but more than that that it was the fountain from which Greek wisdom flowed and again I go back to why Peugeot asks well Peugeot challenged what video was that that he did that I just I just played that that was the um yeah that was the the Genesis video on the symbolic world on on Jordan's channel he said you know if these were sacred rights Jonathan sort of inverts the standpoint epistemology argument and says you know if if in fact this is sort of a world unto itself and a completely buffered self isolated world how can you judge it from another world and that's that's one of the things that we wrestle with and so it's a revelatory hypothesis by which I mean sorry it's a it's a hypothesis about the function of revelation in a society if these okay the revelation of what this is where this is where the little video I made it sort of sort of sticks with me so so it's helpful to remember a few things here so in let's say the old world you have heaven and earth and they're separated and the gods reveal things from heaven to earth that's part of the reason that you have astrology where you look at the stars where the gods disclose their will again you can you know read plenty of case situations in history where they go to the oracle of Delphi you can hear all this on the rest is history okay that's all part of this discarded image that gets that gets thrown away and then you have modernity and Charles Taylor nicely talks about modernity where you have the buffered self and a big part of the discussion between let's say Christians who continue to occupy although cross-pressured by modernism continue to off occupy more of a traditional world and those who say well these are just chemical substances going into the body altering brain states is danger because in the buffered self everything that you are going to unlock with these drugs in the in the modern frame is already just in your head that's the frame now Peterson is always sort of edgy in these things and so he's always just comes right up to the line here in a lot of ways and speaks psychologically but is very careful about ontology and he's always saying that these things are suggested so but you have to remember that we're really having this conversation in two separate worlds and what I see a lot of this is sort of switching between them and this I think is where John Vervecki's comments are are going to be a little bit more clarifying because generally speaking Christians are occupying this world right here where we have a more vigorous ontology about heaven and earth and therefore these drugs aren't simply elements of a buffered self but are potentially if they in fact are revelatory well how are we what are we getting this revelation from Christians for a long time have had issues with divination Israel was quite different and in in some ways seeming more secular in that they had pretty specific rules about divination there were to be no witches in the land they had the Urim and Thummim but they basically left it to the prophets to hear from the lord about things of this nature the idea of a buffered self gets rid of divination because well person takes something into the body and this is part of the back and forth that goes on over sort of the barfieldian question of participation I in my men's bible study just recently read the passage where Jesus says it's not what you put into into your mouth that makes you that that that makes you oh shoot what was the word it's not what put you put into your mouth that defiles you it's what comes out of your heart and so within Christianity there's a long back and forth about what belongs on the heaven side what belongs on the earth side and how these two things are related now in terms of a buffered self you put a drug in you are expecting that on this end of things that there will be in fact chemical reactions and whatnot the question is is are we really dealing with a dualist system and we're talking about cartesian dualism of a spiritual substance and a material substance or are there in fact as in almost all traditional religions ideas that certain substances will open you up to the world of the spirits and those spirits will inhabit you that was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and if you would go to a curandero or a brew or a brujo or some other animistic healer they're still around in places in the Caribbean and you can find them in in various different communities often the exchange would be give them some you know give them a cigar give them some alcohol give them some money he'll he'll use the alcohol and he'll have sometimes they're called a caballo or a horse and the the spirit will mount the individual and basically there's an exchange that happens you get you pay some money you give you you pay some money to the the witch or the caballo or the curandero and they get the money but then they let the spirit mount them and the spirit enjoys physicality and in exchange for that the spirit will curse people tell you lost items on and on and on now again in in the buff with the buffered self the idea is that all of this is hogwash all of this is superstition there's no problem there so therefore psychedelics are simply a medical treatment are they which side of the line are we really paying attention to in this conversation and that that enterprise was practiced by the ancient greeks for thousands of years continuously and that that experience was at the basis of the unity of greek culture but more than that that it was the fountain from which greek wisdom flowed and it was abandoned and oh what was that name of the vervegy's guy john regularly brings up pierre haddo and there's a very interesting i didn't know anything about pierre haddo and there's a very interesting article written about him in first things what is ancient philosophy i'll put the link in the show notes and i was going to bring this in later on when verveky does mention pierre haddo but this this whole idea about the relationship between christianity and ancient philosophy and how jonathan peugeot addressed this in a previous conversation about stoicism what happened to stoicism what happened to the elucidian mysteries what happened to the olympic games you can go to the rest of history podcast on the olympics a fast couple of fascinating episodes what happened to all of this stuff in the pagan world it all gets so it's all gets subsumed and digested by christianity that doesn't mean it changes it you know it doesn't mean it doesn't change it doesn't mean that some valuable things might not get lost in the process but going back to all of this is sort of like saying well you know we reliably connected to the internet via modems and we've really forgotten what it's like to to have that modem sound and i grew up hearing that you know that modem sound when we were connecting to the internet and i i found that to be revelatory that we were that we were connecting to the internet and okay but you've got fiber now and well the question is well can we reopen things with the modem well there are some changes that happen with a modem but we have to figure out how to assess the value and so it's a revelatory hypothesis by which i mean sorry it's a hypothesis about the function of revelation in a society and now revelation for jordan is a very interesting thing because he sometimes uses the word almost synonymously with insight and and whereas let's say in a christian frame we would we would definitely connect revelation and insight but again if you go back to this this idea about heaven and earth well revelation is something that comes from heaven to earth now there's also general revelation and special revelation and so christians have for a long time have for a long time understood distinctions within it a big part of jordan peterson's contribution has been in a sense having a lower register understanding of let's say darwinian revelation through the process and life of the church that which endures there's a revelation of a degree of truth by the things that endure and don't go away if these drug-induced dreamlike now i had some i had some i hope i don't repeat myself and if i do i'm sorry because i had the little mishap of hitting the wrong button and stopping recording and a set of bunch of things which weren't recorded dreams are another great example of what we're talking about here we all have dreams we all reliably have dreams some of us remember our dreams better than others some of us dream more vividly than others on and on and on some of us have dreams that we believe are revelatory and the church has for a long time dealt with this kind of thing when i was working with the haitians i've told the story before one of the women came up to me and said i dreamed about you last night missionary i said oh yeah would you dream and she said well you were surrounded with fruit and flowers all around you and i said well what does that mean because i know that the haitians put a lot of stock in their dreams they're not a very buffered the the folks in haiti do not experience themselves as buffered selves like we do here and she said well they um that means you're going to have many children and at that point we had one child and we didn't seem particularly fertile and we went on to have five is that revelation five is a rather unusually sized family for secular america it's by no means the biggest and it's not enormously unusual but it's unusual enough what's that dream revelatory again i i think about some dreams that i've had that i have not shared with many people but in some ways i see part of what has happened via my youtube channel and estuary as the fulfillment of a dream that i had 20 plus years ago i didn't take a psychedelic and again there's the standpoint epistemology i know what are you going to say well just take the mushroom i don't see the point partly because again with the question of divination there's strong statements in scripture about divination the argument is there are spiritual entities that are above and beyond you balrogs let's say um don't tangle with them keep the door closed let god tell you what god wants to tell you that's that's a that's a part of christianity and this is part of the reason why you see the stiffening of the line between those here who are under the discipline and are committed christians and those who are not this is a this is a line that christians are very sensitive about states of religious experience are the fountain from which a culture like the greek culture emerges well what are we supposed to make of that ontologically i mean we're great admirers of the greeks right we see our culture as that's certainly the rational element of it and perhaps a tremendous amount of the aesthetic element is deeply rooted in greek presuppositions it's like well is that are the elucidian mysteries that religious element is that an aberration or is it is it that which in that within which everything else is embedded i don't see the elucidian mysteries as an aberration i see that as an example of now obviously there were different different cultures had different rights but those kinds of things continue i don't remember if i i i yeah i did talk about that because i reviewed some of the other videos i i don't see it as an aberration i see it as part of the pagan world that basically and if you go to again the rest is history and you say why did the olympic games stop and then the final event is you're running in armor so you dress up and run well that's ludicrous because of course in the greek weather 38 degrees centigrade or whatever but that's where the spartans come into their own right that's so they they often win that do they yeah i guess yeah i guess so and then everyone goes that's it and the winners on the fifth day they all go to the statue of zeus and they're given their um their olive crowns so yeah and again well why do they go to the statue of zeus well if you listen to the whole podcast you'll understand the deeply religious aspect of the ancient olympics this was a today we don't look at it is deeply religious today and they'll get into that in their treatment of the modern olympics but you just don't pull religion out of these things and in a sense as peugeot will later say this is this is a terrifically modernistic example peugeot says it or someone said in the comment section this is intensely modernist example here we have this substance and the substance is supposed to afford us something well what about the olympics well what what would the olympics have to do with any of this yeah tom that sounds awful and you have comprehensively shattered any romantic faith i had in the ancient olympics so one quick question before we get on to some great olympians um it continues after greece has been absorbed into the roman empire but non-greeks are taking part that's right isn't it so roman emperors and other romans now is that general or is it just big big names kind of vips it's basically nero but didn't tiberius take part he takes part in the question event but by and large it remains focused on on greece so it goes on it goes into decline um yeah in the early roman period uh suller who's the uh this kind of terrifying general he marches on rome and kind of um at the beginning of the first century bc and he is he plunders olympia uh and uses it to kind of fund his fund his army in a civil war yeah but then augustus is very keen on it julia claude is very keen on it nero is massively keen on it hadrian who is hugely into everything greek he's very keen on it um and it you know it's very successful through the second century third century you you get these rome empire kind of implodes into civil war barbarians sweep across goes into decline um and basically by the fourth century it's it's on its last legs and it it kind of i think the last the last recorded mention of the games is i think 394 something like that yeah theodosius the great isn't it it doesn't theodosius ban it basically i'm not sure he bans it i i think it i mean that's i think i think basically there's no market for it because everybody has become christians become christians so nobody's going for to yeah so that that sort of reinforces that point about it being religious rather than sporting or sporting being religious that they see it as a pagan festival you know the the the flies and the the nudity aren't enough to to compensate for the pagan religious connotations well paul um you know when he writes to the corinthians uh makes reference to the islamian games so he he says that um you know as christians we we are competing for a higher crown um right yeah so so um his dissing of the games is there in the new testament um i mean basically yes if you're not worshiping zeus then um what's the point and the great statue of zeus has been carted off to constantinople um you know it's been taken there not as not as a kind of religious icon but as a kind of you know cultural symbol um so there's just no there's just no call for them um and so um tell me about some you've got some so basically all this whole world just sort of gets subsumed and back then to the some of the videos i had about you know neo paganism well these are these are attempts to try to i think get around or under christianity or in some way to sort of get around some of the blockages that we've made and i it's whatever you do with a substance today won't be anything like what happened with the elucidian mysteries and peugeot i thought made that point tremendously clearly on jordan's channel and i think peugeot was right this is a this is a fundamentally important question it's not something trivial i really don't know what to make of it because it throws the whole problem of well the ontological significance of psychedelic substances into the mix and that's a thorny problem if there ever was one that's a problem of the lower meeting the higher that's for sure right these chemical substances that can reliably induce overwhelming mystical experiences you can just set that aside and say well that's a form of insanity but it's not schizophrenia it's it's not obviously within the category of of mental illness and bishop barrett and jonathan peugeot just hold their tongues and then and to you know to murray rescues hypothesis runs quite contrary to that not only is it not insanity it's it was a vital source of of revelatory knowledge philosophical knowledge and and got the ball rolling in some sense so god only knows what to make of that but well there's i mean there's lots of experimental work being done on this right now the griffith lab i i did an experiment in my lab right it's not epiphenomenal the people who have more mystical experiences have more meaning in life but again for modernist meaning in life is epiphenomenal reliable correlation but yeah they become more open at least long standing yeah yeah well a couple of years anyways and and this was interesting too because i've heard jordan talk about this quite a bit but then john saying well it's you know a couple of years it's long standing but it's not permanent well what's what's going on there it's not trivial it's one standard deviation increase it's a big difference so it doesn't sound like it's fundamentally biochemical the experience seems to have something to do with it as many experiences do and you have all of yayden's work showing that when people will have these experiences they will reliably and i'm having a psychedelic experience of bad internet like a bad tv get fiber there yeah well so a good friend of mine who's a genius by the way and so i listened to what he has to say and he's a technological genius he talked to me about his his mushroom experiences when he was a mixed up teenager you know engaging in various forms of delinquent activity and he said that from the after his psychedelic experience his sense of what was right and what was wrong was massively heightened and he abided by it from then on yeah yeah and like i look at his life it's like well you know you you've accomplished a fair bit and he's very solid now this sense of right and wrong is that revelatory or is it according to the standards of the day around him so we we get back to see if this thing is still working we get we get back to this little diagram one of the issues that i i come back to again and again is okay morality where does morality come from in a traditional perspective morality comes from goes from heaven to earth and come on pen there we go i can write morality goes from heaven to earth so well so this new morality is that revelatory or has the experience now changed you in some way and again i am not about to say that everyone who has had a significant psychedelic experience has had a bad thing i won't say that at all i'm way too much of a pastor to know that people have all sorts of experiences and sometimes very good experiences can lead them in bad places and bad experiences can lead them in good places and many of our experiences are just sort of our experience and so we have to be a little bit a little bit careful in how we how we evaluate them person and quite the monster in in the most positive way and you know you can't just dispense with that it's like well it taught him the difference between good and evil and then he abided by that for the course of his life and and you know when when when griffiths griffiths people have his laboratory subjects have these mystical experiences and they quit smoking yeah and you think and if you take a look at this work you'll see like it's did they become baptist so it's onto normativity people encounter what they call the really real and it's really unusual because normally what we do is we take these experiences that are disconnected from our everyday intelligibility like a dream and we say it's not real because it doesn't fit in people do the opposite with these experiences they say that was really real and all of this has to change to get closer to it now i think there's a way though of starting i'm not this is going to be a complete answer jordan but i think part of the reason why we find it problematic these kinds of experiences and this is what some of the empirical work i did showed is because we've reduced rationality to inference and we've forgotten that rationality is broader and includes insight and if you think of how an insight works and you can see you can see a continuum between insight flow transformative experience even the flow experience has mystical aspects to it and people get into it on a fairly reliable basis right and what we have what we have to say is the core of rationality is not inferential coherence it's the capacity for self-correction and insight is one of our most powerful ways of self-correcting i point to your own work you showed in some of your experiments that you know one of the things that predicts insight is the anomalous card sorting task right and you also showed that that predicts how well people are overcoming self-deception you did the experiments on both of those right and that's not the coincidence insight is one of the fundamental machineries by which we overcome how we fundamentally misframed it's a fundamental self-correction we need a model of rationality that includes them both let me and i think i think that was a i was that was a very good response ask you about that let's go back to this nested idea right i i noticed the the the focus thing yesterday i can't can't not see it every time we go to jordan single frame now peugeot wants to get in and i just said something about psychedelics which is important to mention is that i mean obviously a lot of people are talking about it right now and i did you know i did watch that interview with murer rescue and i think that in this question of psychedelics i think we're actually seeing an an increase of the problem that we're talking about this kind of alienating problem which is that psychedelic seems like a very nice solution because there it is there's the mushroom i can analyze the chemical substance i can i can so when we talk about the elucidinian mysteries now everybody's excited to talk about the spiked wine but no one cares to talk about the entire ritual in which this was embedded and it becomes this kind of weird reductive thing in which the tool that we can identify which is you know you can you can put it in a box and you can you can nicely identify it then everybody's attention goes there right now because of our kind of materialism in our in our and so i find it very difficult because you know what what we saw psychedelics do in the 60s is that ripping open the veil supposedly in a world where the ritual around let's say the coherence of society the place where society coheres together and engages in a common ritual and in common attention and in common storytelling and then we kind of throw this stuff out into a world that is individualistic and based on on everybody's own little whims is not necessary is going to i think and we saw it happen is going to create these experiences that are frameless and instead of binding will will will continue to kind of fragment our society i'm really worried about the psychedelics and i think i i think jonathan made a great point i also think again okay you want to have your psychedelic church i'll tell you in north america you can start a church super easy you've got significant constitutional protections for you i have a friend who's a lawyer and in the area of religion and yeah you can you can start your psychedelic church and you can probably get all kinds of legal protection i mean they had the peyote case and for for um native americans and i mean there's a there's a lot there that you can build on you can start your psychedelic church and i think the questions are not so much oh can we dig back under christianity and sort of this move towards neo-paganism i think the questions are where exactly is it going to go i don't think you know there's a lot of you can find a bunch of talk about stoicism on the you know on various youtube channels i don't think stoicism as a movement is going to challenge christianity it's just not and i don't think psychedelics as a movement are going to challenge christianity because you can't build on it it won't scale and i think many of the issues that we're dealing with today some of which have to do with sexuality some of which have to do with some of these topics you're not really going to build a civilization because it doesn't have the breadth and the civilizations that were built on them are gone and they're not coming back again back to the olympics i think the olympics and what happened with the olympics proves jonathan's or demonstrates jonathan's point but and i know how much you've been looking forward to me using the word sacral yes come on let's get it over with okay so so the key really the fundamental difference between the modern olympic games which as constituted now is basically about money i mean the reason that they're going ahead in a time of covid it's not because of the olympic spirit it's not because of the unity of nations it's it's because of tv deals yeah well we're going to do the modern olympics aren't we in another podcast so we can do all the sleaze and the politics of it but but the um the episode you mentioned with thermopylae the persians are invading greece you know this is a massive crisis holding the pass at thermopylae is the best option the greeks have to stop the persian advance but they don't go because of the games and that that's not because they're obsessed by by sport although they are it's because the olympic games have this incredible status as something that is holy to the gods as again pausenina when he when he he goes to olympia and he says about the games that there are basically the two holiest events in greece one is the mysteries at elusis which is just outside athens where it's it's involved with the story of domita and persephone and persephone going into the underworld and then coming back for six months and going back and it's all basically about life and death so it's absolutely at the heart of of of everything that that a mortal might want to learn but he says that the olympics the olympic games are the festival the olympics are on that level and actually when i say olympic games as a synonym for festival that's wrong because the games are only a part of of the broader festival let's go back to the origins so when did they the conventional date is 776 isn't it and we get that from aristotle am i right that he says it was 776 bc um yes well we we get it also from um a guy called hippias of elis and elis is the kind of the town that um over the course of history comes to kind of monopolize and and lay claim to the games and the festival um and essentially if you win the sprint which is the first race and it's won by this butcher supposedly called caribas right then nice from that point on your name as the guy who wins the sprint you you know this is how the greeks date this is this is the dating system that they use so it's kind of i mean how elite is that you win a sprint and then your name you know it's going to be used forever after by people drawing up histories and well just to just to interject on this we were in sparta the other day in this in modern sparta which um is as my son said is not it doesn't quite live up to his image of ancient sparta but in the middle of ancient of modern sparta there is a monument an olympic monument it has the names of every spartan who who won the olympics going back to you know the eighth century bc or whatever it is and coming right up to um the early 21st century and i thought i mean they're basically pretending there's no break they're pretending that the olympic games are the same thing and that's part of so i i loved that that that was a sort of that they're still remembering these guys you know 2500 years ago and they still got this sort of monument or their to their spartan olympic heroes so the names do live forevermore well yes yes absolutely um and so greek contenders knew that i mean the fame that you win is in a sense the kind of the key to it um but uh it won't surprise you to know that there are complications so so one of them is you know is this true uh and actually the kind of the weight of opinion is probably that it vaguely is what the butcher did win and all that sort of stuff yeah perhaps who knows i mean we've got no way really i've known but it seems it seems feasible but this this kind of you know we we can recognize that that's a historical account but the for the greeks this this i'm afraid i'm going to use the word the sacral quality of the game yeah i'm so glad you did that tom i mean it would be disappointing if you didn't i know it's interwoven with myth okay so you can basically with the greeks you can hold you know kind of three or four ideas simultaneously in your head so you can have this idea that there is a kind of recognizable starting point that you get on the blocks you know firing gun goes and you're off the games have begun but at the same time you also have to kind of enmesh it in your ideas about the stories told of the gods and the heroes and as is always the way with greece there is no definitive account so it's held at olympia olympia obviously there's the resonance with with olympus the home of the gods where zeus the king of the gods rules and it's usually named after olympus tom is it after mount olympus the place well it's it's named after olympian zeus so zeus presides over the games and so therefore one of the stories that's told about the origins of the games um and again going back to posemius who really is that kind of you know the crucial source for this he says some say zeus wrestled there at olympia with cronos himself for the throne of heaven some say he held the games as a celebration of his triumph cronos was his zeus's father who swallowed who you know there was a prediction that he would be toppled by his yes child and so he devours his children as they're born and he gets tricked because zeus's mother gives him a stone gives him a stone wrapped in swaddling clothes and zeus is then able to live and comes and defeats him so that is kind of pinning the origins of the olympics right to the beginning of the reign of the olympians the coming of the olympians so that's the kind of measure of its significance but tom i read this story i read it only today that uh pelops yes the son of tantalus a man who had survived being eaten by the gods being served to the gods as food by his own father which is not a claim many of us can make uh but he had he had done this and lived to tell the tale that he had a chariot race with his prospective father-in-law in which he replaced the lynchpins and the wheels of this father-in-law's okay yeah can i just jump in i'm sort of thinking out loud because i you know i really loved in what both jordan and john were saying is the the way the mr i don't know how many comments bishop barron gets about psychedelics because i didn't ever get i didn't ever deal with this stuff until i met all you people on the internet tickle is being described there's something really right in that i think when you have a true mystical experience meaning an experience of of god of the sacred it does have those effects that it convinces you that's really real as opposed to the world that's it's real but it's not as real as that that now i'm clearer about good and evil i mean the authentically mystical i think has that but what when you talk about drugs and all that look for me it's a closed book i've never experienced that myself directly but i'd also say this the great mystics in the western tradition think of john of the cross especially he was my go-to guy john of the cross probably had what we call extraordinary experiences certainly his colleague therese of avila did i mean visions and that sort of thing but what did john of the cross consistently say let go of them let go of them when people said oh what do i do when i have an experience see it it's kind of a buddhist thing see it and let go of it john of the cross never wanted people like hanging on to the extraordinary vision or the extraordinary manifestation so there is the mystical for sure and and you know i use my platonic thing going from you know the cave going from physics to mathematics to metaphysics but beyond metaphysics there is indeed this mystical dimension of knowing so i don't discount that for a minute but i'm also i've got a lot of john of cross in me that says be very wary of hanging on to those and to jonathan's point there about you know well if i just take this drug that's going to be my my guaranteed path into the mystical whatever is going on there the real mystical you know tonight i'll be probably in front of the blessed sacrament at some point with uh the rosary and believe me i'm not having any kind of lsd like experiences but that's the mystical as far as i'm concerned so i'm trying to find what's really good in that description of it which i think it really is accurate but i'm wary of clinging to it one there's one thing to be clear go ahead just to respond to to jonathan's criticism i mean the point that jonathan is making is being recognized by people who feel first of all there's a there's a distinction even in griffith between a psychedelic experience and a mystical experience and secondly yeah okay most people are clearly indicating for example all the therapeutic interventions using psychedelics and the evidence is mounting that it's not the drug that does it right it is the drug in in concert with the set and setting the therapeutic framework all of this other stuff have you have that i consistently argue for this you have to have this wrapped in a sapiential framework because it is it can just as much take you off into self-deception as it can into right into self-correction so and and the the context and let's say at john's hopkins is probably going to be a little bit different than your um your flight down to south america i can't find the video right now i just i just looked for it but after one of the many little back and forths we've had over psychedelics somebody sent me a video and it was it was a rather impressive video of a young man and his story it had a very troubled very troubled upbringing had a very troubled past um went down to south america had an awoska experience um and it really helped him sort of sort some things out again i'm pretty high in openness and someone comes up to me and i've had many people in fact some people that are close to me tell me well you don't know what you're talking about with respect to psychedelics because you've never done it true um but doesn't mean i don't have opinions and you're going to do with them what you will but you know it was quite a moving experience but to imagine that well and then there's the question of what would you want from me do you want me to do you want me to try them do you want me to recommend them those two places i'm not going to go oh i i i but i want to be clear that there's a lot of people that take the criticisms that have been made here very seriously and it's actually woven into a lot of the research yeah well it's interesting with regards to the scientism issue so if you look at griffith's research so you you see that his subjects take psilocybin and then they have a mystical experience and then they quit smoking or they're less afraid of death it's like and the way it's written up in the journal is it is bottom-up drug effect because there's no description of the content of the mystical experience it's like well the drug produces a mystical experience and then people don't smoke and and the scientific journal format only allows for that and so but then there's this question that's like this is a big question it's like okay well why are these people no longer afraid of death like did that switch just get turned off well the fact that the scientific journal doesn't have any place for the nature of the mystical experience is very interesting because it continues to sort of show this blindside that's not that's not how it works there the whole view they have of reality has been reoriented in some manner and what manner it's like well what happened exactly that's that's an even more key question and it's relevant to jonathan's point and then john to go after your you a little bit on this topic jonathan is pointing to something that's that's that's a very intelligent caution and that is that i know you know that i know you know that and these these hypotheses of set and setting are they're just the beginning of that surround that needs to be created to integrate these experiences into the broader culture they're just they're you know they're not much changed from the early 60s well you have to be somewhere calm you have to be with someone who you know is going to take care of you it's like yeah that's we're just barely beginning to to figure out what to do with this and then bishop barron like i believe for what it's worth and i don't know what you guys think about that i think that revelation is a psychedelic account literally oh the book of revel i really believe that you bet you bet i think that the author of that had a second bishop barron's face psychedelic experience and all he did was write down what happened to him now it's not that might not be right but it's too grounded in the old testament the classic apocalyptic literature i mean it's why is that why is that an objection why is that an objection he was grounded in that tradition so i mean jordan's comeback is fairly valid again to to think about a buffered self well that's obviously within the buffer then it's a rearrangement my take on the book of revelation is that the book of revelation is an updating of the old testament prophets through the lens of the resurrected christ that's what the book of revelation is and it's told in an apocalyptic genre and all of that tradition was was made vivid in imagery during the experience that's not be not certainly not beyond i mean imagine just just think about what you do when you do almost anything creative i'm not trying to draw a one-to-one correlation here but how can i i mean i watch artists do this all the time artists sit down and look at the stuff that jonathan peugeot does these images come out of some place so they're they're coming out of everything that's been put into them in many ways the the confines of such experiences so and i think the church is going to have to wrestle with this seriously in the years to come because there's an issue well i agree with that and i i would like to see the church wrestle with it but uh wrestling with it is not going to include me taking these substances i mean if if a bunch of you can can get really irate about the vaccine i'm gonna i'm gonna be stubborn about this association between psychedelic use and revelatory meaning again you when he says revelatory does he mean insight because often when he uses revelatory you know i think about his the first vancouver conversation with sam harrison brett weinstein that tends to be the way that he uses it in other words he tends to use revelation in terms of lower register type things that the church is going to have to grapple with i believe there are plenty of months who have relations and have visions and have all these types of experiences but that don't take psychedelics they you know it that it's actually through aestheticism and through transformation and i think this is coming back to to bishop barron's point is that let's say in the hesychastic tradition in the mystical tradition of the east it's exactly like what he said about saint john of the cross they consistently insist that the mystic has to ignore all experiences because the purpose is not to have experiences the purpose is to be united with god to be transformed you know to be free of your passions to be free of the things that kind of bind you and it's going to happen and maybe that can actually maybe be somewhat instructive for others but that's not the point and so so i think that i can i understand it because there's something about our world too that wants experiences right we we can we want to have these these exciting or very kind of exciting experiences but the real purpose is to be transformed which is why someone is willing to be martyred or someone is like that has nothing to do with like having a really great mystical experience is there's something about and i think part of this conversation is going to have to go deeper into this question of transformation jordan's talked about that multiple times his conversation with with david oh he's the pastor at at um at liberty um david nasser many of my conversations with jonathan with john vervecky transformation again isn't simply sort of a blank slate when when we talk about transformation we talk about something going something going up well it's going up towards a telos it's going up towards and some place where it will reside and we we want to imagine this thing to be good now we tend to do this i've been talking until these things dropped we've been talking about betterment and there's proximal betterment and then there's ultimate and i think then there's also the question of absolute and okay so we sort of dead reckon these these proximal betterments and okay they've stopped smoking well in a society that believes that smoking is bad for your health that's a positive thing that includes the baptists okay so there's betterment their proximal betterment but one of the things that i i i see with people all the time let's see can i move these things around oh cool will this move i don't know i'm just playing with the whiteboard here oh that that moved okay um i was going to so ian mcgill chris did i thought a really good conversation with rebel wisdom now now with mcgill chris everything always sort of pretty quickly goes into process theology and that's another conversation but this question of so when you get very practical into something let's say someone is having difficulty in their marriage is divorce betterment hmm well that's that's kind of hard to say because you don't get to run the experiment backwards um rick says i should really work on my handwriting and he's right um is is divorce betterment hard to know would you be better with point a or point b now now often not resolving things can lead to transformations sometimes what needs to happen in a marriage if one thing's that that one thing that a marriage even a difficult marriage can provoke is a transformation because usually 50 of the misery in the marriage is one of you the other 50 is probably the other and so staying in it can result in a transformation so again it's it's awfully tempting to say well we can put these transformations in a pill and the rest of the conversation has been saying oh that's not quite that simple because you have the question of what is the direction what is the direction of the transformation is is the transformation really betterment and what do we mean by that because the question of the good is going to be situated in a moral universe so we say smoking is bad we say fear of death is bad i'm not going to challenge either of those things um we would although in some context say that fear of death is actually quite a good thing uh don't do that foolish thing walking too edge too close to the edge well i'm not afraid of death well that really doesn't mean you should die right now because you you rather clumsily fell off a cliff all of this stuff is nested in a world and so when we talk about transformation that too is nested in an entire moral landscape really is about the transformation of the of the person into into the image of christ let's say jonathan is it true i'm curious in the eastern traditions i don't know as well but in in the west certainly the mystics all talk about god actively stripping these things away so even something like the great contentment i get in the beginning of my relationship with god my sense of of consolation to use ignatius term uh god will take that away because i recently talked to someone who you know converted to christianity and they've been in it now for a while and this is exactly they they said you know i've kind of cooled off compared to you know the when when i first became a christian everything was everything was new and fresh and insights were were coming into things and and now it's it's getting comfortable is there something wrong i said this is a this is a pretty normal part of the process something similar thing happens in marriage or in a relationship you you have that period of infatuation at some point it's going to have to settle into something more stable because i'm not meant to fall in love with the consolation i meant to fall in love with god so i'm not meant to fall in love with the mystical experience or with the vision or whatever i meant to fall in love with god and so god actively john the cross will talk about the you know the dark night of the soul and that's really what he means it's not a psychological state it's it's god actively taking away these experiences because there's something else that we're really talking about in the eastern tradition so i really i i haven't had a chance to listen to the whole thing yet but i was really enjoying this conversation that that nick and john um i met nick in real life he came to a meetup he was in bethel north of us and john i had a conversation with not too long ago um but you know talking about their experience in the charismatic church revelations are all over the place and a lot of what it has taken in charismatic pentecostal traditions has been to basically build up a tradition around all of these reported experienced revelatory revelatory experiences and again christian christian liturgy is designed to christian liturgy is designed christian hymnody is designed christian practice is designed to get us into flow states to get us into into states where where we're having these um different level of mystical experiences but what you do then around it in terms of the institution is to figure out okay now how can we keep this productive and not destructive and again that's why my challenge you're going to start your dmt church my guess is you're not going to really be able to scale it because you're going to have everybody doing their own thing having their own experiences and if these experiences are considered revelatory it's going to be chaotic and in fact this is why as i mentioned in that little video it's really interesting that christians and the west grew out of this pay a lot of attention to the physical layer of reality and that's why the physical resurrection of jesus has always been the cornerstone of the church because i saw jesus well good for you but it's the physical resurrection that we build our hope on the highest point is is absence of all image and thought right yeah that that that you you actually don't have any there's no imagination there's no thought there's nothing there's only this kind of pure presence and just pure light let's say that kind of now now this is kind of an interesting statement given a lot of the conversations back and forth with john vervecki especially that one that that they had which got so esoteric so fast how high up does narrative go and and now john is basically saying well at the top there's no narrative which is sort of john vervecki's point gathers you into god uh so it is and they constantly say the same thing they say all these experiences let them go you got to drop them you got to don't become a guru and you know kind of teach out of your out of your little mystical insight but rather just drop it and keep going up the ladder let's say right and if you want to look at the pentecostal church there's a lot of people that have been they had this vision and they ran with it and you know if you're around pentecostals long enough or even non-pentecostals you watch how that thing plays out i see a lot of people with very little experience about the church having a lot of ideas about how things should happen let's say in the church they have very little experience in the church or in church leadership and the truth is the church is running these experiments especially with protestantism the church is running these experiments all the time and you can watch them play out if you just know where to look i mean i'm very wary of the idea that the communion cup the the origins are in some kind of psychedelic experience i mean trust me it's never happened to me i've been going to mass since i was a kid uh because the reality of it is other than that i mean even if there was something and certainly the eliciting mysteries have been well studied and perhaps there was a psychedelic element and so on but i would never want to put stress on that i would i would want to say that first of all if you talk i talked to aiden lyon who was right his book is coming out a psychedelic experience a philosophy of psychedelic experience first of all he doesn't uh he doesn't pin the term on the use of psychedelics per se it just means mind revealing experience okay so uh what i would say is that the substances are belong to a class that don't require chemical substances so these are disruptive strategies you know jonathan mentioned you know eschisis right asceticism yeah the shamans chanting the drumming the sleep deprivation there's a whole family of disruptive strategies but let me let me try and show you you can find my conversation with with jon vervecky on shamanism and christianity both on my channel and on his and on the awakening from the discord awakening from the meaning crisis discord server what i think this is related to if you are if you are trying to if you're having a problem a problem because you've mis-framed the situation and you're and you need an insight what's actually really good for an insight is to be moderately distracted from the problem or it's like if you're trying to solve an insight problem on the computer screen and i put a bit of static or noise into it that will actually help you break up the inappropriate frame and find a new frame you do the same thing with neural networks neural networks are trying to learn and you periodically have to throw in noise because if you don't throw in noise they'll get too narrow and too fixed on what they're picking up on so this is this is and this is what i meant i did a talk about this it's like insight requires these disruptive strategies and they look exactly the opposite from our model of rationality so i think a more appropriate thing because i mean i i see disruptive strategies in saint john of the cross i certainly see those and of course they're all the way through the neo-platonic tradition and they can be cognitive disruptive strategies nicholas of kusa puts you like you know that an infinite circle is also a straight line and you go like that right so i know i'm with you on that i'm with you no i'm with you on that i'm thinking of thomas merton used the buddhist term of calming the monkey mind and he thought that was the purpose of the rosary yeah and i was conducting a retreat this about three years ago with the priests of dublin now i'm all now i took a little bit of heat from a few people on where i ranked bishop baron in this conversation and again i'm a fan of bishop baron i i think he's at his best in this conversation when he's the most personal and maybe the maybe the being a bishop sort of restricts them i understand that being a clergy restricts me if i had if i had a large church or if i were denominational official i would not be doing these videos probably probably get myself in trouble anyway i this when when he starts talking in a much more personal sense and again i saw this also in the his conversation with jonathan peugeot he seemed more relaxed in there the more personal he gets i think the more um winsome he becomes especially in a conversation like this oh irish so this is in my cultural dna but they were praying the rosary one night these about 60 men and they prayed the rosary which normally takes about 25 minutes to do it at the usual pace they finished it in about six minutes and it was hilly me for the great stars and hey may be fun to great stars but at first it seemed ludicrous but what it was doing was setting up just that kind of buzz that sort of mantra like quality that i think does allow something to happen that allows something to happen in deeper parts of the psyche deeper parts of the soul so i think that's right i agree with those elements are there in the mystical tradition and i see people do this in church all the time in their own ways and and this is where the neo sacrament or the sacramentalist churches and the neo sacramentalist churches tend to have an advantage but it's also there's always kind of two sides to it it's it's the it's the repetition of the place and it's it's both the repetition and the disruption it's it's it's just part of how human beings manage our contact between the registers jesus prayer too jonathan's an example of that i think yeah and so i for me as a scientist i'm studying these things like when i did the the one experiment i mentioned the content which i think is supportive of jonathan's point isn't the key thing that's predictive of the changes in people it's predictive of the relationship to meaning in life it's actually the insight process rather than the particular phenomenological content that seems to be driving the transformation the christian aesthetic and and that's what jon said right there that probably did more in terms of saying okay now i can i can sort of have an understanding of of how these how use of these drugs have helped people because again a couple few years ago when this came up i had never had any experience and some people close to me people i dearly love people who i trust you know i've told me about their experiences and and what jon said right there was i thought one of the best framing of when i hear them talk about it that's what i think the good of it has has come it's in that sense that it's come through the christian mystic this insight gathering or this kind of mounting up into insight is bound up in the transformation of the person in terms of their own passions and also the transformation of the community in terms of liturgy and participation in communion and so it's buffered like it like i said it's binding it doesn't it's not just someone you know doing something to get some insight but it ends up being this this binding of the of like if bishop baren was talking about all these monks sitting together doing the rosary together and then maybe going into liturgy and and taking communion together and working together and so there's something more than just the just the kind of psychological or you know personal experience or personal healing from from this or that problem but it's yeah it's it's it's a holistic thing i hate using that word but it's a whole and i think peugeot is exactly right there and i think this is exactly why psychedelic church won't work because what you want is something that's communal something that's more public something that can be shared um you know one of the things that my wife and i do together often is watch tv but we watch tv together and we do it with remote and we pause and we talk about it men often do things together why because it it affords a certain degree of community and i think by its nature taking a substance and have doing something on your own is individualizing and that's why i think you're you're not going to have a psychedelic community develop you know holistic process let's say well because both ways right the insight isn't just propositional it's perspectival and procedural and and and i think mystical experience is the most profound version of participatory knowing i mean i think they can make a very strong neoplatonic argument and i and i think i agree with you jonathan i think i mean you you see this in some of the things i've been doing the ethnographic work on what people do the circling you you you can you can get uh you can get shared insight flow that doesn't belong to any one person it belongs to the community as a whole and people right and and i think that's that's very important and that's probably not going to happen when you're vomiting in a bucket or not being able to see straight important uh for as you said making sure that this doesn't i mean it's so easy for these experiences to become a magnet of narcissism for people right and so the the de-centering that happens when we are which i think is exactly what paul was talking about in second corinthians 12 immersed in something larger than ourselves which i think helps cultivate the virtue of reverence i absolutely agree with you i think that absolutely has to be the case and i've argued it repeatedly for that i hope i'm not coming across as trying to say it's a it's an individual personal thing that i'm talking about that's not fundamentally what i'm talking about i'm talking about it being systemic in the individual and systematic throughout the community so okay so let me jonathan i'm curious about this i mean i your cautions are duly noted on my end i i saw see what happened say in retrospect when the hallucinogens were introduced to western culture right i mean it didn't work very well and look at what happened to timothy leary so for example i had his old job at harvard by the way oh i didn't know that yeah yes many people have pointed that out to me jordan by the way yeah jesus of all the weird things in any in any case you know jordan peterson is just a weird weirdness lightning rod stuff strikes him chair eliotta also believed that the true shamanic tradition wasn't psychedelic driven no and that was an aberration i think he was wrong i really do believe that he was wrong and i think that and i i'm i'm also not entirely i'm also not entirely convinced that that the practices that you're describing can produce experiences that are as intense as those that are produced chemically maybe they are but even if they are they're not they're not available to intensity of experience is not an easy thing to measure in the way that we want to measure no maybe i'm wrong it might be some out there say no we can well how do we how do we measure the intensity of the experience and to what degree is intensity related to quality to the typical person they take tremendous amount of training and then so that's a big problem and then is that a problem or is that a feature well it seems like well i don't i yeah look it's a feature too jonathan because maybe you need to do all that training to handle the insight you know and and i'm not trying to look for a facile solution here believe me but the church has a hard time attracting people at the moment and okay now we're oh this is the answer this is where of course bishop arron's going to talk about what he talks about fairly often he spent a fair amount of time with jonathan bageaux on it too but it's it's very interesting to me how often peterson comes back to the poor performance of the church and okay fair enough um you didn't get a chance to buy the one in toronto um you know this this again had some of this in the comments on the first video i i don't i don't see him i don't see him becoming catholic he seems in his orientation protestant and maybe if you know he sticks to this psychedelic thing he'll try to go the way of the psychedelic church and i think he'll very quickly see that it it doesn't work the there was jesus and john the baptist and a lot of people don't understand how big a movement john the baptist was john the baptist is no longer around in the same way jesus is around and there's something about systems fascinating end to nate heil and and michael martin and john verveckis conversation on on sophiology on on grail country on that channel and it ended with the church and i really want to do some treatment of that video too because i don't think psychedelics are going to help church growth i think there are many churches the pentecostal churches have been some of the fastest growing churches around the world and they in fact reliably provoke in people modernist frame breaking it happens all the time in pentecostal churches people leave and they have a have a conversion experience maybe they maybe they fell on the floor you know we've talked a little bit about you know toronto blessing and some of these things john wimber you can find john wimber taught at fuller seminary you can find some of his books you might look up his book power encounter story after story of basically no substances involved the power of what happened in that church broke through this happens all the time and it happens around the world and it happens cross culturally and it happens without any chemicals going in anyone's mouth because all the chemicals are being triggered reliably in people's brains by the set and setting of everything that is happening and and people are transformed now maybe you know jordan needs to go to the right church and uh and get whammied and it kind of reminds me of jordan and sam harris talking about you know jordan basically saying maybe you haven't taken enough to to break through your to break through your your determined atheism but again i go back to c.s lewis in the beginning of his book miracles the only person that he knows that saw a ghost didn't believe in ghosts experience has its limitation and it lives within the frames that we live and we're we're tremendously complex and subtle creatures with respect to our belief systems and the systems that we participate in publicly i don't know what's happening in in the broad church with regards to the sort of work for example that griffiths is doing and it's not like i have the answers to these things but i what's very interesting is is again if we would bring well maybe i should probably have nick on the channel uh nick watches um because nick was at bethel so bethel in northern california two hours north of here if jordan wants to go and watch transformations and signs and wonders and and people getting really serious at it go to bethel now what happens in many of these pentecostal churches is they approach it in a very modernistic way there is a there is a toolbox or there you know how to work miracle manuals that are all over the place and you know when i hear jordan talking about you know psychedelics and the church he's he's approaching it with techne and part of what's foundational to the church is that we don't just approach things with techne because that is idolatrous we approach god with the spirit of finesse as um as dulos as slaves as servants and we ask for god to fill us because we are empty whenever we approach with a spirit of geometry when we approach in order to use god that that will not end well that will not end well but we shouldn't look to the psychedelics as a as a savior certainly but they should also not be discounted because they are the means by which people can have the sorts of experiences that the scientists the followers of scientism discount it's right there it's right there as proof in some sense i'd be more at home though with using the wisdom maybe that's irrelevant to the church it's not irrelevant to the church again go to an assemblies of god church and pay or go to a vineyard church or go to bethel at that that jordan if you want to come to northern california i'll go to bethel with you and and i'm sure with the status that you've got i'm sure we could have an audience with bill johnson read bill johnson's books i've got them here here's two of my even my kindle library i've got the supernatural power of a transformed mind pentacostals are are all over this and and here's bill johnson's thesis the will of god is simply unearth as it is in heaven isn't that um isn't that basic isn't that refreshing when we pray thy kingdom come thy will be done when we pray for god's dominion and will be realized right here right now that is life transforming paradigm shattering way to do normal christianity and they will go through they'll have a school and they will teach you all of this stuff and rick you know rick's always looking for better camera angles and how to how to juice up living stones streaming experience and so sometimes he goes to bill johnson's and bethel's website and they've got you know they've got lots of money for the best cameras and they've got all the technology and then i just tuned in once and if i recall correctly bill johnson was up there and he's he was thanking people for praying for his wife who had cancer and and part of my problem is john whimber died you know and these are theological issues that the church has been dealing with for a very long time and in many ways the the psychedelic questions as you know none of the i've known plenty of people who have spoken in tongues they have seen visions they have dreamed dreams they have lived in many ways in sometimes in shallow ways the mystical life and you know what they left it hasn't really transformed them and that sort of brings in where where john what john was taught or what jonathan was talking about in terms of of there's a there's a quality of this that comes in okay set and setting and and the entire narrative of one's life jordan's tammy's story tammy's story of the vision with respect to her healing her miraculous healing was was that done on on psilocybin or dmt or something like that didn't appear so with her telling of it it simply happened and i'm not a skeptic about any of this stuff that this comes what i am a skeptic of is the systemization of it because that is frankly idolatrous we always come to god with open hands asking to be filled jesus himself goes into the garden and says you know if it made if if this cup may pass from me not your will but mine be done that is always the posture of the faith tradition jordan as you've been doing i mean the fact that you're drawing a lot of people back toward christianity through the opening up of the bible and the the wisdom way of reading the bible that to me is a is a great way the churches can start drawing especially young people back it's obviously working in your case uh you know we've got our problems and some of it came from the scandals certainly uh but some came from an exaggerated attempt to be relevant to the society and to sort of dumb down our language and to make it sound like an echo of the culture that's what did us in i think in terms of attracting younger people this has gone on quite a while in some ways the psych you know nate said it well nate heil and i think he was right it's kind of an unfortunate redirection of this conversation in the whole psychedelic route it's obvious that it's something that jordan is working on and i think if he's serious about the church coming to grips with this okay but it's probably going to be within the context of pentacostal christians african christians charismatic catholics the church is absolutely replete with various kinds of pattern disrupting techniques that that that run the gamut of of so much of it now maybe in this in whatever kind of mainline church jordan remembers from his childhood it was it was stale and frozen and utterly modernistic which is exactly what bishop barron is going to be complaining about but to to imagine that this stuff is not present in the church that mystical experiences dreams caught an article today um on twitter the strange new habit of the global church from its humble beginnings the christian church has grown to be the world's largest religious community the majority of whom reside in in the global south asia africa and latin america or as it is called the majority world africa is now the biggest christian continent and latin america will also soon outstrip europe in terms of numbers of christians who reside there consequently most church members in the near future and already now will not be adult european north american caucasians but people of all ages genders and ethnic backgrounds across the world and has the united method is what this does to their ideas of of changing the assumptions about gender and sexuality in a nutshell the picture of the world church in the beginning of the third millennium that message however is only slowly gaining ground in theological education and literature the reader of the typical textbook in the doctrine of the church and say the student listening to a lecture in a classroom and too many theological schools may wonder if the author and the lectures live in a different world from christians in the world church in whose writings and presentations that looks as if the surrounding world has not experienced any major changes relevant to life and mission of the church but by and large doctrines of the church were still written as if christendom model were in place making christians virtually the only world religion with an established mainline churches as the only player in the field of well-to-do europeans and americans the majority of the faithful of course leaders and theologians are supposed are supposedly mainly aging white men yet how radically different is the world of the third millennium in which the global church and its mission exists nothing less um than a radical transformation is is happening and now there's a lot going on in this the composition of the church um worldwide with regard to denominations is changing dramatically as of this writing one half of all christians are roman catholic another quarter complies pentecostal or charismatics and the rest are ethan orthodox christians anglicans mainline protestants and members of the free church this means that roman catholics and pentecostal charismatics together constitute three-fourths of the global membership to imagine the church is this sort of frozen place of stayed rationality is just not getting out there and seeing what's happening now that's where in a lot of ways for a lot of verveckis questions come in in terms of error checking and this is actually what a lot of the church does through its structure through its community so maybe this is a good place to end so i didn't get this done in two parts um and maybe this will be the worst of my commentaries but i don't know you'll let me know i know you will that's that's why you're my third lobe