https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hhzaraeRBL4

 Let's start officially I'm recording because I'm I'm good good for me getting started But I don't want to edit this because I'm just gonna send this to you guys. I think Just as is I'm gonna take a leaf out of Paul's book No editing there's not enough time in life. Oh I should have taken that up a long time ago. Okay, so So I will introduce you fellas because you holy men as I call the group This is this is by the way, this is I feel like this is peace coming together showing that you know, anything's possible we have our Calvinist from the iconoclast roots preacher and then we have our icon carver Johnson Peja, so Name Paul didn't even say my name Just say my name Paul the iconoclast is that is that right? Paul the Calvinist total depravity The icon carver although I mean, okay, you're doing a class you're doing you're doing a YouTube class But you're kind of into the YouTube space these days and that's what's brought us here today I Need indeed lady gets get get to it I'm just gonna my goal is to just make you you gentlemen laugh at my ridiculousness If we if we thought you were ridiculous, we wouldn't have accepted to talk to you. Okay, so don't worry about that Watching this gal I'm not ridiculous just so you know, they wouldn't have said yes otherwise, okay So the second Peterson wave That's that's why I wanted to bring us here today And she has her own jazz her own mug I have to actually look at that. I said one to Benjamin Boyce Thanks for helping me out with my YouTube channel and that's it I don't have any others I don't know. I don't know how to sell myself get get page. Oh, that's a good Scribers on my channel and then be like, hey, do you want do you want the footage? Like you can put it on yours That's my that's my model who needs mugs I've got page. Oh, just kidding So anyway Let's get back to business Gentlemen so the second Peterson wave I'm quoting you Paul. Yes, and I I mean it's it's an apt little Explanation because it is it is the second coming but it's It's like okay. So watching you talk with so Jonathan talking watching you talk with Peterson. I I Don't want to go into like the the you know, you you obviously are our friends with with Am I in first name basis with Jordan? We all are You're obviously friends so I don't need to go into the like hey, how was that? But I'm it's more I'm trying to get what did what does it mean? The interview which was by the way a beautiful interview That's how that's all the only way I can describe it. It's I've never seen Jordan open up in such a vulnerable way and so it was you set the the stage in a very very like Beautiful and open way and I I want to thank you. So thank you for that but but so so Jordan the way that he opened up and the way that he the things talked about It was different. It was different. I've watched a lot of Peterson Over the past few years and This was different and and I mind you he hasn't necessarily gone back to that space because I've watched a few Interviews of him like, you know since you and I mean he seems to just be doing well and and and recovering and you can see that but but anyway, the point is I To me watching this interview with you you guys it felt like something's changed Something is new. This is the meaning crisis. We're in and it seems like this means something What does it mean? Are you asking me you're asking Paul you're asking you I Mean I just see it as What's going on now is I really just see as another step in something that has been boiling up, you know for the past several years I would say in terms of let's say a Rediscovery of Christianity in certain circles a you know, all of a sudden we find ourselves in a strange place where Even people that I've seen that were kind of very hostile to Christianity in a very dismissive way They even if they're not necessarily going to become Christians all of a sudden they hold their they hold their tongue a little more and so they're more careful in what they say because I think that there's something happening and So I think it to me it's just like one more step in this process and Jordan is is playing kind of a weird catalyst role where he's kind of furthering this this movement of At least a certain type of intellectual that is reconsidering Christianity You know, we talked about Tom Holland But there are other people that are in that space and are kind of appearing and coming up I'm going to interview a an a novelist. His name is the Paul Kingsworth Kings North, sorry And he's the same the same situation. He doesn't understand like he's becoming a Christian He converted to orthodoxy, but it's almost he almost doesn't totally he sees that if this is going on But it's almost as if it's happening despite anybody just happening. It's it's a zeitgeist. It's a movement in history so I think that this is This is what's going on still and Jordan is kind of playing a again a catalyst in that in that in that moment Okay, I have a follow-up but Paul give you a chance to answer well, I you know, I I completely agree with Jonathan that You know, I sort of said Jordan Peterson wave one and we'll see if there's a second wave or not But this is the far larger wave when I when I began to see Tom Holland show up and listen to him I thought oh there it is again and You know in the we're seeing it with some of these high-status high-profile people But we also see it on the discord server in the symbolic world. We see it in churches. We see it in different places what I thought was What I thought was Illuminating about Jonathan's conversation with Jordan is this line that many including Tom Holland sort of Get stuck with get stuck and get stuck before sort of waiver before where Okay, we've got modernity. We've got all of the goods that modernity has offered us and What modernity did was first? deconstruct Christian ideas about history and science and Then since let's say the rise of the new atheists criticized Christian ideas about ethics and morality and so someone like Tom Holland will say very explicitly I I don't believe Jesus rose from the dead but I have to live into the story because it makes my life better and I Talked to a lot of people who are right at that place and that that became so clear in Jonathan's conversation with Jordan that he's just wavering right in front of this line and That calls up a whole bunch of issues and that I think what we're I think what we're really seeing is a We're looking once again at the issues that brought about the Protestant Reformation and And real issues that were long before it really and we're we're trying to work through these issues and Most of the ancient options continue to be on the menu one of the big ones is Gnosticism and We're as a culture. We're working through this stuff. Basically, we're trying to similarly to what happened in early modernity where they tried to Embrace the goods of modernity without losing the goods of Christianity Now at the end of modernity, we're sort of moving back into narrative without Losing the goods that modernity offered. So I think we're we're at that point You had to go bring up modernity right right away Paul. I was For a little bit into it Okay. Well, I will we'll come back to modernity Don't don't you worry but I do have a follow-up with and it does a bit have to do with what? Well, what you're both are talking about about so so Jordan being the catalyst In the midst of what's already happening But the thing is with regards to to Jordan the way that his Life happened in the past few years And now it could have gone that maybe Tammy didn't get sick and and maybe he he didn't get This situation where he was given these prescription drugs that ended up, you know so like he could have he could have been rock solid in this like No second wave first wave still go, you know, and but but that's that's what I'm The way where he is the the the suffering and the broken and the The honest space that he is coming from now it Maybe I'm just reflecting over my own life with my own deconstruction reconstruction Yes Well, everyone's going through this because yes and me spiritually, okay Yeah, that might that might be just him me and Jordan, but it feels like it's not just me It's a lot of people so that's not a coincidence this is what is the Synchronicities it's a synchronicity the way that the the the down into You said it may the may the the The icon of st. Michael keep those dragons at bay you suppose that that was the ending, you know and and he is go he's deep in in in in the in the valley and It feels like we are with him, but not just because he's there because we're there, too so that's What am I even asking? That's my my feelings and Yeah, well, I think I mean I think that your intuition is is that Jordan is somehow manifesting something at an individual level that is happening at a larger scale and That's that's exactly what's happening. So and he is paying the price for that Not always in positive ways in positive ways too, I mean he got rich he got famous all of that happened But there's also a price to that and and he said it before like I remember him saying something like don't become an archetype Because it's very dangerous. And so I don't think he necessarily did it on purpose, but he He he well, I think there's some moments where he did do it on purpose to be honest, but Maybe not. I don't know if it was totally consciously Friend sorry From you his friend And so and so he's kind of embodying this crisis in his physical body and in his family and in and everything around him So people see this catharsis in him and they're kind of manifesting It's kind of all say it's concentrating in his story. And so people identify with his story It's really it's really like a movie like the same way that you'll identify with a character in a movie That's what's happening. But in real life and so And like I don't want to make light of the suffering. It's a that's not the point The point is to just say this is actually how this is how reality works. This is how the world happens is through these types of embodiments and these types of of Condensations of patterns into people into into groups into patterns, you know And once you understand that there's so many things that they don't bother you so much anymore You know it because in the materialist way of thinking you'd say why would God choose some random people in the desert in you know in the Middle East to manifest and You're missing you don't understand how the world works. The world actually works this way things get condensed into particulars And that's why we have kings. That's why we have rituals That's why we have sacrifices all of this is part of that and that never went away It's still happening and so Jordan is playing is actually Condensing something about reality and that's why people that's why he has that effect on people and so That's that's this that's the way that I see it and I saw that back in 2016 You know when things started to happen around him Mm-hmm, and I remember even writing to him messages about that Particularly almost a bit a bit frightened about what was happening, you know But at the same time these things they're hard to they're hard to totally understand rationally You just kind of see them happen and you can recognize them as they're happening. So So I mean I for for himself. I really do hope that that he can you know, come out of the of the whale and You know make the full transition Mm-hmm Paul thoughts you're talking to a Calvinist. This is not synchronicity. This is Providence and I Yeah, so the so I was just this morning I was reading Jonathan's Jonathan's script for the video that wasn't made about the little nas X video and Well and and you know, so then I was thinking about Jonathan's, you know We none of us can see ourselves our eyes look outward Mm-hmm and so we have to see each other and we have to talk to each other and listen to each other to know ourselves that's That's how human beings work. So I was thinking about Jonathan and his and the part he is playing and one of the things that comes through clearly from Jonathan is a very And this has been true of Jonathan all along a very anti-modern message where he keeps saying Reality has a structure reality has a pattern if you understand the pattern you can understand your world that stands completely opposite the dominant cultural message that continues to say the world is function is fundamentally chaotic and there is no structure and That is embraced because that gives us a sense of autonomy and power that our life is our own and we script ourselves and so, you know I've had a number of conversations with people who have watched Jonathan's conversation with with Jordan and Have said why won't he cross the line and I keep saying well, I'm a Calvinist You don't really leap you get pushed and pulled and carried That is that is the narrative of salvation and For whatever reason God, you know and it's not you can't you see part of the problem of the misunderstanding of Calvinism is that people and this is something I've learned better from the Roman Catholics from you know from from from Brett, what's his name? I can't think of his name right now, but but Agency is not either or Suckled right agency is not either or and that's always the thing that people get tripped up with Calvinism Calvin was simply echoing a lot of the medieval in the ancient that said our agencies are nested and so That's that's a better framework to understand why Jordan is wavering before a line and Only God knows when God decides to relieve the tension I need some clarification. What do you mean by our agencies are nested? you we could not be having this conversation without the agency of Westinghouse Bill Gates Steve Jobs, you know that we are our agency is nested in a myriad of other agents throughout history and We as individuals like to see ourselves as these free autonomous creatures in a world of chaos Not fully thinking through what that actually means Okay, and and what Jonathan's ministry has been no there's a pattern and an order and if you pay attention You can learn the pattern and the order and you can actually this is where I went with Vervecky and and JP Marceau yesterday With this with this contemporary idea of agency It's an either or proposition if God has agency. I do not when in fact God's agency it when I live into God's agency. I have more agency and And these are some of the things that we're now We're coming into right now and we have to resolve to continue to go forward I don't know if that made any sense. No, no, it makes sense. I mean, obviously I probably wouldn't phrase it exactly the same way I've talked about this before in the sense that Let's say like in St. Maximus the confessor and a lot of the Eastern Fathers the way they understand freedom is Going only one way that is You are only free to choose God Every time you choose something else, you're actually you're actually Making yourself a slave to that thing So and then even when you choose God you could say that ultimately you're making yourself a slave to God and that's how you Free yourself And so and so that's how freedom manifests itself It's like it's not like we're there and it's not like the idea that freedom is somehow You know You have different types of toothpaste and you have the agency to decide which one you take all of that is kind of irrelevant In the the real idea of what freedom is freedom is really this capacity to not be a slave to your multiplicity to your passions to all these desires that are not bad in themselves, but become bad when you Subject yourself to them and then ultimately look towards the light and so the idea is rather that whatever whatever agency we have is just the agency of Not saying no of saying yes to God let's say we can't say no like We have the capacity to either look down or look up kind of like this image of st Peter coming out unto the unto the flood let's say unto the waters and so and so and and and I think that there's a mystery that's there for sure in terms of how How some people are called specially or some people are kind of pulled more than others or you know? And that's hard to that mystery is definitely hard to to peers And so in the case of Jordan, I don't know. I'm not in his consciousness like I don't I have no way of Seeing really what's happening and what's going on. I just yeah, I can just look at what's happening on the outside. Let's say Hmm and see the patterns See I'm getting the I'm getting the pattern thing Jonathan, um, okay, so No, it is it is I Think that Paul you you did a video I mean you do so many videos but one of them you brought up about James and John Asking to sit at the right and left hand of Christ and right. Oh Man keep it together Andrea like don't don't don't tear up. It's it's just the Bible. It's fine. It's you can you can do this You go right ahead and cry Andrea. This is a this is a safe space. This is a safe space And Paul goes there Thank you fellas. Yeah, no, we can take it back. We can take back safe space so so So he says you don't and I just looked this up because I wanted to make sure I knew exactly what what Jesus said back to them that you don't know what you're asking and And he's like you will drink from my cup Like this is and then all the rest of the devil's are like, how dare you ask to sit at his? What you read like like the most intense part is that that middle part but then as you read continue reading on they're like, um Excuse me. What about what about us like, you know, and you're like, oh my goodness you guys you're missing the point It's not about being elevated it's being brought low and that's what you're asking for and and that seems I don't know What in the world? poor Jordan Peterson asked for but it seems as if he's getting served this cup and Why would we choose that Why do we choose that we don't know what we're asking? But we I mean we do know we do know is We see the picture we've been able to see the pattern pattern play out with Christ, right? So I know that I Know the answer but I am when you see Jordan Peterson and what he's gone through and what he he is living that archetypal Pattern Why would we ask for that? I Mean I don't think the thing is okay If I'm wrong, there's something about there's something about how we go about in the world and we know the things that we say they have power and the things that we Let's say participate in and that we invoke have power And they don't they're not necessarily always Things don't just go in one direction. And so she pushed in one direction things are gonna push back in the other direction and so if you You know if you talk about certain things you better watch out like watch if you if you decry certain things in the world You need to watch your your the the back side of your head because there's a slap coming like you you know the the idea that someone who decries something will then be tempted by it or that the idea that if you If you if you talk against something it's going to affect you in a certain way That's just these are just how the these patterns are just there. They they that's how it works That's how it works and so Jordan talked about talks about suffering talks about telling the truth talks about how the world manifests itself through giving meaning to suffering and so you know, that's the then that this is the this is the This is the weight that's been put on his shoulders Like this is the reality that he's facing and so he's he's in his world like his world is laying itself out the things that he that he's engaged with are Are there and he's living with the the positive and the negative of that, you know and we all have that like it's I always even myself sometimes I talk about certain subjects and I'm like you better watch out because You better watch out what you position yourself for or against because those things are gonna revolve around you after that Well, I mean, I guess someone was looking out for you and that little nosket got deleted two times I Think it was good that he got deleted because then I wrote it was improvised the first video and And even while I was talking sometimes I was like, no this directions not good And I would pause and I keep going and tell myself I will edit it later So it was actually a good a good the fact that he got deleted made me force me to write it And so I wrote it down and why as it's written. I feel pretty comfortable except I did skip some parts There are a few parts that I skip when I say because there are certain things that you can write but you won't say I don't want to see myself saying certain words or certain things Yeah, and so there are there are few parts that I that I actually skipped Yeah, I'm like, oh no, should we should we bring it up? Oh well Paul did so Lord, please keep this recording I mean I mean otherwise, it's a nice chat guys. It's nice knowing you well, you know, I think your question is is something that one of the interesting things about the gospel is that the It's an amazingly honest portrayal of the disciples by the disciples of their inability to Understand much of anything of what Jesus is doing That's them we're all them we're exactly it just like you said I want to be the one who shares in that cup though What's in the cup again? Well exactly and and so and you see this, you know, you see this in John 6 when Jesus comes out and says the most Astounding thing, you know unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood you can have no part of me to the mob That is what is the mob gathered around? They want to see the miracle show they want to you know, they want to feel the excitement of perhaps a reinvigoration of Exodus plagues upon Roman oppressors and Jesus hits them with that and then of course a bunch leave and Jesus looks at his disciples and they're like Where else can we go? Yeah that man that that text I remember that they made like a you know a dramatized version There's one movie Jesus movie that it's all the the Gospel of John and I remember watching it with my kids and thinking this really shows you how how crazy some of the things that he was saying really appear like just how Radical the type of things he was saying would appear to people because we're used to hearing that like we're used to reading them And we we read them with other verses and we have this kind of general picture in our mind of what Jesus did and his story But then when you see someone actually saying that to a crowd like you said you think my goodness if I'd been there I would have stoned him like what would I what else would I have done? Like if I was there I would have I would definitely not have been I would definitely not have agreed with him It's only in retrospect with seeing his everything that came after that all of a sudden you it's like it's these light bulbs that flash And you go. Oh, that's why I said that okay That's what was going on and the disciples are part of that process and it's only at Pentecost that they finally It's like all of a sudden everything dawns on them and the pattern, you know appears to them and they're like Oh, this is what's been going on. No, we followed him for three years We had no idea what he was talking about Really? We just had this like strange intuition and then all of a sudden it all kind of dawns on them and then they get this Amazing power from it. So it's a great it is in terms of a story It's it's wonderful to follow that and like you said we have that we still have that like there's still times when I I gloss over some of the things that Christ will say because they just I can't deal with it. I don't know what what he's talking about and then you know, ten years later five years later I'm like, okay. Yeah Well, how is it that I lived with this in my mind without have any any idea and then all of a sudden it kind of It flashes, you know Well, and I've been so I've been preaching, you know through lent with Watching what's going on in the culture. So you have the woke and the anti woke and of course in my congregation I've got You know very politically involved African-american folks and I've got very conservative white folks who voted for time I've got all that in my church and when I'm I'm walking through Luke from Luke 9 the end of Luke 9 all the way to the crucifixion and Jesus at the triumphal entry and Jesus is weeping over Jerusalem, you know, if only you knew what would bring you peace This it is it is so contemporary and I I don't know, you know, I What Jonathan just said is so right. It's amazing. He lasted three years It is and and so, you know, so I and I look at Jordan, you know first Jordan sort of You know Jordan obviously is has his own narrative that he's working through and then he sort of becomes the darling of the conservatives and Then he has the temerity to say of the Kavanaugh hearing. Well, what Kavanaugh should do is Resign it for the good of the nation and of course a big part of Jordan's fan base just turn on him Yeah, and and so and this is exactly what happens with Jesus. You've got this culture war around him and He will not he will not mobilize the crowd to march on Their capital which is the temple he won't play that it won't play the demagogue which they want him to play But he also won't play the Roman supplicant Which they want him to play and so he walks through that line and he becomes the enemy of all in a rather René Girard way and the disciples are just on the outside watching this and of course there are elements of all of those factions Among the disciples and of course then one of the I mean it is it is the most amazing Story and as Jonathan keeps saying and as as Jordan I think keeps seeing but probably not saying as well as Jonathan it's it's all right there and It's it's the it's the most published Documented discussed book in all of human history and Is deeply foundational for our culture, but we can't see it It's amazing Something about scales on eyes somewhere Yeah, there's definitely something about it seems like there's something about that even in the way that Christ kind of promises He kind of promises this idea that all things will be revealed It's not like it's already it's like it's already happened in him, but it's almost like he's saying Okay, I'm turning on the light and then it's gonna start to shine out and you're slowly gonna see it But you know, it's gonna take a while, you know thousands of years whatever But and so but this is what that's what we're seeing and I think and I really do believe that there are some mysteries In the gospel that are still being revealed to us now and that are that are still popping up You know also because it's they're being seen from different angles that maybe those angles weren't so visible before and so it's it's like it's it's I think that's also probably one of the things about having like a foundational myth or foundational story is that it's harder to it might actually be harder to see because you it's harder to interpret it because you're inside and so you struggle to interpret it and It's maybe and that's probably maybe possibly one of the reasons why Christianity also has to to die Let's say it's so that as we move away from the story all of a sudden some aspects of it which were still hidden will start to show themselves and And and then everything everything will come together in the end Okay, oh man Which direction do I go? If I'm gonna be a Calvinist, I guess I'll just go with Do I have a decision right now there's two directions you don't choose Calvinism it chooses you Yeah So, okay, I Want to talk about theosis, but I also want to talk about the seeds That you see Jonathan, so I will maybe let you guys choose which direction you want to go Well, what what do you want to know about both of them? So, okay, so okay I'll okay. I will decide now I've decided we'll stick with theosis and then we will talk about the seeds and I've said it so it will happen So we'll put a pin in the seeds of the Remember, but at the end you mentioned about the seeds of Christianity The breakdown of Christianity is happening currently in the short term, but there are seeds that you see That's what you said at the end of your discussion with Peterson Jonathan, but anyways, so that's that's that's on the wall for later But let's go into theosis because that's something that Jordan kept going back to He kept on coming back to well theosis along with the myth being history and we being realized within the Human story that is not just a story. It's reality is embodied And like why that that was is but why should I why should I believe this, you know? And and so I and I find it interesting not just that he asked it But that he kept coming back and he kept circling back in his interview And the conversation with you so in terms of the narrative in terms of the narrative and let's say the mythic touching The narrative and the factual touching I think that for me The what what I wanted to do is to just point into the fact that he already thinks that it He said it so many times that you when he talks about perception and how the world needs Needs to have a structure for you to even perceive that it's there I know that you think that it's just that just like everybody else. Sometimes you you think certain things, but you don't necessarily You're not able to see all the ramifications of what you of what you already think So I was just trying to point him back to that and and to say say that this this doubt that he has it's a it's It's if he looks at his own theory of about reality it actually kind of goes away Because he believes he does believe that the narrative and the factual touch And it's just that he struggles with what that means because it's like if that if that's real and I know he thinks that then There's everything changes it really it's the the effect of that and I think that's what he also understands the effect of that is Radical it's such a radical transformation if you think that these patterns are real and that the world Has to manifest itself through these patterns Then it's like all of religion comes right back on the table in a second everything all the rituals the sacrifices The stories of these demons these angels everything just floods right back in to reality And that's the door that it's like it's hard because it you think am I gonna open that door like if I open that door Everything changes and that's the door that I've been kind of nudging at for the past four years sometimes being careful Not to push people to too fast, you know, you know when I talk about hierarchies and then slightly I'm sometimes I'm like, you know that hierarchy. It's a hierarchy of beings. It's not a hierarchy of concepts It's like you you need to see it's not about play though It's about you know, those ancient hierarchies of gods that you see like it's closer to that It's not actually a bunch of concepts. Anyways, so Once that once that door is open, it's like Checkmate for a lot of stuff About how the world how we think the world works. Oh, so that's maybe why it's so Difficult, I don't think he's doing it consciously But I think he realizes he realizes that it's like if I open that door It's it's massive it's huge and it made will also make him lose a lot of credibility Yeah Because because a lot of people aren't willing to go there and then if they're not willing to go there then they Continue to stay in that kind of atheistic Steven Pinker rationalist mode Flatland yeah, and so but once you open the door then everything changes And if and if and those people they won't they won't be able to see You know like the Bretton Weinstein's and the the Steven Pinker's and all that The IDW types they they won't they won't be able to understand how radical that that change is And then you like I said, you lose credibility Yeah, yeah, yeah, no, that's right, that's right That's he's he's exactly right and you know part of what you know when I first discovered Jordan Peterson, I Didn't know what I was looking at or why I was interested It took a while to figure that out, but but Jonathan is right it's where the it's where the the story verse and the matter verse meet and Jordan had been working at that for a long time and More than most had been willing to sort of go there Speaking scientifically as he are where it always says But it's I think part of what happens and this is the same thing for for preachers You deal with this stuff out there in the world and you sort of keep it at arm's length because it's always on your workshop It's always on your work table But when it's got to be part of your life then suddenly you recognize the ramification the cost What this really means and that's where you say, whoa, I thought I was just going to work But this is the world I live in and if I open that door, you know Tolkien says it, you know, you take that step out that door. You don't know where that path will lead you You know you take that step out that door you don't know where that path will lead you Okay, so and the wizard comes knocking yeah, that's right when he brings dwarfs I just found out that Gandalf was like an actual dwarf in like Norse mythology That there's a dwarf named Gandalf in Norse mythology. Oh, I didn't know that You can't no one can listen to all these podcasts it's impossible it's really it's amazing that they're all kind of happening I'm excited, but I don't see how it's possible to be a danger to all of them Speaking of attention. Oh, I wanted to talk about attention to you. Okay. Well, no, okay. No Andrew focus. Okay, so We are going to go back to the pin that I put up on the wall and I and the metaphor Let's just say I just want to say something about theosis which is that? The notion of from you guys. Maybe we should get a definition But the idea let's say the notion of theosis or the return of this this this notion within Christianity It's it's a solution to a lot of problems like it's a solution to a lot of problems about why things exist Rather than not exist and and then it actually solves the problem of how things exist as well Because if you understand it as the notion that everything that exists is always aiming towards a good You know and whether you see it through human consciousness or not you see it through human consciousness It's easier to say that because we're the ones who have these categories because we're conscious beings Then just our noticing of categories means that they're aiming towards the good and that that scales up and it scales up and everything is actually Everything is a call unto the good, you know, and then you could say that everything in a way is fallen But even in its fallen state, it's still a testimony to this desire this call this like longing for For heaven for the garden for paradise whatever you want name you want to put on it but towards the the good of itself and That and then that ultimately leads up to this idea that we find in in in in the gospel that we are meant We are created to live in the life of God to participate in his life You know to what extent that goes is is it can be discussed? But the fact of that I think even even like I think that most people agree and that's maybe some place where people criticize me Afterwards they said, you know Catholics do believe in theosis and then Protestants on me Yeah, we do believe in a form of theosis and like okay fine. I'll give you that Well, we can argue later but at least understanding that that that this idea of participating in the life of God of Manifesting the fullness of Christ whatever language you want to use. That's really That's the purpose of why things exist participation with the divine Yeah, right How close is this to sanctification because that's my Protestant framework Sanctification is a smaller category, but it's pointing in the same direction Okay, it's it's becoming sanctification is becoming a holy well who is holy. Holy holy So and Jonathan's exactly right. I mean afterwards the Roman Catholics like hey, wait a minute and the Protestants like hey, wait a minute I mean and even yesterday again, it was an amazing conversation we had with JP and and Jonathan John Verbeke Because this is what we were knocking at, you know, it's remarkably difficult when you sit people down and say what do you want? People don't know because we're fragmented and what we really want is everything Which means what we really want is God. Yeah, that's what we really want and we are Augustine said it, you know, our hearts are restless until they're satisfied with him and so this is and and the the purpose of Christ's Incarnation JP wrote that so beautifully and that blog the purpose of the incarnation is As Lewis said in his book miracles to come down and to bring us all up with him and that's Christianity and you know in the conversation we had yesterday where You know, we're talking people are always coming to me with, you know mystical experiences from meditation or psychedelics or something like that And I keep telling them if you're sitting there having an experience That remains inadequate because Christ will not rest and the Bible says this until all things are Subject to him until until he is all in all and then he turns over the kingdom to the father That's what that's what Paul says. And so That's that's Christianity Actually that reminds me a little bit of Jonathan when you were bringing up about how the the dying God and resurrection story that you were like, well, that's not really Christ actually because It's it's he defeats death with death and that's and then he saves us from death and that's it Well, it's the ultimate version. It's like you can't in a narrative way This is what Christ does in so much of his story is that in a narrative manner You can't go beyond the story that Christ manifest and it's there are so many examples of that in his story and that's one It's like it's like, okay. Yeah, he is the dying and resurrecting God. Yes. He is but then Tell another story after his story. There's no other story to tell because he ends it. He ends that process by by Defeating death itself like okay, so you could say well, you know, he could have been someone else or whatever It doesn't matter. Like what are you talking about? That's where that story is Like what are you talking about? That's where that story happened and that there is no other version of that story That's the story. That's it Like that's where it happened and it's the same with so many things like you can imagine a scapegoat But then you can you imagine a scapegoat that is betrayed by his own people by the foreigners by his own disciples You know, it's like what other categories are there and who is abandoned by God even on the on the cross? And so it's like at some point you reach a limit where it's like there are no more categories left You know that there's there's just none left. And so That's what I think the it's the ultimate pattern is revealed in the story of Christ And that's why like when people say say something like, you know You need to look at the Old Testament through Christ and then you know The scholar will scoff at you and think you know, you're being idiosyncratic You're being you know, you're not paying attention to the historical details, but it's more than that there's something more than that which is that recognizing in the story of Christ how he reaches the limit of this possibility of story and then Realizing that that's it. Like that's the ultimate version of the universal pattern Then of course, you're gonna use that as a lens to look at other stories It's like he gave you a key and and then I'm gonna use that key that would be stupid not to anymore Yeah, it's stupid people to know and and I think part of part of what's exciting to me that's happening is that you know as Jonathan again, so so wonderfully continues to Elaborate, you know, there's a fractal pattern to the universe that that there's little patterns and they just grow bigger and the pattern continues to manifest as it scales and you know so I'm watching all of this talk in the YouTube space about storytelling and there's just crisis and storytelling because They keep they keep wanting to say okay. Yeah Christianity blah blah blah blah blah We need a new story and they can't get beyond it. And so they can and and I'm it's my personal mission to run Parasitic storytelling Jonathan's video up over a million views if I got to do it myself, I will Because because what he points out there is sort of so Jordan Peterson sort of uses meaning as this little Gyroscope within the iron box of secularism It says, you know, you can you can learn something about the direction you need to go by following meaning That's a really important insight, but it's limited and What I think Jonathan gets at in that parasitic storytelling video is a very similar thing by noting that Story itself And many other people have made this point before but story itself bears witness to the storyteller of existence And if you pay close enough attention you'll begin to see it and That's a to me. That's a power. So I'm a preacher. Okay, that's a powerful evangelistic Yeah, I know comes as a surprise, right? So that's that's why I would know when I saw when I saw that video of Jonathan's it was like, oh Wow lights really came on all over the place and this this idea that again, it's so parallel to Jordan because Jordan kept saying you're not gonna rewrite a fairy tale and And part of what Jordan opened up for me is Jordan basically said hey, you know It's not just built into this this this thing we call culture because culture has been dealing with pluralism It's actually a level beneath it. It's all reality And so you're not gonna get away from this and of course you say that and people are like, I don't want to hear that Yeah, well they will they try and then they end up manifesting just the upside down of Christianity that's what they end up manifesting and so it's actually I think that we're actually in a We're in an interesting moment because even when I was young, you know when you had this idea, let's say of When you think of like this idea of the satanic there was satanic hierarchy, you know And you think why would that happen? Like why would anybody want that? It doesn't make any sense It's like there's something about it, which is kind of arbitrary But then once you realize that in the very desire to tell a new story Because you're in the you're in the pattern The only thing you can do is look away from the center look towards the margin and then start to To manifest just the upside down of that story and then it creates these upside down hierarchies this upside down Scapegoating all of this is kind of the the last possible story And I think if any Gerard even mentioned that explicitly He said said after once your once the story of Christ gets revealed and it enters into culture There's only two possibilities There's only Christ or Antichrist and you can't you if you try to get away from Christ You're just moving towards towards Antichrist and you can point it out and say this is why this is Antichrist and it's not it's not arbitrary. It's totally part of the story. It's just it's just that it's still playing out Let's say well, it brings up what you wrote the the article you wrote about You guys I don't even little NOS. I don't know anything Like I've got three little boys and so I'm Not instructing them and In the world of rap I don't know. Anyway, so regardless we're not talking about my lack of current knowledge of The music industry what the point is that is what it was that that's manifested in Directly in that video what you just described is in that video and it's the self like what you Ultimately like hey guys, you don't have to go read it. I just explained it It's it points to pride and the self and basically Satan falling Yeah, it's it's it's it's this is what's interesting. I mean, it's really fascinating Fascinating I it's weird to be fascinated by by watching it happen It's like you you you realize that you wouldn't think that you would get to a point where people would openly celebrate Let's say Satanic values like they would just openly celebrate them pride revolution idiosyncrasy and And the idea that the whole world has to be molded to my will and my desires Like you think how can you know? My grandparents could not have imagined that such a world would come about And now we're just seeing it's right there in front of us It's happening and and so we so what what else can we do it just point to it and say this is it Like this is this is the story. This is what's happening Just be aware that that's what's going on I Mostly about it's mostly about like in the 80s We had these pastors that told us about hidden messages and right why you don't need hidden messages It's like people tell you what you will just tell you what they're doing. They're not hiding it. They're just telling you Yeah My impression was somebody sent that to me and my first impression was exactly like Jonathan's I thought yeah Okay, then evangelicals are gonna throw a big fan and you're gonna feel validated and vindicated because evangelicals through it It's just a food fight. Yeah, but then I watched and it was like Wow There's another level it was like another level of this pattern kind of kind of happening. So Well when I was watching it and the snake wasn't feminine It was just this dude this it was just him him same so yeah itself which was astounding. Yeah Yeah, I wasn't Ready for that. No, but you have to what you have to read even the people praising the video saying what's amazing about this video Is that it really is a beautiful celebration of self love Yes, that's exactly what you're saying What it is it's a celebration of self love People are writing that like there's they're happy they're like finally someone who says you don't actually need someone else You know to complete you it you just can love yourself And take over hell in the process that's right That's what I'm saying. It's like people are not hiding what they're doing. They're telling you straight up Yeah, I believe they don't understand the the ramifications of their position They don't understand what that means and what it's gonna do and and and like I said in the article that yeah If you get on that process that means that there's someone behind you coming for you as well Like that's it's just part and even in yourself It's like you give into you give you give kingship to a desire inside yourself and you submit yourself to that There's another one coming that's darker and more Enslaving that's gonna come topple that one as well Like once you enter into that weird revolutionary thing where you submit yourself to a to a Fragment of yourself or to a part of your desires, then it doesn't end there It gets worse like and you can see it like the the porn addiction is like the most the most visible vision of that in reality now, which is that It starts with this idea that we're gonna liberate sexuality and it ends with someone who can't have sex anymore And is enslaved to some weird fetishistic thing and can't even be aroused without some strange Aberration of the world and so it's like a total slave to this really idiosyncratic thing But that was like through a process of revolutions and a process of giving in to these desires giving in giving in giving in To a point where you're a complete slave So what are you gonna be a slave to folks? Yeah, who you gonna serve? That's right Are you gonna slave to the infinite or the infinite loving God like even if you say you don't believe in that then Even if you can you say you don't believe in that at least you can put those categories up there and you can say Okay, so there's this infinite loving God and then there's some weird fetishistic thing It's like okay So what am I gonna be a slave to or drugs or whatever it is that people kind of end up being slaves to? And I've used that because it's the most prominent on the internet But it's like there are many things that you can become a slave to Okay, okay, so so this actually I'm gonna bring this up I Don't know if it's related but but kind of okay, so so red skull the situation With Peterson and I know sir. I know it's Peterson again Like I can't get away we can't get away from the poor guy like Him being sorry I keep saying poor guy He he is blessed in a way because consider if we join my brothers whenever we face trials of any kind because we Refines our faith Had to say a little bit of scripture there folks. Yeah, so so but any of back to the red skull so That is coming out at the same time as this other video and well, sorry, I don't know I'm guessing ish same time ish of this other this little NASA's video this or it's an inversion of The the good guy the this message that he's giving these young people. I know is Clean up your room take responsibility for yourselves That responsibility message which is a good message, but yeah, but then it's this oh ten rules Let's just change it a little bit guys to like make it like The Ten Commandments they want you wanted to lose the Ten Commandments Explain any of it. Yeah He's the bad guy Yeah, but it's it's a he's the worst a Nazi Yeah, what is so it's funny cuz it's like the Babylon be had the best take on this They had that they always have the best take there such geniuses Like I wish I could talk to these guys because they're just like they're really geniuses So this is something to talk about this like weird double inversion how the word flips upside down then it flips back this is a perfect example of that because So a few years ago they because they want to deconstruct the hierarchy like they want to destroy the hierarchy They want to destroy any form of like social order any form of heroism That's what this all of these woke storytellers want to do Or at least replace them with like their own twisted version of that and so a few years ago They made Captain America into a Hydra agent. Oh Yeah, so they made Captain America into a Hydra agent where he was he had all this time He had been secretly a Hydra agent And so he said hail Hydra and it was like everybody just flipped out and was and was saying you're just totally destroying And so so in the same process of wanting to do that they make The most like reasonable person into the red skull who's basically saying get your act together, you know, be responsible Don't blame others for your problems all of this like really boring Regular advice that any person, you know two generations ago would be telling people but it's like the world is so upside down They're just telling people normal things has become completely completely impossible. And so so the the the Babylon B had Showing Captain America say hail Hydra like well if that's what Hydra is then yes I will submit to Hydra and so it's like this weird thing where they Tried to play two games and then those two games like annulled annulled themselves. That's pretty smart Yeah, so it's pretty smart. It's been it's been fun to watch like the how how Jordan and his fans have been flipping that back and you know showing pictures of the red skull saying, you know Pet a cat and all that stuff So radical so radical so okay, so so sorry Paul, did you have any thoughts on that? I I frankly I've just seen some of the memes but hilarious I I don't know. I'm not enough of a comic book nerd to really keep up with it all He's the simple dude Yeah, okay. Well, I do I okay, so I just actually yesterday going back to Modernity how do you say it? modernity You do say it's special. Yes, you have a way of some words So maybe I'm just making that up but anyway, you talk about modernity a lot you you've been reading that I don't remember the name of it, but there's the the picture of the statue that's Yeah, the iconic class that that they found Yeah, it's a it's a terrific book on the creation of the modern world from 1450 to 1650 reformations and it's Yeah, and I've been learning a ton especially about you know, the way Vatican to you know, it's very interesting the way Vatican to not Vatican to it the way the Council of Trent modernized the Roman Catholic Church And there's a lot of that history. I mean when I was Growing up and then even trained in seminary we were sort of educated in a fairly narrow way within our product Dutch Calvinism about here are all the safe narratives that the preachers go out and repeat but You know again, this has been a tremendous learning experience for me over the last few years Okay, so that's that's probably why I've it's been resonating with me the things that you've been saying it because I just finished the discarded image Yeah On the discord so we just finished that yesterday actually the discussions of it and the the epilogue is is fantastic I'd say it's one of the best parts of the book. Yeah, it is. It's clear I mean, sorry that the whole thing is great. It's it was it was not a thick book, but it was a thick book. So so In the end he he talks about these models that we create So the models that you're looking at in reformations I just finished looking at the medieval model in this but then but then he kind of he sums it up In a way that is so let's look at the pattern and models Yes, the though the medieval model was so very universally accepted in Western Europe No model has actually been as accepted maybe as Openly and universally as that particular model But we continue making new models and and he mentions this about how like but evidence will turn up when the inner need for it Becomes sufficiently great like for the new model like new models will old models will be times attention I'll come up and the evidence isn't made up. It's just It's it's like that. It's discovered because of attention because of what Jonathan was talking to George about right? Yeah So what are the what's the need? What is the? cultural contest Context asking and what are we then pulling out and seeing to create these models and and then of course if the pattern sings it I'm just gonna get the last Last so it determines how much of that total truth will appear and what pattern it will suggest and my pattern Pigeon So There you go, there you go, but the mean guys Well, this is There's something like you know Paul talked about Providence and let's say that the providence of the story and how the story Almost there's something about how you know the the notion you can imagine the despair of the disciples and seeing Christ being crucified and then him dying and then most of them not Understanding how is this possible? How did it that it's happening this way? and then almost falling into despair hiding from the Roman authorities and Then suddenly three days later the surprise of the return and the surprise of this transformed version of what was there before this Fuller version of what was there before and I think that that's what we're seeing happening right before our very eyes and so the medieval pattern had a kind of synthesis that was powerful and was You know was based on on Phenomenological perception and this idea of saving the phenomena, but it was done. It was in the night It was there was something naive about it. Like let's be honest There was something naive about it Which then started to break in the modern age started to fragment to a point where it seemed like this model Was completely unbelievable and was completely insane and was just a complete Delusion from the people who believed it and now we've come to the end of that and The meaning of the medieval model is returning The meaning of the hierarchies of the spheres of the heavens that this idea of these hierarchies of beings of how beings emerge into higher beings and how you know, let's say spirits inform beings from above and create these this Fractal pattern of being now all of a sudden it's being it's like it's all of a sudden showing itself to us and science has reached that point all these these theories about how systems work about how you know any form of Organizational system how it functions all of this is there and all of a sudden It's accessible to us again And I think that not not everybody understands the ramifications of that a lot of people are still afraid to go all the way But I think that like, you know, I think that someone like JP Marceau, for example And even and even let's say John Brevecki what he's doing what I'm doing this is this is I think that this is the This is it like it's gonna take it's gonna happen it's just going to it's going to start to happen more and more and people are just Automatically going to be able to think that way again and most people are not even gonna know how it happened But it's going to it's gonna start to just become obvious It's gonna be it's gonna become obvious that this idea of attention How it affects this hierarchy of being and how it reveals to us this hierarchy? Um JP keeps talking about this book called the revenge of Aristotle, which I probably should read but that just that title is perfect because all of a sudden to say that the world is made of potential and that that potential has to be actualized into into identities it's like you've got Scientists who would just say yeah, that's how it works, you know, that's that's cognitive sciences would just say that's exactly how it works Yeah, yeah And and it's it's you know I always illustrate it with the covering of the eyes because in a sense what modernity was able to do was okay Let's exclude the subject. Let's let's take let's imagine we can see the world and Peterson Begins maps of meaning in this one. Imagine you can see the world as a as a as a realm of objects and what you do with is is you exclude the viewer and we've gotten to a point where We realize that we're just covering one eye or the other and we want to see through both eyes And and or if you're going to do that Well now you are you are realizing that yeah, it's attention you are going to You're going to see what you're looking at. It sounds like the most obvious thing in the world Yeah, that's it that's how it works and and like I said, I think that it's such a in a way it's such a fundamental change that just like One of my contentions is that what happened during the Copernican? Revolution is that there had been a shift in thinking that was so profound that people didn't even realize it so by the time Copernicus was talking about That the the planets the way he was and that by the time Galileo was doing it the change-out already happened And they didn't even totally understand what they were arguing about and I think that the the depth of the change that is happening right now is at that level and you know, I talk like I talked with my brother Matt here about his book and You know, I mean both of us would have wished that he could have sold, you know a large amount of his books But obviously that's not what happened, you know, he sold a few thousand books, but I I told him I said what's gonna happen Matt here is that in ten years? People are gonna are going to start thinking that way and they won't even know where it comes from And they won't even realize because it's just it's just gonna seep into culture and it's gonna It's gonna start to underlie the way people see the world and it's going to kind of happen in a in a magical way I don't know what other word to use And this is what was happening during the Protestant Reformation. Yeah Okay, I wanted to say this little quote before you go into this Paul because it's sort of why I brought up reformations The book that you brought up and then and then I won't interrupt you anymore So so again, just interrupt me all you want Andrea I'm actually like I've held off this. I'm from New Jersey. We interrupt each other all the time. It's me feel at home So in the discussion the the book club discussion about the discarded image that we were we kind of ended up going in this Well, what's after the medieval model and and one of one of my friends mentioned like mechanical printing press mechanical worldview and That's where that she she was saying that's kind of where that Started and now we're coming to the end of that and that's sort of What it seems like is relevant to what you guys are talking about like this That must be what you just described Jonathan is like the seeds. I think what you were just like about it's just gonna seep in It's not short-term, but it's the long term. Yeah, and and and I want to throw it back and you just see it in retrospect Like you couldn't I don't think that people I think they had an inkling like that that that Ockham for example that the way that Ockham was presenting reality They had an inkling that there was something wrong about it There was something off and that this wasn't this wasn't right and so they kind of fought it but it just happened the change happened and The idea of pushing God up into the heavens and disconnecting God from the world completely then it that's what happens. It leaves the world to become this mechanical Arbitrary thing and then and then the the fruits of that don't appear right away Takes a while for the fruits to appear and by the time the fruits are showing themselves. It's like it's too late You can't stop this machine anymore. You can't stop this freight train. It's just it's it's happening. So Which is which is what happened in the Protestant Reformation there was you know, Jan Hus Wycliffe there were all these manifestations that happened before and in a sense the Roman Catholic Church and the And the civil leaders were sort of playing whack-a-mole on things, but it had an outbreak it's not unlike a virus and that outbreak then spread now didn't spread everywhere because eventually The Catholic Church and in in the Council of Trent figured out in a sense how to adapt to modernity in the Council of Trent they Regularized, you know, it's again. I didn't know any of this history. They regularized all of this stuff They took out they took out the extremes from all the miracles and and in a sense what happens in in the Council of Trent is they they okay, we're done with the Middle Ages and now modern Catholicism is going to begin and and that's how they were able to not allow the Protestant Reformation to consume all of Europe but of course Protestantism had its own thing to play and Of course the radical Reformation which were the Anabaptists in many ways the Anabaptists Kept losing battles, but in some ways kept winning wars because many of the ideas of the Anabaptists have you know, even if you listen to The Roman Catholics have their own fight going on but listen to a guy like Bishop Baron so much of Stuff has he's been able to you know, basically integrate all of this other stuff Which is why he can do what he does. I mean, he's a brilliant man But this is this is the process but again back to my point that It's not unlike the pandemic I remember when you know, it was March when things were starting to you know, when things finally closed down a lot of people said Well, you know, it's here already it's and That's that's where we're at too. And that's why the artists and Peterson said this many times that's why the artists manifest at first because artists are Doing a different thing. It's There you know, if you look at good basketball players, they don't think They don't think with a certain part of their brain to play basketball Because it would mess them up. Yeah, you know, you want to have a basketball player miss a free throw, you know, get him thinking And it's the same with artists and so, you know, that's why it always manifests first in the arts Okay, I think I don't know. I'm not the artist he is No, I think so I think that especially even especially in this change that's happening now It in a way almost has to be led by artists because it has to appear as an embodied Reality, you know and as a participative reality and so it actually has to leave the heady scholar space, you know and and kind of land into stories into images that people can identify with And so I think that yeah, I think that that's that's the the best way or the most it's just gonna happen on its own Like I said, it's not it's and it's already it was already there before, you know the artists were the ones leading culture where there was music or You know in the early 20th century was painters, but then it became mostly music I would say in our generation that they're the ones who were leading the changes in thinking and so and so it's still gonna be that I think and film I mean film. Yeah film for sure film is such a powerful medium I mean when you think about how its music and its visual and its incarnate in a you know in a way and now that with with the internet we have this just Proliferation of artistry out there. Mm-hmm. Okay. Well, I am realizing that our time is probably coming To an end because it's been a while Yeah, I want to keep you guys and but I just want to end on one last Question and it's I mean, it's gonna be really short. So don't worry about it Yeah, so the participation that's something going back to the Your your conversation with Jordan Jonathan Like you could always go to church He said it I didn't say But The thing about theosis is participation with the divine the thing about the church is is the participation in in the body of Christ Within the community your community that you are in Why is participation so important and why are What are we to do in this space of individualism really short question? Yeah, just a little one. Yeah Well, I mean that's how reality is that's how it works I mean that you know when st. Paul talks about the body You know working together Towards the head that's how everything functions everything that has being needs to have its parts participating in its whole Right, whether it's a pen or whatever it is like for if the parts of my pen don't participate towards the whole of the pen Towards the identity the pen that I'm gonna throw it out because it's not it's gonna be useless It's not gonna write and so that's how that's actually how reality works and it says it's true It's true for things it's true for families it's true for cities it's true for any level of being That's how it works. And so if we don't if we don't have participative We don't have ways to participate in higher beings in terms of communities then we're going to we're going to fragment and we're going to break apart and then And then we're going to become fodder for something else We're going to become potential for another identity to just smash us and I mean think about you can just think about it in terms of an ancient city that Doesn't work together to to build the wall to do whatever it needs to do and to live together And then there's an enemy at the gate But they haven't they haven't participated in the life of the city So the enemy just marches right in and there's nothing you can do to stop them They built their house in the sand instead of the rock There you go. They built they tried to build alone instead of together. Yeah Okay Because that that I mean the I mean there's a there's a deep crisis in in the church especially the Protestant Church and That all of these things because this is so deeply entwined with Protestantism that That we have to you know, we have to work this through but now when you think about vervekis meaning crisis That the meaning crisis has everything to do with participation because it seems the way human beings are made to live is by Jonathan said it again and again in his conversation with Jordan by worship because worship is attention plus caring or love that's worship and You know Heidegger notes that caring, you know without the meaning crisis is well There's nothing to care about because there's no self and the reason there's no self is because our self is always borrowed from the origin of self which is which is which is God and so that's that's the participation and if we if we are not participating in the in the How to say in we are for now participating in God as I think I think Jonathan's response to the freedom question I think was absolutely tremendous. We are going to look to participate in other gods and The problem with all of those other gods are that they are functionally we turn those other gods into idols and they will never Satisfy because our hearts are not satisfied until we have everything and so Okay, I'm going to be as I'm gonna be a great basketball player But you know that runs out when I hit 35 or I'm gonna be a great this I'm gonna be a great that it's all fragmented and so we we long for participation and we try participating in all of these sub gods turning them into idols and once we learn that we can only finally find as Augustine said Satisfaction by participating in the God then suddenly all of the other things Yeah, what did Jesus say at the end of Matthew 6 seek first the kingdom and his righteousness and all of these things will be You know given to you because if you if you look to the other gods You're you're you're going to have a meaning crisis and you're going to become slaves to those other gods So you must be slave to the God and then all of the other things are available to you Yeah, and it just if you think about it Just the idea that if you if you submit yourself to the the the source of all reality If you don't if he the word God bothers you at least at the outset If you submit yourself to the source of all reality then everything lines itself up everything gets aligned in that in that that hierarchy and then the Elements of being stopped to fight amongst each other so much They actually start to cooperate, you know towards because one of the problems with these little gods Is that they fight amongst each other and you feel it in yourself where you feel pulled you feel ripped apart between different Desires that you have and you see it in society where people start to be ripped apart politically ripped apart in terms of ideology in terms of identities and so the solution is of course to To join ourselves and to you know to to submit ourselves to the highest at least you know So yeah, so yeah, so okay, I think this is I mean we could But I think this is a good space to to To to be done for now, but but I actually have one more question for you, Jonathan I Know I'm so bad at like I'm like I lied. Sorry. Are you gonna do more video game videos? Cuz like I could use you guys It's so funny cuz a lot of people are asking them at the same time for some reason the one I did didn't get a Lot of you so and I think maybe because I the Donkey Kong one No, we got like I think it barely got like 10,000 views. I think Go watch the Donkey Kong video. Yes. I can't I will definitely I'll definitely I'll probably make at least one more because I promise that I would make one on on like Super Mario as As because it's really a fairy tale if you look at even the structure of the game But it also has a lot in it. It has a real an intense. Let's say It has a lot in it. And so I probably will talk about it But I'm not in a hurry just because there's so many things to talk about anyways I know I guess I've just been like you're like and I'll be doing another one. I'm like, oh goody Yeah, and then like four months later or whatever We only have one Jonathan let other people go out and make these videos Yeah, make your your YouTube videos. Make a better video than Jonathan. Yes, go out and do it. Go ahead try Absolutely To end the only reason why I've You know sneakily Tricked you all to come in is so I can ask you please bring my message to Jordan Peterson, please The whole thing I didn't care about that all I cared about was can you please send this book or this message That's right Like can you please get this to Peters would heal the world that way Okay, guys, I don't actually know how to sorry thank you for coming on my show I mean you can just edit it. You might have to I will I will thank you though. Thank you for coming on Okay