https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=a1EOdu9-tu4

 Hi, this is Paul. I am back from Australia. The Australia videos are coming from my presentation at the conference there. While I was in Australia, of course, the Jordan Peterson Liberty University event happened, and just yesterday the One Last Question video was released, and a lot of you have been clamoring for some commentary on this, and some of you have been in withdrawal. I haven't done a really long Me Talking to You video in a rather long time, so, well, we're going to do it today, and I'm not going to do too much of the second video today just because I had this one laid out yesterday when it came, and I've only altered it a little bit. Bruce Ashford, if you go to... oh nuts, I probably eliminated that click. Bruce Ashford, someone I didn't... Bruce Ashford Jr., someone I didn't know, professor of theology and culture, dean of faculty, provost at... where? Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary. I know nothing of that institution. I've not read any of his books, but anybody who writes Every Square Inch, an Introduction to Cultural Engagement for Christians... let me pause again. A guy who writes a book that is described as, In every square inch Bruce Ashford skillfully navigates such questions, drawing on sources like Abraham Kuyper, C.S. Lewis, and Francis Schaeffer. This guy should be right down my alley. Don't know anything about him. I've started following him on Twitter because of Esther's recommendation, and he's offered an article for this book that Ron Dart is editing and will be coming out at some point. Had a tweet and a piece in the Gospel Coalition. Again, these are my theological tribe. Conservative, Reformed Calvinists, maybe not all Dutch Reformed Calvinists, but if you're looking at Abraham Kuyper, well, you don't get much more Dutch Reformed Calvinists than Abraham Kuyper. And he wrote what I thought was quite a good piece on the Gospel Coalition about Jordan Peterson. It was fairly affirming. But he put one of the pullout quotes that he led with in Twitter today, three or so hours ago, maybe five hours ago now. Unless Jordan Peterson buys wholesale into the Christian faith, his solution is insubstantial, metaphysically, and is a little more than a banquet of crushed ice and vapor. And this is what I call an 80% article in that I... this article is 80% there, I think. And what it doesn't show is, well, so the tweet I had following up on the previous tweet, I thought, I think this is a good piece. I'm happy for the 80% good Jordan Peterson articles rather than the Christian deficiency articles, which is where we say, well, here we are as Christians and this is where Jordan Peterson is deficient. That article does that, but just a little bit, and it's not a bad move to make. You'll find plenty of video of me doing it. Rather than the Christian deficiency or the leftist hit piece, the church needs to seriously confront why we are falling short and what Jordan Peterson is offering. And if you had to put a thesis on all of my video rambling, way too many hours of way too unfocused video, there it is. Rod Dreher is going down the Jordan B. Peterson rabbit hole. I believe it was Rod Dreher where I initially saw things about Peterson early on, and that's when I went down the rabbit hole. But apparently Dreher just kind of took glancing looks at him. And lately Dreher's been watching more of his videos and blogging more about him. And today Dreher is doing his homework. And so he's starting to wrestle with Jung. And I know from a number of you out there, I haven't wrestled enough with Jung. So my apologies. But Jung is a complex guy to wrestle with, especially if you're a Christian. So wrestling with Jung is something that we're going to continue to do. And he brings this full circle. Of course, Dreher has his own path. If you know anything about Rod Dreher, he converted to Roman Catholicism. He grew up in Louisiana where Catholicism is pretty much a staple. But when he and his wife went to a priest to ask the priest for guidance about Roman Catholic sanctioned birth control, the priest rolled his eyes and said, oh, one of them, which led eventually to Dreher's, let's see, conversion. I don't like using that word for hopping, for entering into different rooms of Christianity. He then went to the Orthodox where the Orthodox were taking, or at least taking themselves more seriously than this Roman Catholic priest seemed to be taking his own faith. And so Dreher, I've been, I've read Dreher quite a few years now and really appreciate Dreher. I haven't bought the Benedict option. After reading so much Dreher, I wondered if I needed to buy the Benedict option. I've got my own thoughts on Dreher's Benedict option. In some ways, a lot of those thoughts go down to the Benedict option that the Christian Reformed Church had been living before World War II. And I've got a lot of those thoughts with respect to the Christian Reformed Church. But most of you aren't interested in any of that because that's Christian Reformed Church in fighting. But here Dreher, you know, is looking at an evangelical church that converts its floor into a basketball court. This is pretty standard practice for evangelicalism. Sometimes anything to get attention, any bandwagon that might give us a platform, anytime an NFL or NBA star gets on stage and says, I just like to give all the glory to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that is the evangelical move. And I'm not going to say anything against it because it's exactly right. But it's right there with my 80 percent article on Bruce Ashford's piece. It's yes, but and maybe that's the story of my life and maybe I'm not being gracious enough. But that's my angst with that part of the church. And Dreher expresses it here. Can you see this is why Jordan Peterson is so successful today in reaching people, why so many members of the Christian clergy are not. And this is, of course, exactly why I went down this rabbit hole. Peterson may or may not be a Christian, but he talks about mythology, especially Christian mythology. That is Bible stories, as if they were true in the Jungian sense. That is, if they told us things that are true about reality and ourselves, and he teaches his listeners what they can learn from these myths. And the Benedict option, the prominent sociologist of religion, Christian Smith, weighed in on this passage about Christianity and Eros. And those of you know who follow my work know that I quote Christian Smith an awful lot too. Christian Smith is one of those people that's very important to read to do current cultural exegesis. Christian Smith's work was the foundation for the observation of moralistic therapeutic deism. I read Christian Smith's, I probably, yeah. I bring the book so often into my videos, read Christian Smith's Soul Searching, where he is a sociologist, goes through the basic work he did of asking the youth of America questions about now what really do you believe and mapping it and working it through. So, so all of this is extremely relevant stuff, which makes Jordan Peterson going to Liberty University. Wow, when I heard he'd gone there I, I just, I was just shocked. Now, so then the tweet that I tweeted out that Drear picked up. There's a, so Warren Mills, Warren, who I'll have on the channel at some point, at the, I played some of the Liberty U video at a Sunday night event in Warren's Anglican Church in Melbourne, Australia. And, and we had a discussion on it and, and Warren mentioned the overlapping, the non overlapping magisteria that's usually the way we talked about religion and science or the Bible and science. And now it's not just the Bible and assignments, it's a whole series of alignments that, that run along those lines and so I use the word separated magisteria because I, I won't accept that they're not overlapping. And so, Jordan Peterson sticks to psychology and keeps his beliefs private. And again, almost every time that he gets cornered asked, do you believe in God, asked about his personal spiritual life with, for if you're a pastor you, you get so used to talking about this because it's on all of your job applications. But Jordan Peterson, you know, he doesn't want to talk about this and this I've discovered in talking privately to a number of academics who have been listening to Jordan Peterson under the covers. And there's a great deal of hesitation in secular universities for people to talk about their personal faith. Dallas Willard is of course, I think the great exception and for many Christian academics probably a great model about how to navigate those waters. We certainly miss Dallas Willard now. And there's a biography of Dallas Willard out that, that, you know, really was helpful to me in opening my eyes to a bunch of stuff about him that I didn't know. But how to talk about this in the modern university and that these, these separated conflicting magisteria, which is where we're at. Liberty University is exactly the place where all of these things come together. Liberty University is exactly the institution that Sam Harris, that gives Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins hives. I remember when Dawkins was on Unbelievable talking to a Jewish, a Jewish rabbi and a Christian minister and they're having a lovely conversation and Dawkins kept saying in the Unbelievable, in the Unbelievable podcast, he kept saying, you know, you're not the kinds of Christians I have a problem with. Well, Liberty University is exactly the kinds of Christians that Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins and an entire group within the IDW really can't stand. And that's where Jordan Peterson goes. It's, and did he know what he was doing when he went there? It just blows my mind. It just blows my mind. It blows my mind. Esther sent me a, sent me a message via Twitter. I was in Australia. I was completely out of the loop. And she said, Jordan Peterson spoke at Liberty University. And I thought, what? And someone rushed the stage. And I thought, what? Yes, God is the author. We are all just sub-authors. I'm distracting myself because Esther made a comment to me about God number one and God number two that she really saw it here. And that's right. God number one and God number two is in full view in this video. Now, those of you who want to get up to speed on my God number one and God number two, these are aspects of the Christian God. The Christian God is fully God number one and God number two. But it's exactly this dividing point that divides Jordan Peterson from Sam Harris. God number one is the immanent God, the God of general revelation, the God of Romans one, the God of the pagans, half of Isaiah six, where the Seraphim come into the temple and sing, Holy, holy, holy, the whole earth is full of his glory. God number one is the whole earth is full of his glory. God number two is holy, holy, holy. He's the axiomatic God. This is the God of natural theology that Jordan Peterson has been constructing. This is the God that Darwin dismissed and Jordan Peterson has used Darwin to reintroduce him into theology. In a sense, what Jordan Peterson has said is you can, you can, okay, so maybe you can have your origins without God, sayeth Darwin, which I have my doubts about, but you can't have psychology without God number one. And that's why I said in the Australian meetings that that it could be that in this conversation, Jordan Peterson might be the most important person in this conversation since Darwin, because I think this is a source of the breadpilling that Jordan Peterson has been doing. Now, God number two is the God that Sam Harris and the celebrity atheists keep trying to debunk. God number two is the God that David Nassar keeps throwing back at Jordan Peterson in this conversation. God number two is the transcendent God, and they will get into that in the one more question video with David Nassar after, which I'm not going to play in this video because it deserves its own whole video, as does the first video. He is the God of special revelation. He is the God who comes to Abraham, Jacob, Moses, and David. He is the God that Jordan Peterson keeps trying to build a bridge to. So Jordan Peterson in a sense comes solidly in and says God number one, and then he keeps inching up. And then he keeps inching up. God one point two, God one point five. And this is what we see Jordan doing at Liberty University because David Nassar will keep saying God number two, and Jordan Peterson will keep creeping up there. And Jordan Peterson with his little natural theology Tower of Babel of sorts just keeps trying to add a new level. And I don't mean to say to draw a connection between the moral equivalence of Jordan Peterson's project and the Tower of Babel, but there's a connection between those two. As some person came up to me and noted quite recently that that's exactly right. There's a connection there because this is us making our way to God. And it's not a bad thing as as Paul says in Romans one. It's in fact something that we should do, but we suppress the truth with our hearts. Why? Well, we'll get into that in this video. God number two is the God of Israel. He's the holy, holy, holy of the pronouncement where the whole earth is full of his glory. God number one and God number two. So Jordan Peterson keeps creeping up God one point five. And that's the big tease for all the Christians watching this Truman show of Jordan Peterson's wondering, is he going to flip? Is he going to flip? Is Truman going to say, ah, this world is just a construction? And there's this guy Christoph who's sitting up in the booth. What was the actor's name? Ed Harris with a beret. And he's, you know, bringing the storms and he's bringing the lightning and he's bringing in parents for Truman to know. It is such a Truman show. And thanks to David who rushed the stage, we get a case study. I mean, this this moment, this video couldn't be better. And then I'm going to introduce Leo Beb. And some of you aren't going to like Leo Beb, but that's exactly the point of Leo Beb. And I don't know how many of you already know Leo Beb. We'll get into him. So Liberty University. Let's talk a little bit about that because context is important here. As I said before, Liberty University is exactly, they are the as close to the archetype at the moment as you can find for everything that Sam Harris hates. And this is where Jordan Peterson goes. This is Sam Harris's nightmare. This is what this is what Sam Harris was trying to do on stage with Jordan Peterson. This is the warning. Jordan, don't associate with these people. And here he goes. Now if you look at their policies, look at their doctrinal statements, most their doctrinal items are broadly standard evangelical. It's a very standard evangelical page. They emphasize six day creation in six days. They weren't outspokenly creationistic, but that may be there. I don't know that Liberty University. They emphasize believers baptism, not infant baptism as we call it in the Christian Reformed Church and practice it in the Christian Reformed Church as is practiced in the Lutheran Church and the Episcopalian Church and the Roman Catholic Church. Their believer Baptist, their dispensational-ish in terms of their doctrinal statement. Premillennial eschatology, seven day tribulation. They are exactly in the right place that when Karl Rove in the, what year was it? What was George W. Bush's first election? When Karl Rove looked over the electoral map, he said, with these people we can take the White House. And I wanted, I even made a PowerPoint to do a response to my friend Mr. Reagan's video about AOC. It's not new to cast politicians. In fact, as Andrew Claven said, that's standard practice for casting politicians. And Karl Rove looked out over the electoral map and said, with these people, with people that Liberty University is exactly at the center of, with these people we can build a coalition. And it's for that reason that they, it's, then later on in George W. Bush's presidency he went to Calvin College hoping to get the Liberty U treatment and it didn't happen because the Dutch Calvinists are a different breed and our politics are a little bit different and our stances are a little bit different. But Liberty U is exactly it. So then David Packman, whose videos I don't watch, but I just YouTube Googled Jordan Peterson, Liberty U, his video came up and he described it as four nuts on stage. These are exactly the people they hate. And he goes right after the student conduct policy, which to me looked pretty standard, very much like Calvin College's student policy, which, you know, school, my alum, you know, I am an alumnus of Calvin College, my alma mater, had some petty 1970 leftovers in the dress code like no jeans or shorts or cutoffs. That's kind of Southern-ish, that's kind of fundamental-ish, that's something I'm not terribly surprised at, at a place like Liberty University, but that's who those people are. They've also got some controversial business practices. If you look at top Christian schools, Columbia College probably associated with the Christian Church Disciples of Christ centralized in Columbia, Missouri, that's their central, like Grand Rapids, Michigan is the central hub of the Christian Reform Church. Liberty University is enormous, 108,000 students as compared to Columbia College, which with its almost 30,000 students. Now, most of those students are online students, but so they've got a huge amount of money, $215 million of net income from 2016, $1 billion overall in total revenue, $1.25 billion endowment. That's an enormous endowment, 14,000 students on campus, 95,000 students online. Part of what's controversial, and you can look this up at Nonprofit Quarterly, very low per student costs. They have figured out how to economize in all of this. Now, I'm expecting a phone call, so I might interrupt for if the phone rings. That's why I hear the people texting and stuff and my phone here. Phoenix University, for example, which is the largest online university, spends $4,000 a student. So very controversial. And if that's not controversial enough, their politics, Jerry Falwell Senior, those of us who are old enough to remember, was one of the key figures in the religious right movement of the 80s and really founded Liberty University and made it what it is today. Jerry Falwell Jr. in the run up of the 2016 election, there was a civil war of sorts being waged over Trump, whether conservative evangelicals who would be turned off by their president doing the kinds of things that Donald Trump does, saying the kinds of things that Donald Trump says, Dobson calling him a baby Christian, but here's Jerry Falwell Jr. standing with thumbs up, and his wife, Jerry Falwell Jr.'s wife, right next to the Playboy cover that Donald Trump was on. And I grew up in the New York metropolitan area back in the 70s and 80s. Donald Trump was in the news regularly for his antics. He's on the Howard Stern show. This is Donald Trump and, well, Liberty University's student policies compare that to Donald Trump's behavior, and it's a stark contrast. And so, Falwell has been, Jerry Falwell Jr. has been at least as controversial as his father. Two other guys on the stage, David Nassar. I probably spelled his name wrong. Oh, E.R. I should correct that. Hang on. I didn't know who David Nassar was, and Esther pointed me to this Christianity Today testimony piece of his, which is lovely. He's a senior VP of spiritual development at Liberty U. That's a very high position. He'd be main chaplain, I suppose, in places like Calvin College or Wheaton College. My friend Tim Blackman is chaplain over at Wheaton College. Maybe I shouldn't mention Tim. Tim was a church planter here with us in Sacramento. Tim is, I think, the world of Tim. But David Nassar escaped from Iran and tells his story in that CT article, and he's a preacher and an author and evangelist. And I just love this guy's heart. I can see why he's risen through the ranks, and he's a very interesting guy to be at Liberty University. And so, you know, here's the thing. I've got a very low resolution view of Liberty University. Karen Prior Swallow is the person that prior swallow prior. I don't remember, but she's a person that I've followed on Twitter and Facebook for a while and author also teaches at Liberty University. And so they've they seem to have some good faculty there. So I don't want to I don't want to let my low resolution political views distort them in my representation of them. So I want to be a little bit careful. So, you know, I really, really love David Nassar in these videos and Gary Habermas. You know, when I found the the Veritas Forum video that Gary Habermas did a number of years ago, I didn't know he taught at Liberty University. He's the chair of their philosophy department. He's the guy with the minimal facts argument that Jesus died by crucifixion. Disciples had a real experience. Disciples had transformed lives. So he's taught very early. James, the brother of Jesus conversion and Paul of Tarsh's conversion. I love that presentation. And usually every Easter I'll do it again this Easter. I will replay that video for myself because I find it so encouraging and powerful. This is a powerful argument that Gary Habermas has put together and he teaches at Liberty University and apparently has for a long time because Jerry Falwell Jr. says he used to be his professor. So, again, I might my resolution is lifting beyond my low resolution biases about the institution. And then Jordan Peterson goes there and now I took the video and I I chopped some things up but I've got most of it in there and I kind of want to walk through it. Pay attention to Nassar and Jordan Peterson. It's their interchanges that are most important. From some words from back channels to me, Jordan Peterson fully accepted the context. In other words, they they talked to him about his presence for the worship part of the of the convocation and them praying over him. You know, sounds like they were very gracious guests. Now, again, I want to attribute Liberty University to the fact that they hosted Bernie Sanders. And I think that speaks a lot of them. So they're Liberty University is a bit of a mystery to me and there's a lot I don't know about it. And I'm sure in the comments section, folks will folks will give me more teach me more about it. And I'm happy to learn a very high and openness. But again, this is of any place in the United States. You know, Wheaton, Calvin College, they are nowhere near where Liberty is in terms of the archetype of everything Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins can't stand. So again, it still blows my mind that Peterson went here. Now, whether they, you know, they invited him, whether Peterson no knew all of this when he went there, I don't know. I have a conversation I'll put out a little bit later this week with Cassidy again. And, you know, one of the things that I mentioned to her is that I know to one degree or another the landscape of of Christianity in America. Jordan Peterson doesn't. And so he's kind of, you know, forest gumping his way through the Christian church. This is why I do videos I hadn't thought of that before. He's forest gumping his way through the thing. And so here he lands at Liberty University. I still can't get over it. So. But he fully accepted the context. What were their agendas for him? They want to flip him. Boy, that'd be a big story. What was achieved? Now, I'm going to go to the tape. Hang on. Tape. Now, they had an introduction introductory video about Peterson. They that had a lot of the culture war stuff. It's important to know that they had when they do. But when they do what's liturgy for them, you know, it'll be it'll be mega church style stuff. It'll be allowed. It'll be big. It'll be expressive. That's the genre of this church. That's the that's the genre that that Rod Dreher is pushing back on with his with his basketball articles. But but here is Peterson in the middle of it. And so let's let's roll it. Hands together for Dr. Jordan Peterson. Such an honor to have you here. Honestly, by far the most just requested speaker this semester. That's astounding. That's astounding. It seems like so many of our students are watching your videos. They're logging on to hear what you have to say. Many have been impacted by your books. And so for all of you who keep hounding me about getting Dr. Peterson here, he's finally here. Can we again welcome him to the house? This is the thing about a chaplain at a Christian college, the chaplain usually in many ways has the ear of the student body. And that's why they get pastors to do this job, because this is a skill set that pastors have. And so many of our students have just been impacted by you. Over three million books have been sold. I walked into clearly the one most enthusiastic about having Jordan Peterson there. Just just in terms of observation. Maybe that isn't fair. But this is a fun video. I was at the Barnes and Noble the other day. And you know you're doing well when you've got good product placement in a book right in the front. But you know you're doing really well where they have stacks and stacks of your book behind the cash register just to keep up with the demand. And the young lady that was there started talking to me a little bit. And then this other employee came up and he said, it's been interesting. So many men are buying this book. Typically women are a lot more frequent, you know, shoppers at a bookstore these days. But he said this book is just taking over the world. And so one of the points that I made in Melbourne was was that generally speaking, in my experience, men watch the videos and women read the books. And we had a fair amount of women participating at the Melbourne Conference. And their takes for me are particularly interesting, because as you'll see in my video, the conversation I do with Cassidy a little bit later in the week, this stuff is fun. It's very interesting in terms of how men and women relate to him differently. And a lot of that has to do with coming through the book. But now Nassar is saying men are buying the book too. How do you think it has it has just touched a nerve? Why do you think this book has really triggered 12 Rules of Life, you know, just and really connected with so many people? Well, I think the fundamental reason I sort of learned this in live lectures that I've been doing. What's interesting about Peterson here is he's already emotional. And one of the things that you'll hear in the rest of this and then the next video too is how powerful the whole experience had been for him, especially with respect to the the non-cynical atmosphere of that campus as opposed to the cynical atmospheres at secular campuses. And I would say that that's quite true of Christian colleges. Christian colleges are in many ways on the front line of the culture war and Christianity today, at least in America, Christian churches have a high degree of buffer and insulation that Christian colleges don't. So kudos to Liberty U. I visited about 150 cities with my wife over the last year. It's a lot of cities. And I've watched the audiences very carefully and listened to them to see what resonates and what does. He's already emotional. This is this is fascinating. And I think the the basic argument that I've been laying out is that, well, we all have difficult lives, you know, that life is characterized in in large part by suffering. There's an inevitable element of suffering in life. I mean, obviously that's symbolized in Christianity by the crucifixion, which is a very harsh symbol. And and not only is life sorrowful in in in part, but it's also touched by malevolence and malevolence of each of us and the malevolence of our social creations, our societies. And even in some sense, the kind of blind malevolence of nature. And so it's it's it's it's it's a demanding occupation to to exist as a human being. And you need something to sustain yourself through that. It's not optional because the the price of existence is so high that without that sustaining meaning, it it it corrupts you. It it embitters you. And and once you're embittered, things go downhill rapidly. Now that sustaining meaning, I think what he's talking about here, you could I think is manifest then in a Christian university because that embitterment is actually what leads to cynicism. And so you would you would hope to find the non bitterness and the non citizen cynicism in a Christian university. It vengeful and you get angry and you get destructive. And then there's really no limit to that. And I've been suggesting to people that the sustaining meaning that they can find in their life isn't to be found through happiness, let's say, because happiness doesn't work when you're not happy, when when when when things have gone badly for you, for even for accidental reasons. But you can find sustaining meaning and responsibility and you can take responsibility for yourself. And of course, it's been the on the cultural right that this is part of the reason that Peterson, although, you know, he's a he's a moderate Canadian politically, which would put him probably left of center on many policy issues in the United States, with the exception of the identity politics issues. But but the responsibility is, of course, long been an emphasis on the right of the culture war. And so, again, you'll tend to find Peterson welcome. I think this is part of the reason he's being read on the American culture war spectrum as right wing because he's making the same noises about responsibility. And again, his his presence at Liberty University is fascinating because, of course, Peterson is a full fledged Darwinian, not a six day creationist, certainly not a young earth six day creationist. He's a full fledged Jungian and he's going to quote you here. So, boy, this is interesting. You can do that. And if you take responsibility for yourself, you treat yourself as if you're someone that's worthy of care and and discipline. And then that has nothing to do with being soft on yourself or the pursuit of pleasure. Any of those things you can take responsibility for yourself. And that works. And then if you do that properly, you can take responsibility for your family. And then if you do that properly, you can take responsibility for your community and you can continue to burden yourself voluntarily, let's say, with with a greater and greater range of existential challenges. And all that that does is make more and more and more of you. This is the heart of Peterson's message right here, right here. This is this is his cry. This is this is his missional heart cry for the world. And that's why he's always weepy during these passages. And that works as an antidote to the catastrophe of life. And, you know, so you get a sense of his wounded healer status. Right. Henry knew Henry Henry now and Dutch Roman Catholic author, tremendous author, you know, wrote about the wounded healer. And now and and now when, of course, as came out later, was same sex attracted and dealt with all of those issues himself. And so and it gave a resonance and a depth to his understanding that understanding that by his stripes, we are healed, understanding that the Messiah we need is the one who is broken. He's not, you know, this comes through archetypally in our superhero movies. This is and again, this is what Peterson himself embodies when he speaks about depression and despair and suffering. There's an authenticity in him because this is the road he has traveled. I speak to my audience is seriously and pessimistically in some sense about part of the substructure of existence, the mortal side, the fragile side. But conclude, I would say that there's more to you than there is to what faces you. And I believe that to be true. And then I'm encouraging people to to attempt that. And I think part of the reason that the book has been perhaps particularly popular among men is because I don't think we do a very good job at the moment of encouraging men. We have this idea that there's something intrinsically oppressive about the patriarchy and about masculinity in general. And so again, the Christian community, Christian colleges, especially conservative Christian places. They never gave up on men. And this has been part of the battleground in the Christian Reformed Church. We've had we had a 25 year battle over whether or not women should be allowed to hold church office. And even though the the war in the Christian Reformed Church ended with a truce. The tensions are still there. And obviously because of the tailwinds of the hurricane of the culture war that blow into the Christian Reformed Church, these things take up resonance. And a place like Liberty University, they're in a sense, they've been working even if the system, and this is something that we'll point out throughout this video, even if the system doesn't formally change, there's impacts that happen in the institution. The even the conservatives change when the contexts change. I think that's nonsense. I think that strong, honest, truthful, courageous men pursuing noble goals is of great benefit to everyone, male and female alike. Emotionally, I mean, it's barely gotten started here. This is this is phenomenal. And again, David Nasser, a good pastor, you know, knows how to mirror and engage and draw out. And I want that to happen. I want that to happen. So many universities in the United States now are 60 percent female student body. I don't know if it's like that in Canada or not. It's the same. It's the same thing. And then that's that's changing extraordinarily rapidly at the rate the demographic shift is occurring. There won't be a man left in the humanities or the social sciences in 10 years. And then that's clearly it's clearly a failure on the part of the universities to have that happen. It's wonderful to see women entering the sphere of higher education on Mars. But but something is out of balance. And it's and since, you know, for better or worse, as men and women were bonded together intractably, we have to ensure that our institutions are set up so that they're of optimal benefit to to everyone. Again, this is something that when women complain to me about Jordan Peterson, that's something that they don't hear what he said right there. He's not saying men and women need each other. They always have. Otherwise, everyone pays. Do you think that there's with so much fatherlessness that that might have been another reason why you're just really seeing so many not just women, but a lot of men to show up and read your book, come to your events. Again, he's a pastor. So these pastoral issues are evident to him. And so that's what he's bringing to the stage and pastors. Pastors don't fit into the contemporary frameworks very well. We're we're such generalists in that we we deal with institutions in terms of churches. We deal with people in terms of pastoral care sort of. So we deal with institutions sort of like business people. We deal with people sort of like therapists. But but but pastoral profession is older than all of these things. So we're kind of the it's our profession that has been fragmented out into specialists. Heard you tell a story about a father and son that you met in LA. Oh yeah. You tell that story really quickly. Oh yeah. I also think it touches to the point that you really. Many of us have heard that story a lot. Care about the people that your book has affected at a very personal level. By the way, I love your opening. It's so nice to come to a gathering like this that isn't characterized by like a like a toxic under structure of cynicism. You know, I see that in so many universities and it's really corrosive. And I hate to see it among young people because, well, first of all, you haven't earned your cynicism. That would be the first thing. But second, well, second, because it's so corrosive and it's such a catastrophe to go to institutes of higher learning and see that what's being developed in young people when they're first starting to open themselves up to the world is a cynicism that tells them before they know anything that life is a terrible thing. Life is a terrible catastrophe. Human beings are a cancer on the face of the planet and nothing can be done about it. And it was so lovely to see the opening ceremony here and to feel the. What would you say? Yeah, the warmth and the welcoming and the and the and the genuine. You seem genuinely pleased to be here. And look, there's 12,000 of you coming out to this. And it's really. That's what Peterson wanted to say. This is why he was emotional. This is this is the impact that he's had these that that that the context is placing on him. I'm going to get into Leslie new begin at the end of this video, because I think that's one of the key takeaways of this video here. Actually, there's going to be a lot of them in there. But but that moment. So Peterson, this is the speech he wanted to give. There's there's the story about the man, the young man and his father and the reconciliation and all of that, which is a favorite story of Peterson's. But but this what he just said right there was what's really on his heart. Why is so emotional? So congratulations to you. I would say that's a see. So I'll give away the ending. The the the the community, the Christian Church is the hermeneutic of the gospel. The hero of this story is, in a sense, the 14000 people at Liberty University. The ones who took in David, who will rush the stage, they're the heroes here. It's it's it's the spirit. Spirit. Now, I've been doing a lot of thinking about this word spirit via my Sunday school class that I have on another channel, but it's the spirit. It's when you talk about student spirit, what exactly are you talking about? You're talking about, you know, thinking along the lines with Jonathan Peugeot here. You're thinking about a you're thinking about a principality, a student spirit that is flowing through. This is what is impacting Peterson. It is it is, in a sense, the church and the church at its best that is impacting Peterson. A real compliment to you as a student body. I was at we were at an airport in Virginia yesterday that we're looking at as a model for the one we're going to do here at New London. And the manager of the airport says every time he comes here, he's just shocked at how students walk up to him, ask him if he needs directions. So welcome. So welcoming to him. So give yourselves a hand. I'm proud of you know that in contact in contrast with David Packman's dismissive. And I have to check myself in this, too, because I've had a very fairly dismissive attitude towards Liberty University because of all of the low resolution stuff that has been brought to me over the years about it. But, you know, this speaks highly of them. And I want to, you know, I want to give them credit for that. Tell that story. Remember the question I asked you? And of course, that answer made me lose track of the original question. So you'll have to ask me that question again. Well, a lot of people have remarked about the touching. And this is in a sense connected to the Joe Biden thing, too. Okay. And and I thought David Brooks answered this quite well last Friday on Brooks and Shields on PBS NewsHour that there's a cultural aspect to this. And so it's particularly interesting in the Dutch reform CRC because we've always sort of been the frozen chosen and we don't touch. And then part of what happened in the 70s and 80s was this Americanism flowing through. And especially if if you have a story like mine where you're connected to the black community, a very touchy thing. There is the Joe Biden skit on Saturday Night Live. That was the cold opening that the woman from the woman from Oakland grabs Joe Biden. That was the perfect way to end that sketch because that's culture. And part of culture here with with David Nassar touching Jordan Peterson. Part of that is pastoral work. You'll find me doing this often if you know if you watch the Freddie and Paul show. How many times don't I stick out my hand and touch Freddie now? There are some times when Freddie doesn't want to be touched at all. And that gets into some of Freddie's things and you become sensitive to that. And so but you know another time I've talked about Daniel who lived to slept literally on the other side of my office door here. There are many days when Daniel all Daniel wanted from me was a was a hug. And if you know what homeless people smell like, you have an idea what the hug was like. You know, they are Daniel would sometimes lay there marinating in his own urine. You know, he was too drunk or too despondent to get to get out of the bed. Things that he had hauled from the garbage cans in the neighborhood. But he's a human being and he needs touch. We know that babies die without touch. So there's and again, I thought the Saturday Night Live skit put some of those things front and center in this issue because this new this new woke moralisms. It's not going to work. It's not human. It's going to fail. And that's that's what I think is going to happen. It's going to fail. It just doesn't work because that they're they're not getting the very complex, careful nuances of when to touch, when to not touch, how to touch, how to not touch. That's all deeply human and much of its intuitive. And we don't. It's it resists forming simple rules easily, which is exactly what I loved about the Saturday Night Live sketch. I think I think actually something that President Falwell said triggered a video that we might we were thinking about maybe showing. And I think it's such a black and white comparative of what's happening right now in so many institutes of higher learning versus maybe one of the reasons where we're seeing an unlikely growth, what other people are seeing just really decline. This is a video in 2016 where you came down to meet with some some students from your university at the University of Toronto. I think it's also a perfect echo of Cambridge last week, this inviting you by calling you close minded in the irony of that, that they would be close minded to hear you out. But this right here is pretty much the same vein, just this idea that an institute of higher learning would be afraid to hear someone out, would be afraid to just come and listen to new ideas. Let's watch this video. And I'd love to get some comments from you about it. OK, so then they played the suspender video, which I'm not going to play. But again, that's what that was the first video I'd seen Jordan Peterson in. So why do you think people are so afraid to just hear someone out? Why drown out? Try to white noise. Maybe a thought that you might disagree with, but certainly you don't need to be disrespectful. You're such a champion for freedom of speech because you believe there are things to be said that can really affect someone's life in a positive way. Well, one of the things that it's necessary to understand is that inside the philosophical confines of the post-Marchist, because otherwise you don't know what you're a Marxist leaning, not mere members of a group. And in the arbitrary presupposition, it's your group identity that's primary and parent exchange of ideas is nothing but a power game that's played between groups of people who are opposing each other for predominance on the world stage. That's it. And so it's not a debate about the value of free speech. That's a trivial debate in some sense. It's a debate about whether free speech itself actually constitutes a genuine phenomenon. And classically speaking, what we presume is that each of us are sources of information, let's say that might be our opinions. It might be our knowledge. And that by through the through honest discourse, through truth, essentially, we can negotiate an agreement that will be, if not to our mutual benefit, which would be optimal, at least capable of establishing something approximating peace. And all of that idea, all of those ideas are under, I would say, serious assault by the postmodernist types in the modern universities. And so the reason that I was shut down at that free speech protest, let's say, which, by the way, was an open mic event. All those people that were there who were trying to shut me down had the opportunity to speak after after I spoke. And the noise you heard was a white noise generator, which was far louder than appeared on them on the video. And the reason that I was speaking forcefully, let's say, or perhaps even somewhat angrily by the end was because not only was the free the white noise generator. My name is David. I'm unwell. I need help. I just wanted to meet you. Notice again, what am I given advertising for pastors? It's the pastor that jumps up and people, there's a reputation in the culture that pastors somehow don't know how to deal with things. Well, the truth is pastors deal with all kinds of stuff. And especially if you're a campus chaplain like David Nasser or a pastor of the kind of church in the neighborhood where I am. You wouldn't believe the things that happened during church services. And so I remember these kind of things would happen to my father all the time. People would stand up and introduce his sermon, interrupt his sermons. And sometimes it's because they were off their meds and off they would rant and an elder would kind of sidle up next to them and settle them down and see if they'd be willing to sit down and be calm for the rest of the sermon. And these things happened all the time at Northside Chapel in Patterson, New Jersey. These things happen at Livingstone CRC. And it's just what happens. And so I'm not surprised Nasser stood up and all of these moves that Nasser is going to make. And then I'm going to cut them to another video that was taken by someone's phone camera that fills in some of the stuff when the main video was cut. None of this surprises me. All of this is standard of what happens in churches where you get interruptions in churches where you have communities of people who are fragile and vulnerable and sometimes prone to disrupt. This is normal. It really is. Well, I hope that you find the help that you need. So at that point when Peterson says that he's, let's see, there's Falwell Jr. There's Habermas. Peterson is already up there with him. So again, Peterson is a clinical psychologist. And again, to the comments of touching, you better believe Nasser and Peterson are touching him in a different way. The security guards are touching him. Now I, those of you who know me from my past know I spent seven years, college and seminary as a campus security guard. So, you know, I'm used to grabbing people. I'm used to grabbing students and taking away their beer. So they're going to grab them in one way, but Nasser and Peterson are going to come to him in another way. And there's a woman who's made some videos about Kelly Davis or something. I'd seen the video that she had made about him and she mentioned that, you know, it's quite moving. And again, this is all common stuff if you're part of churches like this to be prayed over, to have pastors lay their hands on you. I do this every Sunday at my church, not the video part that you might watch, but after church, some people will come up to me and they'll want prayer and prayer almost and always involves touching. And that is, that is very human. That is how we are. That is who we are. That is very Christian. And so they're going to pray over David. And again, I watched this video. Nothing in this video surprised me except the fact that the security guards were a little slow on the draw. I wanted my God, I want to know him better. And Node did a video on this too, which I saw and really enjoyed because Node had said, you know, does he want to know Jordan Peterson or does he want to know God? Now, that's a really good question. And it's a really deep question because what Augustine would say is that, well, it's the part of God and Jordan Peterson that he really wants to know. Because any beauty is, the whole earth is full of his glory. This is God number one. This is God's imminence. That when we taste a good meal, it's God we're enjoying. When we sip a fine wine, it's God we're enjoying. Now, maybe we can't handle wine. We can't handle God. I talked about that in my conversation yesterday with Nick. And actually, I was kind of happy that that conversation came out first before this video because a lot of these issues about God and who and what God is. Again, the main thesis I've been pushing through is that what happened, especially in evangelicalism, is as God number one receded, God number two expanded, and that balance has kind of gotten out of whack in terms of our perceptions of God, in terms of the church and God. And in some ways, I think Jordan Peterson is helping to rebalance those equations by fleshing out God number one in the public space. I'm doing a Peterson! You know, I've been in these situations and there are many people in my congregation with mental illness and you know, you know some of them. And I feel for this man because he's just looking for help. He's got me doing a Peterson. And then here Nasser and Peterson are encouraging the security guards to don't pull him. Let's take our time with this. And again, Nasser's pastoral instincts are dead on. He's clearly a good pastor. You know, through this whole thing, those are all his pastoral instincts. Okay, let's pray for him. They pray. Now notice it's important here, healing, salvation, restoration. What in a sense you do as a pastor, again, your job hasn't been fragmented. You're looking for wholeness. And this gets into the layered nature of reality that all of my videos are about. What we're looking for in resurrection is complete restoration, creation, renewal, restoration. Christian rebellion, renewal, creation, rebellion, redemption, restoration. These are in a sense the four movements of the Christian faith, which are emphasized in the Reformed faith. And so this is what we're looking for for David. God, right now, just come into his life, let him know that he's... And the students are praying, except of course the guy with the camera phone, but it's okay. Thanks for making the effort. I look to you, Lord, I pray that in this moment that you would just begin to work in his spirit. Lord, let him know that we're for him, we're not against him. That God, that he just can find healing, that he's here, that you put him here in this moment. We pray this in your name. Amen. It's just like Gary Habermas here. Okay, now we cut through a bunch of this stuff. That's an important moment. And again, we're going to get to Leslie Newbegin at the end of this. The church is the hermeneutic of the gospel. And the pastor there was laying out the hermeneutic. This is what the church is about. The church is about healing. The church is about restoration, creation, rebellion, redemption, restoration. This is the movement of the gospel and the story of the world. Where does resurrection fit in? And we just have to remember that, David. You know, we're older, we're set in life, and these guys are just coming up. And so you guys will all be in our prayers. Let me tell you something. I think what you just saw is where a lot of you are, but David's just honest enough to cry for help. And I love how he resists otherizing David. Again, this guy's a great pastor. It's clear. He's got all the right instincts. And he knows why Peterson's important. He's articulating it. And then the dam breaks. And in those moments, I'd rather you be here in this context than in this community, because I can tell you from our community group leaders to our RAs to our RSs. Remember how I say Peterson isn't building an institution? What he just lays out there is the institution. If you're going to care for thousands of people, you need institutions. And Nasser's laying that out. Christianity knows this. The church knows this. We build institutions. Hospitals began by Christians. If you're going to scale embodied love and care, the hands and feet of Jesus, you need institutions and policies and all of that work. And this is why in my tradition, all of us are called by God to labor. And the work that is done of pastoral care, by hospitals and doctors and administrators and school teachers and plumbers and electricians, the whole world is full of his glory. And all of this, all of this ministry, whether you're growing rice or fixing cars, all of this is laboring in God's vineyard because he is the God of creation. The God of creation is the God of redemption. They're both the same God. God number one and God number two. We'll get into that in a little bit. And to every student here that we think God has you here for more than just an education, but for community. And again, I miss Dallas Willard in here because Dallas Willard, if you read the beginning of the, I can't think of this, promoted it how many times here, his, his, Dallas Willard's best book, slips my mind anyway, it'll pop up in a minute. But if you read Dallas Willard, this is what Dallas Willard embodied. We are, and Jamie Smith says we're not brains on sticks. We're embodied here and the church has long practiced this. Hold on, I don't want us to alleviate what God's saying in this moment. And I'll be the first to tell you in front of our distinguished guests that these rules work, but all of them stop short without the ruler. Now we're getting into the interesting stuff. We've got God number one and God number two. God number two, the transcendent God is the ruler. God number one is the immanent God that the, you know, that's embedded in creation that Peterson has been, has been bringing out. And it's in the conversation between Nasser and Peterson that we're going to see the God number one, God number two interchange go back and forth. And Nasser's going to try to keep pulling him, pulling up towards it. And as I said in a tweet, here's the thing. I mean, everyone wants to flip Peterson. And so an evangelical school is going to want to flip Peterson and make him an evangelical. The thing is conversion is not making a sensible decision about a used car. Conversion is falling in love. And you, and you, you abandon your pride and you abandon things that you, that you thought you think you needed. And this is where, you know, Peterson's back around and existentialism should help him because it's, it's, it's, it's a leap of faith, as Kierkegaard said. And oh boy, this stuff gets hard. Without Christ in your life. And we are here for that. We're going to have to get into this language because there's a lot going on here. And hold on, don't clap. Hold on. I don't want us to alleviate what God's saying in this moment. And I'll be the first to tell you in front of our distinguished guests that these rules work. But all of them stop short without the ruler, without Christ in your life. And we are here for that. We're here for you. And again, the touching is pastor. This is what pastors do. So somebody has got tears in their eyes. And this is one of my favorite lines in the whole thing happened because I think it just elevated David. Love it. Pardon me was little hard on David. Yeah, it was. Come on. Yeah, it was. Why do you think, why do you think men like that, and so many of us are just crying out for help finally, obviously you just see this visible manifestation like that's not conjured up that's real. Why do you think that. So I remember my meetup was was was said to have said that whole thing was staged but I know I know I know my flock in my meetup. That's why people are in, like, for me as a clinical psychologist. I've always looked at things, I think, in some ways, from the opposite perspective of most, maybe even most psychologists, and I think this too is something that is so important with Jordan Peterson because this inversion is exactly right and something I love about him, because he much of the world says, why isn't the world better and Peterson is very Augustinian and says, why isn't the world worse. It's amazingly good all things considered. And, and so what Peterson lays out here is part of why I really, I really appreciate it. It's never been a mystery to me why people are depressed. It's never been a mystery to me why people are anxious and unsettled. It seems obvious why they're concerned and hurt and anxious and unsettled. I think the mystery is how it is that we can conduct ourselves so that that can remain under control. People deal with very heavy burdens in their life, you know, you, you don't have to talk to someone for very long. Someone you might might be thinking is doing quite well in the world and sometimes people are. But you don't have to scratch very deep beneath the surface before you find out that they have a family member who has a serious illness or someone who's suffering through a economic crisis of one form or another or, or who, there's some sort of genuine tragedy. One degree removed from them if it's even removed and most people even as individuals have at least one serious problem that they're dealing with. And so it's no mystery that people find it difficult to orient themselves in the world. Mystery is, well, what can you do about it? And we do know what you can do about it. And, you know, Jonathan Haidt wrote a book recently. Now, I'm afraid that it's the name of the book has escaped me. It's about the college situation and, and the snowflake culture. And one of the things that he pointed out, along with Luginov, who's his co-author, was that if you're a psychotherapist of any sort, particularly a behavior therapist, what you help people do is to identify their problems. That's the first thing is to confront what's there. The reality of what's there is bluntly as possible. And so you often end up as a psychotherapist talking to people about their array of problems as if they're putting their cards on the table and you sort out their problems. It's like, and now they often decide that many of the things that are bothering them are not really that important. They can wait, but that there are crucial life challenges that present themselves to them. And this again is where Peterson's clinical experience is so helpful to his, to what he brings to his, his academic knowledge. They're not just psychological problems, although sometimes they are. And again, pastorally, he's exactly right. And we have, in a sense, we've got plenty of Larry Crabb books here. And Larry Crabb comes to mind when we come to this juncture in the conversation, because Larry Crabb for years, being a Christian therapist, you know, realized this. And whereas what the medical establishment tries to do, and this is the scientific approach, is you diagnose it, you give it a label, and you try to, you try to determine the cause or one or two elements of the cause. And the world is just so complex and people are so complex that we resist this. And so, and so often it's not a diagnosable mental illness or everything. And all of us are mentally ill. And that's why, again, this is the theological move that David Nassar makes that, that the David who, who attacked the stage is not that different from the David that is on the stage. And that is so, that is a theological move. And in my Calvinism, I identify it with this idea of total depravity. The idea is not that we are as bad as we could be. The idea is that all of us are to a certain degree sick. All of us are bent and twisted. None of us see clearly. None of us see true. All of us are racist to one degree or another, not just white folks or black folks. This stuff applies to all. There are problems in life, right, existential problems. And then what you do is you help people break them down into manageable units, let's say strategically, and confront them voluntarily. You know, and there's an echo of that idea. There's an echo of that in Christian thinking. And the echo for that is to pick up your cross voluntarily, which is that you have you have an unavoidable mortal burden to bear in life. There's no escape from it except to directly confront it and to take it on voluntarily. And right there, now, Peterson's going to talk a lot more about the voluntary aspect. And this again is where I'll say, yeah, but many of the things that that address us cannot even be handled with voluntary action. People die every day. People are, you know, I when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic with the Haitians. We Americans don't like to think about the fact that there are many people in the world that are they just don't have a chance, according to many of the assumptions that we have. That's just true. How do you answer that? Resurrection. And what's so fascinating about that, two things. One is that psychotherapists of every stripe understand that this is one of the primary reasons that psychotherapy works. And pastors of every stripe have 10 times as many people who either won't go see a psychotherapist or can't afford a psychotherapist or have been seeing a psychotherapist. And it has done no good. There's no dispute about that among all the different psychotherapeutic schools is that the confrontation of existential problems, voluntary confrontation is curative. And that's really something. And so and the practical aspect of that is quite straightforward. It also indicates practical and philosophical. It also indicates to you that there's far more to you than you think, because it turns out that you have substantial problems, genuine deep problems of malevolence and suffering. And again, I think this is so refreshing from Peterson because and part of the reason we're having this Peterson moment is because culturally the implicit messages and liturgies, that's Jamie Smith's word from a philosopher at Calvin College. The implicit liturgies keep saying that the world is just great with this little adaptation. If you can, if you will just own this car or if you will just, you know, if you're a white man, listen a little bit more. I heard that Kyle Carver thing a little bit. If you will just do these things, then the world will be grand. It's like, are you out of your mind? Do you not pay attention to this world? We all die. None of us gets out of this alive. But that if you decide that you will take that on as your responsibility, that you can put yourself together psychologically, just the courage and you can actually solve the problems. Also the hand is is because once you give Peterson the mic and let him go, he'll talk for two hours. We all know this. So if you want to kind of have a conversation with him, Ben Shapiro learned this in his first Sunday show. Boy, you're going to have to figure out your cues. And that seems to be true. It's not a naive wish. It seems to be well within our capacity. And I mean, that's part of the message I would say of 12 rules for life is that dark as things are, there's more light in you than you know what to do with. And there's more light in you than you can possibly manifest. And and the way to find that out is to to challenge yourself. Jerry Falwell readjusts himself with these stools aren't real comfortable. Boy, this guy talks long. Against these massive problems and to find out that you're the one that can deal with them. So that's a great thing to know. And so maybe the context isn't the most preferred, but you just you have someone who just initiates the conversation and crying out for help. And you're you know, this is what you do. Your clinical psychology. So really good of Nassar's part too, because from a from someone who is managing this convocation, which Nassar is, I mean, the president is there to introduce them and to kind of be there. And a little while we'll find out why Gary Habermas is there, which doesn't really happen on stage, which would have also been quite interesting. They're making this show up as they go along here. And so it's Nassar that's really having to kind of focus the conversation. As I said before, Peterson is not an easy guy to direct because just pull the string and off he goes and he'll go for two hours. So now Nassar is going to try to redirect them and and help this along. On a very practical everyday language, you know, for those of us who just what is a good first step? If someone is sitting here and they're saying, man, I'm not going to jump on stage and cry for help, but I'm at a place where I'm thinking about ending my life. I'm in such a dark season of my life where I feel like the valley is the lotus that's ever been. What is a first step right now that you would say? Well, I would say, look, I would say that if you're if you're seriously suicidal and most of the advice Peterson's going to give him is pretty standard protocol. So I'm going to skip through some of it. But again, the thing to pay attention to is that Peterson is he's working from the ground up here. This is bottom up and Nassar is going to keep coming top down. You can tell how you should let circumstance to do something like sit on the edge of my bed or agent and question as far as I'm concerned. But they still ask me that. And I've suggested a form of family member who fantasize about the aftermath. Like if that's a well-developed plan, then you should go talk to someone. You should talk to someone professional. You should let a friend know. You should let a family member know like you need to do that. You're at risk. You're in danger under those circumstances in less serious circumstances. I would say people often ask me if I pray, which is an annoying question. But what's interesting is where does Peterson pray on the edge of his bed? It's almost got to become a meme because because this is this is the same conversation he had with Sam Harris, which makes this just unbelievably delightful. So let me back up a little bit as far as in less serious circumstances, I would say people often ask me if I pray, which is an annoying question as far as I'm concerned. But they still ask me that. And I've suggested a form of prayer, which I would say I do engage in. And that is to practically speaking. OK, so Jordan Peterson, he's been constructing this tower. So I don't have a do I have a dollar bill with me? Hang on. Remember the conversation with put it up to the camera. Remember the conversation with the engineer about the asymptotes and dyslexics. So I can't do left and right. Why is the eye on top of the pyramid separated from the rest of the pyramid? Why is that space in there? Why does that line never reach the y axis? Jordan Peterson, do you pray? It's that little gap in there. And and when you talk about your prayers, you're talking to my left, right. You're talking about OK, we're building the pyramid up, up, up. But that gap never closes. You can get to one point five, one point six, one point seven, one point seven point five, one point seven point seven five, one point seven point eight, one point seven point eight five. You go boom, boom, boom, boom. You will never bridge that gap. It's right there on the dollar bill. That's why the eye is on the top of the pyramid. Even when you pray, when you pray, you're trying to bridge the gap. Do something like sit on the edge of my bed or on the edge of a chair and to think he's on the edge of the bed. He's on the edge of the chair. Trying to bridge a gap here. It's trying to leap. There's probably something that I'm doing wrong or not doing well enough that I'm being blind to that I could fix. And that I would fix. You know, you need both of those, right? Because there's lots of things about your life that you know aren't right that you could fix, but you won't. Who knows why? You don't have the discipline or the vision or the courage or the integrity of character or the maturity or God only knows the reasons. But there are some things that you're doing wrong or not doing that you could fix that you would fix. And you have to sit and ask. And I think it's the reflection of the New Testament idea that if you knock, the door will open, you know, and if you ask, you will receive. It's a very interesting line because it sounds like something that's naively optimistic. It sounds like it's representing God as, you know, the granter of wishes in some sense. But I don't believe that's what it means at all. I think what it means is that if you actually want to know something and you actually want to devote yourself to something, if you're willing to make the proper sacrifices, right, and reorient yourself, that you can move towards what you're aiming at. And I can tell you that if you ask yourself in all humility how it is that you could be better and what you could do in a small way to move in that direction, that first of all, you will receive an answer about what you're doing wrong. It's not that much different than thinking. We don't really regard that as particularly miraculous. Like you can ask yourself, shouldn't we? If you ask yourself a question about how it is that you're lesser than you could be and what you could do about that, you'll find out. And then if you do that, then you won't be lesser. And that works. And it especially works. That works. It's going to come up in the one more question interview and a very important point. It's a nice form of humility as well because what you're going to find out if you ask that question is not going to be something you're proud of. It's going to be some little rotten element of your character that you're ashamed of in 15 different ways and for good reason. Dude is very honest. And even the attempt to triumph over it isn't going to be something that you're going to be able to trumpet proudly to your friends and your family because, you know, to fight off something that's sh- And these are all the kind of things that we deal with in pastoral spaces. ... is a private affair in some sense, but you can do it. And if you can improve your life incrementally in that manner, if you have the humility, one of the things- Again, that touch is- can we land the plane here, Jordan? Carl Jung, a famous psychoanalyst, said about modern people, which I loved, was that modern people can't see God because they won't look low enough. Which appeared in the Drear piece as riffing on a rabbinical saying. And that lowness is internal. It's like, well, what's not good enough about me? And the other thing that's so lovely about that is you're not going to do anyone any harm. You know, if you find out something that you're lacking, if you discover something you're lacking- Well, first of all, great, you've discovered something you're lacking, and you need that thing you're lacking because life is difficult. It's going to call everything that there is out of you. So you need that thing that you're lacking, and then you can work on it incrementally and humbly, you know? So humbly meaning you can work on it in the way that someone as flawed as you could work on it successfully. And then you- and then it works. And then things get better, and as they get better, they tend to get better and better. And so that's very practical and very much in keeping with psychotherapeutic practice and wisdom. And I would say with ancient wisdom in general. And so that's a lovely- You guys keep rolling the mic up, like, can we cut this guy off? Can we move on to another topic? That's a lovely set of things to know, in my opinion. So here's my- And where have you heard this before? Question for you is, if we agree that there is some way in which religious texts carry some kind of value because they allow people to figure out how to navigate their lives in ways that might reduce suffering, reduce the complexity of the choices that they have to make, presumably you will agree that that would be consistent with an evolutionary interpretation. That the fact that the stories themselves are functional would provide an advantage to those who were deploying them. So here's the problem. Isn't it then also true that those stories are responsive to past environments? And so the claim that these things might be timeless would be suspect. And in fact you would expect a spectrum of durability. Some stories would be right in a brief moment and- Yes. Okay. All that's true. All that's true. So far so good. Well, so far so good. This is actually, I think, quite excellent then because what we have is a recognition that there is something to these belief systems that has to do with practical realities in the past. Peterson's making the same point on stage with Brett Weinstein and Sam Harris, who probably set their hair on fire at the sound of Liberty University and at Liberty University. We also have an acknowledgement that we cannot trust in these things based on simple faith because even if they can be certain to have worked at some point in the past, we don't know what their relevance is to the present. Right. Okay. Fair enough. All right. Okay. It only got a fair enough. That's not a small difference between his responses there. Okay. So I- That's- and I would say that's two things about that. That's exactly why we're having this discussion. And you see what happens in the most profound of such texts is the idea that the process by which your knowledge is updated has to occupy a position in the hierarchy of values that supersedes your reliance on dogma is the fundamental claim. That's why, for example, in Christianity, the notion is that the word is the highest of values. And that's embodied word. And that's the thing that mediates between order and chaos. And everything else has to be subject to that. And I would say that's not a claim that's unique to Christianity. So, for example- Okay. No, I think because we're being told we're out of time here. So I want to give Sam his reaction to that as well. And then we'll move on to Q&A. I'm tempted to just ask Jordan a question here. I mean, this is hard to know what to say for tomorrow night. But I feel like we've got 3,000 people sitting here who would really like an answer to this question. You say you believe in God. You have been- No, I say I act as if he exists. You say what? I say I act as if he exists. Okay. Which is a much more precise claim. Okay. So then what- but in this case, what- So you act as though God exists. And in addition, I've heard you say that I act as though God exists. That I can't really be an atheist. Well, so far. So far it seems that. We'll see. The night is young. Yeah. So in that sense, I'm not really an atheist. I've heard you say this. Well, some of you is. Well, if I were really an atheist, I would be far more poorly behaved than in fact I am. I would be like Raskolnikov committing murders and assuming there was nothing wrong with it. It would be more likely, yes. Yeah, okay. So- That's a big distinction. I need to know- That you would versus you would be more likely. What was that? That's a big distinction. That you would is very different than it would be more likely. Taking the safety off the gun is far more- What exists? Okay, well I'm going to tell you some of the things- Well- I'm an exception- Catholics. This is where we go with gun number one, gun number two. What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- What that- Can you come to my mind with a question about this? If I heard an answer from him that actually would satisfy me as to what the mechanism of action might be, that'd be pretty interesting, and if he can tell me what I heard I think it would suggest that we're not just making up stories here. So- Okay, so you might like this, you maybe don't, but- Well, it's possible. Okay, so let's imagine that Hellish situation that you laid out, okay? Okay. Notice how similar these stories are. This is a common experience. And you're confessing to yourself as much as to anyone. And you say, I really want to know what I did wrong, and I really want to know what I could do to put it right. And I'm willing to accept any answer that will manifest itself to me. Try that. See what happens. That's a prayer that will be answered. And it won't be answered in the way that you want it to be answered. I can bloody well tell you that. Okay, but that... Well, what are you communicating with? What are you communicating with when you do that? No, no, that is something that... That is a process that I'm familiar with. It doesn't require any supernatural explanation. God number one and God number two. It's right there again. And it certainly... It certainly doesn't require that we imagine that any of our books were dictated by the creator of the universe. I didn't say that it required any supernatural explanation, or that it required the book. But my concern is... I was asked to provide an instance of prayer that worked. And that's what I did. I didn't do anything other than that. Okay, but that's fully understandable in terms of human psychology and... It's not understandable because we don't know where the answer comes from. Well, we don't know where anything comes from. That's true. Yeah, okay, so... Yeah. Gotcha. But that doesn't open the door... One thing we can know with absolute certainty is that whoever wrote the Bible didn't know either. That's what Sam Harris wants to go to. There's many other things he or she didn't know, like everything else we know scientifically, right? It's not so obvious what people know and what they don't know. No one even knew the brain was involved in any of this, right? Yeah, but they probably knew about as much as we do about how the brain was involved in it. But we've already... We've already asked Dr. Gary Habermas to join us today. Okay, switch gears. Now we get to Habermas and he's been sitting on stage the whole time. Poor Gary. And what are we going to do? Now, Peterson knows exactly what's coming. And you'll hear Peterson say, uh-oh, in kind of a fun manner, joking manner. One of our top scholars on the faculty. He was actually one of my professors here, 1980 to 84. But he teaches at Oxford, in addition to Liberty, Oxford, Cambridge. They let him into Cambridge. Anything would you like to ask Dr. Peterson about? Uh-oh. Ask him. No. No, I wasn't prepared for that. But let me do this. What were you doing on stage? Last Easter, somebody sent me a posting from one of your postings. And it included an article that I wrote, a really brief one on the resurrection. And you made a comment there, you said, not the article, but the topic. You said, this may be the most important topic I've ever considered. Had you been thinking about that for a long time or, you know, this Easter question, this center of Christianity? Well, you know, the sticking point, I would say, with the atheist community and the Christian community, let's say, I don't really think is the existence of God. That's a sticking point, and it's not trivial. But I think the true sticking point is the idea of the bodily resurrection of Christ. Right? And that's a very rough sticking point, because it's key to Christianity. And it flies in the face of standard, the standard materialist objective view of the world. And so it's something that I wrestle with continually. And I think that's OK. I mean, one of the things I learned, I love this. I did a series of biblical lectures and other things. The source of significance, the source of purpose, and the plight to rest those people, it's such a lovely idea, because it means that forward in our lives already puts us on the right track. And so that's a lovely thing. Well, with the resurrection, it's an issue that I wrestle with continually, because there's so much in the New Testament that is profound beyond comprehension. I mean, you see this in the biblical. So what would happen if Jordan Peterson came on stage and said, I believe it, instead of the opposite of what he did with Sam Harris when Sam Harris backed him into almost certainly not. What if Jordan Peterson came on stage at Liberty University and said, yep, I believe in the resurrection. What difference would that make? Now, think about that. And now many would say, oh, you know, maybe Jordan Peterson can now sign the the faith statement and teach at Liberty University. Maybe he could teach at some other Christian college that isn't quite so dispensational-ish or anti-Darwin-ish. So he says he believes in the resurrection. And so what then? Suppose Gary Habermas can flip him over lunch. Writings in general, like the story of Cain and Abel, for example, is an analyze it for your entire life and never get to the bottom of it. It's a real miracle that a story like that can analyze it for your entire life and never get to the bottom of it. Same thing. Exist. And there are statements in the New Testament that are like that. I just showed the triangle on top of the pyramid. So surprising. You see that in the Sermon on the Mount in particular, but not only there that are so surprising that it's almost impossible to understand how they could have come about from the standard scientific materialist perspective, say. But the claim is so overwhelming and also so mysterious that I don't know what to make of it. I don't know what to make of the idea of the physical resurrection. And that's actually important question because you could say, OK, I believe it. OK. What to make of it? What do you mean by that sentence? What to make of it? Well, how does that change my life? How does that change how I live? How does that change how I feel about things? And and actually meditation on the resurrection should bring complete change in our lives. But it doesn't. Why? It's even it's it's complicated conceptually right within the confines of the Gospels themselves. I don't know what it means metaphysically. I understand what it means symbolically. And that's usually the approach I take, take given. Yeah. Yeah, that's the approach you take. You take it symbolically. But the way it cashed out for you can read Rodney Starks books, the way it cashed out for New Testament Christians was that when everyone would flee the plague infested cities, Christians would stay and care not only for their loved ones, but for the loved ones that were abandoned by the people fleeing it. That's what the resurrection does. And that is those metaphysical claims which launched Christians to have high cost medical degrees in North America and go and serve poor Africans for little or no money. That's what the resurrection does. The resurrection is together with the cross, together with the cross. So you you can you can you can allow yourself to be crucified because you know you will be raised. And sometimes people take the turn and say, well, that devalues the cross. Well, hardly because Jesus is making the same offer to you that was made to him. And was he able to trust? Yes. Did he still did he still bear what he bore in the Garden of Gethsemane? Yes. All of that is real. But that is the transaction. And it's not just symbolic of burning away the deadwood. That's a part of it. But that's a that's a that's a foothill part of of it rather than the full blown Sierra Yosemite National Park. That's that's bouldering rather than El Capitan. That's the difference that I'm a psychologist. I mean, I do believe that the part of the human being that leads us to redemption is the part of us that dies when it's in error and is reborn as something better and new. And I. But it also dies because it's right. And that's key to the story of Jesus. Jesus doesn't die because he's in error. Jesus is killed because he's right. That's also part of this story. And that's where his symbolic psychological take on the resurrection, although has a lot to it, is again foothills. It's bouldering compared to El Capitan. I think that's true practically and scientifically and metaphysically. It's true at every level of existence. But I also don't know what it would mean to live that way fully. Right. You know, if you were fully awake to your errors and fully taking advantage of every opportunity that was put before you. But it's not just your errors. It's the errors of the world, which is why he dies for the world, which we'll get into the second video when we get into the one more question video and fully devoted to the good, to the highest good that you could conceptualize. I have no idea what the limit of transformation might be for a human being because we're very mysterious creatures in a very mysterious world. At lunch, he'll get you clear on the resurrection. It's this kind of... Well, it's a joke. He takes it graciously and Habermas takes it graciously, but it's... Hi, David. I'm sorry. Becky's gonna be mad at me. And the interchange between Falwell and his wife is really interesting because you would never hear anyone do this 50 years ago. And that's again a sign that even when an institution decides to not change, the change has always come. Is it corruption? Is it improvement? Well, you can decide for yourself. It's fine. Again with a hand. Hey, um... Pastor, a moment. The young man's name is David. It's a focus on the individual. And he's not a Liberty student. His friends with a Liberty student graciously has begun to see that there are things in his life where he's crying out for help. And so David came to a Bible study last night with a friend of his. And then his friend invited him to come hear you, Dr. Peterson. And I just want to make sure we don't lose what God... I think God predestined this moment for us. And I want to just ask you... Oh, God, he's a word a Calvinist could love. And this is my favorite moment in the whole... And a tricky... And invited him to come hear you, Dr. Peterson. And I just want to make sure we don't lose what God... I think God predestined this moment for us. And I want to just ask you... Oh, God, he's a tricky character, you know. He does. God number two is a very tricky character. He does. He does put things on that... I want to make sure we don't miss this moment. Dr. Peterson, we can give David your 12 books, 12 rules in that book. We can give him your next book, which is 12 More Rules. And he can... they will be helpful to him. I gave your book to my daughter. They will be helpful to her. I read the books. I see Bible verses attached around them. But with that... The Bible verses... Okay, now we're getting into the culture of this particular segment of evangelical subculture. David submitting, bending his knee to Christ. Relationship with God number two. Okay, that's right there. And just saying, I don't want to clean up the behavior or deal with the symptoms. What's broken in me is my heart doesn't belong to the Savior who's sitting on the throne. How does your book go beyond behavioral modification and walk into soul transformation? You got to get on a plane here. I really appreciate Peterson here. I mean, he is listening. If you've ever paid the hundred bucks or so for the VIP thing and had your 30 seconds with the good doctor, this is him. I mean, when I listen to Owen Benjamin and the guy in Australia, James Higgins, you know, saying he's a charlatan. He's the best charlatan I've ever seen. The dude's genuine. He really is. ...in a minute and go back to Toronto. But David... so he's crying out for help. He needs someone who's omnipresent. And I love that line. He needs someone who's omnipresent. Now, again, this is where we get into institutions because we get into... God mediates his glory and his care through his creation. Now, contrary to providential deism, that doesn't mean that God is inactive or unable to be direct. But the common posture is a mediation posture, which is exactly where we're at. And this is where the contemporary framework with a natural, supernatural distinction really does break down. And this is why creation, fall, redemption, restoration is so vital because the medical technology is a gift from God. We have to be careful with these transitions between them. And so can you just help us understand... Nessar's a very gracious... he's good. He's good. What does David do once he's done with the last page of your book and he begins to apply these things? Because I know a lot of cleaned up people that are just as messed up as he is. I'm that way sometimes. That's right. That's right. And this is what evangelicalism gets from Augustine and Calvinism. And this is what it gets right. We are all in this boat. So can you tell me, how does Christ not just become a perfect model and behavior police, but how does he become who he says he is when he... Okay, now we're dealing with God number two here. This is God number two on full display. How does Christ act? And this is where the questions get really, really difficult. This is... what's my dollar? You know, this is where we're getting into the... This is where we're getting into the gap here. ...claims to be God in David's life. Well, we talked about this a little bit last night about the idea that... And I wouldn't say that my ideas are fully formulated about this. One of the things that Carl Jung pointed out was that... And again, it's interesting that at these moments he turns to Jung. And that makes a lot of sense as Rod Dreher picked up on. When you matured, you needed to replace your father with the father. Right, because otherwise your father stayed the father. And that wasn't good because there's a confusion there between the individual, your father, who of course you have respect for, perhaps, depending of course on your father, but hopefully. And the transcendent idea of the father... Ah, now we're talking about God number two-ish. We're into like 1.5. God number 1.5. ...itself. If you're trying to put yourself together, there's the concept of... If you're trying to put yourself together... ...yourself put together, but then there's the transcendent idea of being put together... ...the transcendent idea... ...their itself. And the idea of Christ, at least... The idea of Christ... I'm speaking to you as a psychologist. He always gives this disclaimer. I try to limit myself to that. Yes, he does. That's... Why? That's what I want to know. The embodiment, the symbolic embodiment, at minimum, of the idea of the human ideal. It's the highest ideal that we can conceive of. But he's still a product of our conception. If you go into an old cathedral and you look at the dome of the cathedral and that's the sky, that's the cosmos, and you see Christ... Symbolism happens, right? Jonathan Pujo? ...portrayed on the ceiling as Panticrator, as creator of the world. The idea there is something like... It's something like consciousness and soul participates in the ongoing... Soul? ...cogeneration of creation. And that your goal as a human being is to participate in that creation in the most ethical manner possible. Yes, we are co-creators. We are sub-creators. Creation, rebellion, redemption, restoration. This is why all are called by God. Because whether you're farming or doing psychology or doing art or doing music or washing floors or washing windows, you are in fact creating and participating in the ongoing creation of God's world. There's a document from our denomination that speaks this well. It's called... maybe I'll put the link to it. It's free online. Our world belongs to God and basically lays out the Christian Reformed Church's vision of this creation, rebellion... I alter the words a little bit. Creation, rebellion, redemption, restoration, just because pastors like alliteration. So imagine it this way. We can think about this very practically. So you wake up in the morning, your consciousness re-emerges on the stage of existence. And what you're confronted by is the potential of the day. This is something that's referred to in the Sermon on the Mount, to concentrate on the day. So we use the day as our unit of analysis. You see the day as a set of possible pathways. You could do this, you could do that, you could not do this, you could not do that. And your conscience speaks to you too, almost immediately, I would say, upon awakening. Here's something I need to do today to keep things in order. Here's something I need not to do today to keep things in order. Here's my set of obligations that I need to undertake so that when I go to sleep tonight, I can sleep with a clear conscience and things are better than they might have otherwise been. And so what you see in front of you is the potential of the world. And to me, you see, that's akin to the potential that God confronted in Genesis at the beginning of time. That's the meaning of that story, is that there's a potential that is confronted by an attitude. The attitude that is appropriate in relationship to that confrontation is the attitude of the logos. And the logos is something like courage. That's one of its primary attributes. And truth, that's the other. Now, there's more, but I would say if you had to boil it down to two, it would be courage and truth. And so there's this notion. See, what happens in Genesis is God employs the logos to generate order out of potential. And every time he does that, he says, and it was good. And the idea there is that if you confront the potential that's in front of you with truth and courage, that what you do is you take what could be and you transform it into what is. And you do that and you transform it into what is that's good. And then you have that, that is you. That's your soul. That's the thing that, as Genesis points out, that gives you that affinity with God. The fact that you're made in the image of God is the fact that you have that capability. And that that capability to take that potential and to make the world out of it is also dependent on your ethical choices. And we're still in creation and we're still in God point one again. And everyone knows that, right? Even if we can't articulate it, you know, you know perfectly well that you can wake up in a miserable mood, bitter and unhappy, and do 25 things that day to make your life more like hell than it was and to share that delight with the people around you. Everyone understands that. And you know as well, And the hand comes, you knew the hand was coming, he's gone a while. That you can decide to face things courageously and truthfully. And you can make tomorrow's morning somewhat better than today's morning was by setting the world in order. And then the answer to your question is that, you see, you can't be doing that because you want to be a good person in some sense. You can't be doing that because you want to be seen as being a good person. That's not the right attitude. You have to be doing it because it's the transcendent right thing to do. Because you're trying to mirror God number two, the transcendent God. It's the thing that you do if you aim at the highest possible ideal. And you know, and that is laid out in the Sermon on the Mount, is that you should aim at the highest possible ideal. You should aim at a relationship with God. And then that you should concentrate on the day. And it's a deadly serious psychological advice. Aim high. Lift your eyes above the horizon, right? Lift your eyes to the stars that beckon above. Try to set things right and to orient your life. And there has to be a relationship with the transcendent that allows you to do that possible. This is where his language is going. And it's going to be very interesting to hear because this is where he'll go in the one more question thing. It's going to be very interesting to hear how much this relationship in the transcendent comes in. There's a long history of this. We're going to talk about the New England transcendentalists. So what are the pauses? What are the fears? I don't want to, you know, at some point you're going to have to deal with pluralism. And that's part of the reason we're going to look at Leslie Newb again. But we're making progress here, boys and girls. Properly or it becomes an exercise in ego. And then it doesn't work. So I can say I've learned a lot today. And now we got to interrupt the dude because, you know, we're at a clock here. We're trying to run a show with the number of followers you have. You've really struck a nerve in people and you found something that they really need. And you must have gotten that way by being a good listener. That's something I'm not. Becky says whenever she's upset, there's a problem. I'm just a fixer. I just go fix it. No, I just want you to listen. So I have I have I have something to say about that very briefly, if I might. Well, if if someone if someone comes to you with a problem, and this is, I think, something that men actually have to learn more than women, is that the person that's coming to you with the problem doesn't exactly know what the problem is. And the problem with jumping in with a fix too soon is that it's possible that you're you're curing the wrong illness. And so you have to listen because the person has to stumble around foolishly and in pain to to let you know what the problem actually is. And that's difficult. Right. You're going to have to teach me more because I'm task oriented. I'm just always going 100 miles an hour. I'll work on it. All right. Go ahead, David. Stagecraft. I just want to tell you because I because I genuinely because we're because we're we're near in the end where we're going to have to have the altar call. You only think you have one of the most you're one of the most tender hearted guests that we've seen. I watched the way you were with your mom last night and this morning. There's there's such a compassionate soul in there. I just want to tell you, sir, that no matter how much David or David who jumped on stage or David who's sitting here with you, no matter how much we I believe self-diagnosed and begin to take steps forward, we can certainly fix the circumstances and take forward. But ultimately, without Christ in the center of our life, God, number two, I just believe that we we lose our way at very best. We just become a really good performaholic and see what we're going to have to work on this more because there's a lot going on here. And I've got a conversation in 25 minutes. So. And I'm more concerned about the man that David can be when he's a man of God and the marriage he'll have and the fatherhood he'll have. And you see, you can there's a lot more that can be worked through with that language. But what happens is that I think in a sense, the church kind of got stuck on a particular language and are using the language as magic words. Now, there's a sense, you know, oh, and Benjamin for his for his magic words video that Sitch and Adam kind of mocked their way through the wizardry there. There's a point to it because language does have that wizardry and hocus pocus, of course, if you know where that phrase comes from. So the church is the church has been bifurcated in a progressivist and a conservative movement. And the the sin of progressivism is to is to forget the past. The sin of conservatism is to worship the past. And this is your chaos balancing again here to its degree. And so what you have to do is you have to you have to you have to figure out how to. One of the ways that you worship the past is you take the old words and you stick to them. And you don't often find that, in fact, the old words are their their languages moving underneath them. Jesus is Lord is a completely biblical phrase. But to say it now in 2019 means a very different thing than to say it in 8050. In the midst of the Roman Empire, where Caesar is Lord was the was the thing you're riffing on. Now, Jesus is Lord is the central thing. And there's no longer no longer a Caesar is Lord frame of reference. So the word has changed. The words stay the same, but their meaning has changed. And and so what what what evangelicals tend to do, and I count myself as sort of one, is we go back and we hang on to the words and we dig our nails into the words and we say, Here are the words that we're going to stick to. But they're changing underneath. And this is why, in fact, preachers and theologians have jobs, because it's that it's that business that we have to attend to. If you go to my blog, I'm a gospel word gardener. We continue to garden words. We don't. They have to be garden. And what happens with gardening is you take something that has potential in it and you work it. And that's what we're doing with words. We're working them. And and so what Peterson has been has done a tremendous amount of work on God number one. And what what Nassar is in a sense is taking all the words of God number two and plunking them there. And they look unimpressive. They look they look underwhelming compared to Peterson. Now, if you if you read C.S. Lewis, you'll notice that C.S. Lewis talks about words wearing out. And other authors have made this point, too. Words and overuse get worn out. They're tools that we use. And and so some of these words get threadbare. And again, it's not the fault of the words. It's fault of what we've done with the words. And and we haven't we haven't garden the words properly or stewarded them properly. And so Nassar hits them with God number two, but uses all of the same language that hasn't really been as as clearly garden and especially now on stage with Jordan Peterson, who's been doing a tremendous amount of gardening the God number one area. And the person that he'll help one day who's crying out for help and and it's such a great opportunity to read and to learn these principles, but to know that these principles are ultimately exemplified in the person of Jesus. How can we how can we pray for you? What's what's we want to close in prayer. Is there a prayer request that would know again back channels told me Peterson agreed to this kudos to Peterson. You know, there are a lot of people who do not go to church or identify as Christians that would have backed out of it. I don't know that Bernie Sanders would have sat here and been prayed over. I can go back to the videotape and see. But and again, say nothing about against Bernie Sanders, but Peterson opens up. I mean, just look at this frame, which I just happened to stop. I mean, Peterson, he understands this is a guy who is used to sitting at the edge of his bed and looking into the dark places of his life and saying, what can be better and waiting for an answer. God number two speaks in those moments. We can just we can take away. By the way, have you not absolutely enjoyed and are you not just grateful for him? Thank you, sir. We love you. You're awesome. How can we be such an evangelical pastor? You're awesome. Those are some word gardenings there, buddy. I know. I know it. I know it. Amen. And I mean, what's Sam Harris going to say about this? What's Joe Rogan going to say about this? Ben Shapiro, he's, you know, that's a whole that's complicated in a whole other realm. But Not many speakers get a standing ovation. Falwell just said He's moved by this. He's deeply moved by this as well. He should be. This is a remarkable thing. David Nasser knows it. Yeah. I love you. Anyways, this is trying for David Nasser, too. I would dare bet he was behind this entire episode. Grand Slam there, David. Well done. How can I how can I next week pray for you, brother? How can I right now just stay stand? Call them brother. Yes, it's like my fervent hope. And perhaps this is something that could be transformed into a prayer is that the That the mistakes that I am inevitably going to make while I'm pursuing that I don't pay an undue price for the mistakes that I'm inevitably going to make as I pursue what I'm pursuing. That's my fervent hope. You know, and it has been since all of this has broken around me that I would be careful enough in my self-sacrifice to pray for you. I'm going to pray for you. I'm going to pray for you. I'm going to pray for you. I'm going to pray for you. I'm going to pray for you. I'm going to pray for you. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. And that's what I'm hoping for. The only reason they're supporting me is that if they wish to pray for me is that I'm careful enough, I remain careful enough and fortunate enough so that my inevitable faults don't interfere too catastrophically with whatever good I might be able to do. with whatever good I might be able to do. This is where I need some God number two. Lay it on him, David. Lay it on him, David. Do it, baby. Let's pray for our brother. Put your hands towards him. Lord, I thank you for Dr. Peterson. I thank you, Lord, for the people that he's been able to help. I thank you, God, for the principles in the book that have helped people just look up. And I pray that what they would see as they look up is more than answers to fix the problems. See all those hands? That's liturgy. That's a different kind of liturgy. But it's liturgy. More than ways to medicate the issues, but that God, they would just look inside their soul and need, wake up to the fact that they need you. I thank you, Lord, that it's an initial bridge that hopefully points to the Gospel. And I pray that for the people that are reading it, that that book would ultimately call people to your word, to your word, to your word. I thank you for the seeking heart, the humility, and the teachability of our friend. I pray that as he seeks you out, that he would begin to see you, Jesus, as more than just a hero, but a personal savior. Just do that in his soul, Lord. We love you, God. We thank you that we're here. Lord, we pray for David right now. We pray that he would know that we're for him, we're with him. I'm a student here at Liberty. That I get to pour into him. I get to learn. Peterson nods when Nassar says that. I pray in years to come that David will look back on this moment and see it as a crossroad moment where you just change the trajectory of his life. We love you, God. We learn from each other, and so thank you that we've learned so much from Dr. Peterson. We need this in your name. Amen. One more time. Remarkable video. Remarkable video. Do these separated magisteria overlap? Only got 15 minutes, gosh. Jordan Peterson is scrupulously trying to construct a natural theology of sorts from a secular frame. His thesis is that if you lose Western civilization, if you lose the presuppositions beneath it, offered from the Bible as mythological text, God number one, David Nassar is asserting a religious tradition encoded in various phrases. The rules need a ruler without David submitting, bending his knee to Christ. This is the language that pastors and theologians have to keep working on. Because if you just enshrine the old words, they don't mean what they used to mean because the words are also of a moment. That the relational demand in the non-object in space, this is God number, non-object in space world, which is God number two. And so the evangelicals come in and they say exactly this. Unless Jordan Peterson buys wholesale into the Christian faith, his solutions are insubstantial, metaphysical, it is more than a banquet, it is little more than a banquet of crushed ice and vapor. I don't think so. Something more is going on here. And it's not just about Jordan Peterson, it's never about one individual. And if Jordan and Gary Habermas, Jordan Peterson comes out of lunch and instead of saying to Sam Harris, almost certainly not, he says to Gary Habermas, almost certainly so, that Peterson's point that he makes in the resurrection answer is very, very important in that how does the event of the resurrection, how does that transform the way I live? How does it make me move towards the leper instead of running it away? How does it make me stand with the Apostle Paul in, or how does it make me believe with the Apostle Paul and all the saints that maybe God will heal? How does it transform how I live my life? And I think in Peterson's prayer in a sense, how does it take the, on one hand, I don't want to take anything away from Peterson's fear, but it's this relationship with God number two that addresses that fear. And now when you read Paul in Timothy, you know, Paul's pretty bedraggled if you read, you know, 1 Timothy, but it's this living relationship. And again, even relationship is threadbare. And I've talked about Colson and Jimmy Carter and this transition that happened in the 70s as God number one keeps getting dismissed, evangelicals increase the volume of God number two. And that then leads to, as Dreer points out, as Christian Smith points out, the moralistic, therapeutic deism. And so there's a lot going on here. And I think we need to do better than the 80% good thing. I think the Peterson moment is a challenge to us to take much more seriously, to have our moment at the edge of the bed and look at what we have done and open ourselves radically to God and say, okay, show me what I need to change, God number two. You have a limited capacity to ensure outcomes. Jordan Peterson in modern psychiatry and psychology. Get the help you need, yes. Volunteerily taking up the burden, yes, but I dare bet that the David who rushed the stage had seen a doctor before and he had stumbled in his meds, which means he had been taking meds, which means it didn't fix it. But then the evangelicals lean in with their language and actually in the one more question thing, Nassar is terrifically open and honest about the shortcomings of the church and our approach. David Nassar likely won't dismiss modern medical technology. Again, read Larry Crabb. Larry Crabb works this field quite well. How the church prays and then hands them off to the therapist. And that's not a bad thing, but it's indicating something about our disbelief. Some Christian traditions will refuse medicine and psychological therapy. And so then you get to Jordan Peterson, keep saying, what works? Well, modern psychology has offered impressive relief for those suffering from mental illness and the strains of modern life. Jordan Peterson is right, is right through that, though, that the lines there are blurry. And Jordan Peterson is also right in recognizing that context and story matters. We see that in psychedelics. We see that in Jung. And to look at Melanie Brewster, whose video that I've played from Skepticon, when she recognizes that the church and religious communities offer impressive data to demonstrate the efficacy of their far less scientific approach. And you see this played out in the community there at Liberty, that Liberty is being the hermeneutic of the Gospel for David. And he was part of a Bible study, he was part of a youth group, and he was part of a community. And in many ways, those aspects are terrifically efficacious in many, many ways. And these are the, these are the normal, non-pharmaceutical things that allow us to, in fact, cope with the crippling suffering of this world. I love this quote from Carl Reiner, who was a, who was a Jesuit priest and theologian. In the torment of the insufficiency of everything attainable, we come to the understanding that here in this life, all symphonies remain unfinished, which is exactly the point of the resurrection. All symphonies remain unfinished, and we must leave our hands open to, to, to the God of the Bible, God number one and number two, in hopes for us to fill up, to fill it. Again, in the torment of the insufficiency of everything attainable, we come to the understanding that here in this life, all symphonies remain unfinished. And it's the resurrection that addresses that truth. So, honesty and shortcomings. Do we really imagine that, nine minutes, do we really imagine that the David who charged the stage had never seen a doctor for his bipolar? David had a relationship with a Liberty student. Was that relationship sufficient in the moment to address everything that bothered him to the point that he was desperate enough to charge the stage? And this is where I bring in Leo Bebb. You can find the book of Bebb written by Frederick Beekner, and this is in a sense where a bunch of streams of Christianity come together. I don't think anyone would call Frederick Beekner an evangelical. And in his first book, Lion Country, has parts in it that evangelicals would get nervous about. Reverend Leo Bebb, what Beekner addresses in there is so much of this, all of this coming together in the archetypal thing that Liberty University is to Sam Harris, and even to me in some ways. Reverend Leo Bebb runs a diploma mill and will ordain any male, Leo Bebb is very clear on that, who sends them their money. And he's under suspicion of perhaps having exposed himself to children. Something happened, and it isn't entirely clear, and they can't quite get it. But lots of other things aren't clear too. Is he good? Is he bad? Is he right? Is he wrong? Is he evil? Is he God? Bebb's supporting cast from Bible Belt Florida is exactly how you would imagine. In Lion Country, Anthony Parr, smart New Yorker, goes down to expose the fraud and finds things he's not quite sure about. Life is stranger than our fiction. People who have their lives together have terrible loose ends and obstacles that they never overcome. David Nasser and Jordan Peterson are right and honest about not otherizing the other David. We develop our scripts for the world, and they don't pan out from psychology or from your church. It's true. Anthony Parr can't figure out if Bebb is good or evil or crazy or miraculous. Parr has to begin to confront his own life about his assumptions. He has to sit at the edge of his bed and look deeply into it and ask that question and wonder if the darkness will answer back. Because sometimes it does. Is Parr a good person? Are his answers sufficient? In the book of Bebb, there's a resurrection story. Did a dead man rise at Leo Bebb's command? Antonio can't shake away the possibility that it might have happened. So, what's behind the modernist posture that it could not have happened or almost certainly not? Why doesn't Bebb capitalize on this? Isn't he all about money? He's always courting some wealthy person in order to keep his little church and his diploma mill and his so-called ministry afloat, him and his trench coat and his creepy hat and his one eyelid that flutters. Brownie said yes, only that wasn't the way Bebb wanted it. First thing he said, first thing he said when he had me sitting up again, it was Brownie that he raised, was for me and Billy not to go around shooting our mouths off because there would be an awful fuss if we did. And he would probably lose his job with the Bible Company because they wouldn't want the publicity. He said that losing his job would probably kill Lucille, who had just had the baby and was feeling blue enough anyway and wasn't getting much sleep nights. But of course it was bound to get out whether we shot our mouths off it or not because there were plenty who had heard about the accident and the next thing they knew, I was back at work again, good as new. What happened to Brownie? Why does Brownie serve Bebb and Lucille? So belovedly but so much like a slave. Exactly, Anthony said. So how come there's no shrine and pile of crutches? How come Bebb's still driving a Dodge with 50,000 miles on it that doesn't even have air conditioning? Brownie said, there's a very simple explanation for that and with your interest in religion, I'm surprised you've not thought of it yourself. When it comes right down to it, dear, Brownie always says dear, people don't want miracles. That's just what they do want, I said. Get the rumor started at that statue of the Virgin's nose has started to run and within 24 hours, people will line up six deep. Brownie said, little miracles, yes. People will flock to the little ones the way they flock to a magic show. Herod says, water to wine, that's just fine. Healing a leper, that's okay. But take a real miracle, like resurrection. Nobody wants those kind, dear, because they'll make it so you've got to believe whether you want to or not. That's God number two. That's God number two coming barging in. That's C.S. Lewis on pantheism feeling a tug at the other end of the line. What if I'm not looking for God? What if God is looking for me? There's a third person-ness in Jordan Peterson's privacy. He's haunted, baby. Pantheism in a space for object betray the same motivational incentive. I and we are in charge. The world is a space for us to take our shot at dominion. And even equality is second best. If I can't be God, then I at least don't want anyone else telling me they're better than me. Traditional Christian language has embedded within it a non-egalitarian relationship. You've got to bend the knee. Does it work? All pragmatic questions have implicit telos. And these are presuppositional and or subject to examination. Listen to my conversation I did with Nick yesterday. I loved the way that conversation went into free will. Free. It's only free if it's in God. In Him there's freedom. It's a crazy thing to think and to say. But you find it in strange ways. Jordan Peterson's project, he wants to improve the lives of regular people and he's 100% sincere in that. I believe it with all my heart. He's made a great contribution in my opinion. He wants to know the truth. This is a far more ambitious project. He's trying to branch the gap at the eye of the pyramid on the back of the dollar. The world is stranger than we can imagine. What do we mean by knowing? Jordan Peterson wants to experience it. And in the other question video, it's at that moment Peterson turns and he wants to hear about David's conversion and David doesn't tell him. It's like come on David! You put your testimony in Christianity today! Tell him why Peterson's curious about falling in love. Modernist assumptions, the secular frame continues to be an epistemic epistemological limitation on him. Will he give it up? Will he fall in love? On the other hand, the evangelical project can oversell and under deliver. Traditional norms and correctives, the Bible, continue to function powerfully. Evangelical practice, a neo-naivete about their Biblixism sometimes. Christians have to become more aware of the insufficiency of their cold talk. This is the job of the church, theologians, writers, pastors, and we stumble towards it in the dark. And that's what we're doing really in many places in our culture war. The face of insufficiencies of our action is of course the ground of Hebrews 11. Gosh, I'm out of time. I want to talk about my Sunday School lesson. I want to talk about Raymond Brown. I want to talk about reading the Bible because this isn't new. This is all the way back. If you read 1 John, you have this epistle where Raymond Brown notes on one hand we have these outsized things about love and on the other hand, John is as antithetical as black and white as any book in the Bible. Shoot, I'm out of time. I got to end with Leslie Newb again in the Gospel in a pluralistic society. And yet I confess I have come to feel that the primary reality which we have to take account in seeking for a Christian impact on public life is the Christian congregation. How is it possible that the Gospel could be credible? That people should come to believe that the power which is the last word in human affairs is represented by a man hanging on the cross. This is the power of the video. It's what moved Peterson. It was the lack of cynicism. It was the love that he saw. It was the prayer for him. That's the hermeneutic of the Gospel in the church. I am suggesting that the only answer, the only hermeneutic of the Gospel is a congregation of men and women who believe it and live by it. I am of course not denying the importance of many activities by which we seek to challenge public life with the Gospel, evangelistic campaigns, distribution of Bibles and Christian literature, conferences and even books such as this one. But I am saying that these are all secondary and that they have power to accomplish their purpose only as they are rooted in and lead back to a believing community. Even if, in your opinion, that believing community has serious problems. Jesus, as I said earlier, did not write a book but formed a community. This community has at its heart the remembering and rehearsing of his words and deeds and the sacraments given by him through which it enabled both to engraft new members in its life and to renew life again and again through the sharing in his risen life through the body broken and the life blood poured out. It exists in him and for him. He is the center of its life, its character is given to it when it is true to its nature. Not by the characters of its members but by his character. And when one point when David Nasser says, speaking of all the things that have impacted Peterson, David Nasser says, And in a sense, those are threadbare words heard by so many but in another sense he's exactly right because it's the hermeneutic of the gospel. It's the body of believers. It's not just the chosen words. It's the chosen words. It's the logos becoming flesh even in an imperfect way right there in that body, that community. I'm out of time. There it is. Two hours plus. There'll be another.