https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nsQWCZFmRx0

 Hi, this is Paul. For a while now I've wanted to get into this video and I've mentioned it in a previous video. It's a video from Yale University by an Old Testament scholar named Christine Hayes. You can look her up on Wikipedia. I graduated from Harvard. If you listen, I've listened to a few of her other lectures in this series and most of it is pretty standard university treatment of the Old Testament. But in this video she introduces the work of a Jewish scholar in the 1930s. And I haven't had a chance to read that book yet. I ordered it used on Amazon. There's an English translation by Moshe Greenberg and so I'm looking forward to taking a look at that book. But she introduced some ideas that I think are really important to the ongoing conversation and discovery that I'm doing. Now one of the things that I've noticed in a lot of the work that I've been doing over these last two years and even before that is that there are certain watersheds that differentiate and distinguish some different positions with respect to what is. You know, big picture questions. One of them is a personal god versus an impersonal god or impersonal whatever there is out there. And the question of whether or not there is this this goes down to a lot of the Darwinian stuff. The question of whether or not the universe is blind, let's say things simply are. The question of whether or not there's purpose built into the universe so that processes achieve the destinations of a creator who builds with intentionality and purpose versus an impersonal situation or environment or arena in which only agents act. And those agents I'm thinking about John Verveje's language of the of the agent arena relationship in which only agents actually act with purpose and intentionality seek, tell us seek outcomes and ends. You know all of these questions are just rolling around in all of these conversations that I'm having consciousness is consciousness derived from matter or is consciousness. In fact, a foundational thing this gets into the panpsychism conversations that we've been having with with JP panpsychism is in a way that sort of getting at consciousness that but you get into the question is consciousness sort of the product of the product of matter or is consciousness prior to matter as in many theistic conceptions. And with all these with all these situations you get. There's this basically these these basic watershed assumptions presuppositions biases that tend to govern the rest of the thought that it's that it's developed. If you for example if consciousness is a function of certain organizations of matter well then we are to the best of our knowledge unless we find some other material beings that have agency and consciousness. We are what we know of in the universe. But if in fact consciousness is something that is not dependent upon materiality but somehow coheres and arranges itself with materiality and the strange way that we experience it then then perhaps there are other beings that are as conscious and purposeful as we are. But you know we don't have access to them because of the limitations of our perception. Now someone recommended this video to me and I have people regularly recommend videos to me and it's a y'all are better than the Google algorithm in terms of finding stuff that that I would be interested in. And so I really appreciate the recommendation. Sometimes I come through an email or Twitter or comment section. I try to keep up with the comments section as best I can. And so but this this video caught my eye and I've listened to it a few times and I put a little piece of it in because I didn't know how quickly Yale was going to pull this stuff down. You never know with these other YouTube channels but there wasn't a copyright notice or anything on it. So I want to play probably most of this video and do some commentary all the way through because this actually gets into some of the Jordan Peterson biblical series stuff. Jordan sort of came at the polytheism monotheism conversation in the traditional way that that she actually describes in this video. And and in Jordan Peterson's schema monotheism comes about with this continual combing combining the aspects of gods and it's a way sociologically for people to sort of get together and for built for religions to construct and sort of self construct. And so you go from polytheism to henna theism to monotheism and she's going to talk a little bit about that in this video. Polytheism is was always a form of of social religious lubrication. You have this God your friend has that God you can either it. Gods are sort of gods are sort of tools out there that you can call upon in order to get certain things done and you'll find those you'll find those ideas pretty common throughout the world in terms of their religious assumption. If one God is good good gods are good two gods are better. Augustine in the city of God takes this to task in a pretty rough way. Augustine mocks the Romans for their God of the doorknobs and God of the hinges and God of the door itself and God of the mantle piece. And so the Romans just sort of multiply the numbers of God. And of course you had emperors becoming gods and and and what that tends to do is reinforce the idea that that temples and churches are sort of religious service providers and the people themselves are stand at the center of the universe and find tools and ways of accessing the powers that be out there in order to exert and establish and promote their own personhood and achieve their aims and destinies that the individual wishes to achieve. Now this will basically come on hard times in Christianity where the God that we find in the Old Testament she's an Old Testament scholar she doesn't really talk about the New Testament but the God that we find in the book of Genesis is not simply a compilation of all the gods but a radically different thing than this realm called the meta divine realm and she talks about it quite well. So I'm going to let her talk about it and I want to mute my computer a second before that dinging drives me crazy. All right so let's jump into this video and give it a listen. I'll actually play most of it but it's it's it's all a good video. It was just a more refund. And today we are going to begin our appraisal of the first portion of the Bible as the product of a religious and cultural revolution. The Bible is the product. Now again she's teaching at Yale's secular university ideas like revelation will be not passed around. This is a secular perspective something from the bottom. And so if if if you are a Christian who believes in revelation and you hear these things you know you can be offended if you want to and you can disagree with her certainly but that's that's the frame in which she is operating here and actually while she makes these lectures she gives a lot of different. She gives a lot of different qualifications to a lot of her words because every now and then some Christian will wander into her course at Yale. Of minds that were exposed to and influenced by and reacting to the ideas and cultures of their day. And as I suggested in the opening lecture comparative study of the literature of the ancient Near East and the Bible reveals the shared cultural and literary heritage at the same. And again even though Esther cringes whenever I say it take a look at some of John Walton's books while John Walton does a lot in terms of ancient Near East contemporaries to the Bible. And I think it's time that it reveals great differences between the two in the literature of the Bible some members of Israelite society probably a cultural religious and literary elite broke radically with the prevailing norms of the day they mounted a critique of prevailing norms. And John Walton's responsible for the final editing and shaping of the Bible somewhere from the seventh to the fifth or fourth century B.C.E. right we're not totally sure and we'll talk more about that. But those final editors were members of this group and they had a specific worldview and they impose that worldview on the older traditions and stories that are found in the Bible. You can impose that worldview if you're redacting it of course you're imposing it but it makes it sound so hostile. That radical new worldview in the Bible was monotheism. But why you might ask should the idea of one God instead of many be so radical. What is so different. What's different about having the one God from having a pantheon of gods headed by a superior God. What is so new and revolutionary about monotheism. Well according to one school of thought there isn't anything particularly revolutionary about monotheism and the classical account of the rise of monotheism that has prevailed for a very long time runs as follows. And I have a little flow chart here to illustrate it for you. The argument goes that in every society there's a natural progression a natural progression from polytheism which is the belief in many gods. Usually these are personifications of natural forces to henotheism and know one God or monolatry which is really the worship of one God as supreme over other gods. So not denying the existence of the other gods ascribing reality to them but isolating one as the supreme God and on to monotheism where essentially one believes only in the reality of one God. And in the 18th and 19th centuries this progression was viewed as an advanced which is not very surprising because the whole theory was put forward by scholars who were basically Western monotheists. So now we have I mean it's funny and in a sense we have all of this stuff has become affectations of we have to situate ourselves as okay we're now beyond it's so ironic because well these were monotheists who have come up with now we're beyond those monotheists and we now ourselves it's like now we're all in the stream baby we're all in the stream. I didn't mean baby because she's a woman I'm doing the affectations I've had baby just just never mind I'll let her talk some more. And these scholars maintained that certain elements of biblical religion represented pure religion religion evolved to its highest form no longer tainted by pagan and polytheistic elements of Canaanite religion generally. Okay, and we could, you know, we're looking at the 18 19th century we're seeing in the West this this flow of let's call it modernism, let's situate it within a period and, and here we have. Again, if you read books from this era, she's, she's very much correct you're not saying anything wrong here that's that's that's the flow of the historiography if you will of the time. It's, it's just sort of the. It's just sort of the attitude. I don't know if she has it or not I haven't listened to her or read, read anything from her or listen to that much of her but you know here now we've progressed above it which which I always find that attitude to be, you know, we've progressed that we've progressed modernism and it's like, that's a pretty modernist way to assume progress because it's you're just at a later state and then 50 years from now and oh that Paul van der klei in 2020 we've progressed far beyond him well congratulations my future listeners there you have it. So, applying an evolutionary model to religion carried with it a very clear value judgment polytheism was understood as clearly inferior. And so, it's always her. She's not having a progressive model to religion she's more having a revolutionary model to religion so the model theists were revolutionaries and, you know, it's, it's. So, it's always her for you always have a way of understanding where one thing flows to the other but all of these ways of understanding or one thing flows to another are our ways of understanding or one thing flows to another and we should probably be in touch with, with our, our own affectations to primitive monality was an improvement. And then closer but monotheism was judged to be the best and purest form of religion. And that first, the great archaeological discoveries that I talked about last time in the 19th century, seem to support this claim that is right monotheism had evolved from ancient Near Eastern polytheism for Neo form tablets that were inscribed with the great literature of Mesopotamian civilizations. And, you know, it's, it's, it's helpful. When we look at these processes like evolution and we're talking about them in historical terms. It's, you know, more and more now as I do these videos I think about what are we actually saying what are we actually meaning what these these aren't the same kinds of processes that we do in a lab and a test tube we, we look at them in society and we, they're sociological we're not just historical processes but you know how what exactly are we talking about and so we can, whereas we see the progression, if, again progression is the right word. We see the transformations to what degree, you know, we know so little about ourselves how these things change in us how the zeitgeists morph throughout the age how that impacts different individuals how how influence gets carried why why one regime as such now I'm using a different for matter what now one regime replaces another so but but when it comes down to human beings and individuals and writers and all of this that's going on, the, the, the, the process will be unbelievably messy and and probably nowhere near linear, but in order to simplify all this these are the kinds of ways that we talk in terms that we use. And even saying it that way, you know, so for example in my adult Sunday school class, a couple of years ago now I've been in john for a while. We're in the book of Ezekiel and part of what was really interesting to me about going through the book of Ezekiel was was watching how events combine with each other. And part of what was really interesting to me about going through the book of Ezekiel was was watching how events combine with religious assumptions to the new see things morph I mean what does it mean that the temple in Jerusalem is destroyed that event in conjunction with a system of beliefs transformed beliefs and other ways now I'm not undercutting or denying notions of of revelation at all. And I want to really get into that issue at some point because that again is another one of these biases that we find well I just listened to a Douglas Murray video that Esther recommended to me and you know it's it's it's again one of these affectations where we say well I don't believe in revelation. Okay what what exactly don't you believe in what what are we talking about when we're talking about revelation. It's these things aren't and I mean that critique on both sides these things aren't anywhere near so simple as one might imagine and I think actually theologians for years have been talking about these issues because for God to appear to me and utter a sentence completely without context it's impossible that I would understand it and all the way you know to John Calvin and before biblical scholars have said God has to accommodate himself to us and what that means is that in a sense he gets into the flow of history because that's the only way a tiny little historically bound creature like me could understand anything at all. So when I read for example the book of Ezekiel and I think a lot of what we see in the Bible is in fact these transformations happening. The Bible shows us how these happen. The temple gets destroyed and and somehow the children and many of the Israelites get carted off to Babylon and then of course the Persians come in and the Greeks will come in and the Romans will come in and all of that history affects people and it affects their thought and their thoughts change and it's an incredibly dynamic process. Okay and you know for for Muhammad to assert I really want to get around to Tom Holland's book on Islam for for Muhammad to assert that you know God gave him a vision well okay well people have visions all the time. It's just the and and if you're hanging around Pentecostals or other people people assert visions and dreams and authoritative things all the time authoritative books to authoritative visions none of that sort of breaks us in terms of whether I'm looking at a book that's divinely inspired and looking at a book that's written by that that there's no claim of divine inspiration both of those books are going to have an impact on me and and to actually be able to to actually delve into the the sociology and the processes and the thought that that how I regard those two books and how much those two books have influence over me and on and on and on and on and on none of this is simple. Okay and so this video is going to be way too long I have conversations at three o'clock so I got to keep going with this. Tablets that were inscribed with the great literature of Mesopotamian civilization that Israelite monotheism had evolved from ancient Near Eastern polytheism. Cuneiform tablets that were inscribed with the great literature of Mesopotamian civilizations were uncovered and when they were deciphered they shed astonishing light on biblical religion and these discoveries led to a kind of parallelomania. That's how it's referred to in the literature scholars delighted in pointing out all of the parallels in theme and language and plot and structure between biblical stories and ancient Near Eastern stories. So more than a thousand years before the Israelite legend of Noah and the ark you have Mesopotamians telling the story of Zeus Sudra or in some versions Utnapishtim who also survived a great flood by building an ark on the instruction of a deity and the flood destroys all life and he sends out birds to scout out the dry land and the land. So with parallels like these it was argued it was clear that the religion of the Israelites was not so different from the religions of their their polytheistic or pagan neighbors. And of course conservative scholars said well with examples like these it's clear that these these stories have a historical basis. They also had a creation story they had a flood story they did animal sacrifices they observed purity taboos Israelite religion was another ancient Near Eastern religion and they differed from their neighbors only over the number of gods they worshiped one or many. It was just a more refined more highly evolved version of ancient Near Eastern religion. Well this view this evolutionary view or evolutionary model was challenged by man named Yahezkel Kaufman in the 1930s and Kaufman argued that monotheism does not and cannot evolve from polytheism because the two are based on radically divergent worldviews radically divergent intuitions about reality. And in a multi volume work which was later translated and abridged and you've got a selection of reading from the translated abridgment so it's translated by Moshe Greenberg and abridged version of his massive work the religion of Israel. Kaufman asserted that the monotheism of Israel wasn't it couldn't be the natural outgrowth of the polytheism of an earlier age. Now she said it very quickly and this is Kaufman's assertion his thesis again couldn't be that natural outgrowth. Okay and again if you're following my videos whenever you say certain words certain fudgy words like natural you have to stop and say well what do you mean by that word. Well I mean that these things flow by themselves okay drop a ball it drops and you know you these things flow by their natural process which means they're in a sense impersonal. All right this is this is all stuff again built into our world and our language and how we go so so monotheism could not be a natural outgrowth of polytheism and in fact part of what we have in this world and since we have societies that are sort of separated you know you have the long standing polytheism of India but was that polytheism or you know you can you can there in a sense and be a humanity you can see a bunch of these experiments just running running running running all the time and in terms of what's natural. It was a radical but Kaufman asserted that the monotheism of Israel wasn't it couldn't be the natural outgrowth of the polytheism of an earlier age. It was a radical break with it it was a total cultural and religious discontinuity. It was a polemic. And then you would have to ask well where does this discontinuity come from if we're imagining in CS Lewis the whole show that one thing leads to another where does this discontinuity come from where do these ideas come from. Against polytheism and the pagan worldview that simplicity says throughout the biblical text. It's been said that Kaufman replaces the evolutionary model of the revolutionary model. This is a revolution not an evolution evolution revolution. Now one advantage of Kaufman's model is that we avoid some of this pejorative we can avoid avoid some of the pejorative evaluations of polytheism as primitive right as necessarily earlier and primitive and inferior. It's just amazing how quickly we get tripped up on value judgments okay. And again value judgments like biases they grow in us naturally. We will always have them with us we can't we can't not have them with us as small creatures in an overly tremendous field we have to have value judgments in order to sort and to know how to act and how to live in the world. So we have to have value judgments as well as the as primitive right as necessarily earlier and primitive and inferior. There's simply positing the existence of two distinct orientations two divergent worldviews. They each have their explanatory merits and they each have their specific problems and difficulties. It's not to say that Kaufman wasn't clearly judgmental but at least the potential is there for us to understand these as two distinct systems. And again as I say with its explanatory merits but as we'll see some of the things that monotheism solves only invite other sorts of problems that it has to wrestle with throughout its long life. Now in Kaufman's view the similarities therefore between the Israelites and ancient Near Eastern religion and cultures that everyone was so busily finding and celebrating. These were in the end similarities in form and external structure appearance. They weren't essential similarities. They differed in content. Sure they both have animal sacrifice. Sure they both have ritual purity laws. Sure they share certain stories and legends but these have been adopted by the Israelites and transformed transformed into vehicles that convey the basic ideas of the monotheistic worldview. So a similarity in form doesn't mean a similarity in function and in this Kaufman's anticipating arguments made by anthropologists. The ritual cult of the Israelites may look like that of their neighbors but it functioned very differently. Its purpose was drastically different from that of Israel's neighbors. The Israelites like their neighbors may have set up a king over themselves but Israelite monarchy differed from Canaanite monarchy in significant ways because of their monotheism. These are all things we will test and explore. So the meaning and function of Israel's cult, of Israel's king, of its creation stories or any of its other narratives, they derive from the place of those items within the larger cultural framework or worldview of Israel and that larger framework or worldview is one of basic monotheism. So let's turn then to Kaufman's description of the fundamental distinction between the polytheistic worldview and the revolutionary monotheistic worldview that took root in Israel. And I am going to be rehearsing and then critiquing the arguments that are in that hundred page reading that I assigned for you this week. This is the only time something like this will happen in the course. And I do that because these ideas are so fundamental and we are going to be wrestling with them throughout the course. So it's important to me that you absorb this stuff right from the beginning and think about it and be critical of it and engage it. Kaufman's ideas are very important. They're also overstated in some ways. And what I was amazed by this when I heard this I thought, wow, this is really interesting stuff. Where can I find more videos about it? I couldn't find a lot of videos about it. I didn't see a lot of books about it. So I ordered Moshe Greenberg's book and there was another video, Jordan Peterson and the Meta Divine Realm and Christine Hayes. And I thought somebody got here before me, but he only had four subscribers. So I hope I'm not stepping on his discovery. But it was just interesting that somebody else figured out something about the relationship of these two. This is cool. That's why we're going to be wrestling with some of these ideas throughout the course. So let's begin with Kaufman's characterization of what he calls pagan religion. That's the term that he uses. The fundamental idea of pagan religion, he says, and I quote, the idea that there exists a realm of being prior to the gods and above them. A realm of being. Now, if you've been following along with John Vervecky and listening to Heidegger and even back to Peterson, you know, being with a capital B, Jordan Peterson all of a time, being with a capital B. There's a realm of being. We have the this is the this is the arena. OK, there's a realm of being capital B and it's a it's a thick realm. Upon which they depend and whose decrees even they must obey. Now, it's interesting because decrees there is quite obviously a anthropomorphism because the basic conceptualization here is impersonal. And so we would say this is where we get our idea about nature. I obey the decrees of gravity. Now, this is decrees is not a far step from a law. I obey the law of gravity. And again, law and decree. I mean, they're anthropomorphized in a sense, but conceptually we tend to view laws of nature as impersonal. There's no agency. There's no purpose. There's no will. Again, this is sort of the framework of contemporary secularism. And and since the Enlightenment, OK, this is we in a sense what we might say is that we've is this in some ways a an adaptive limited in some frames, less limited as it's going through a certain paganism here. This is this is very interesting when you think about this idea in terms of our assumptions behind it. The meta divine realm. This is the realm of supreme and ultimate power and it transcends the deities. All right. The deity or the deities emerge from and are therefore subject to the laws of the meta divine realm. Now, again, if you read mythology, you'll find this in Greek mythology. You'll find it in Babylonian mythology. You'll find it almost all over the place that and that these gods emerge. We you know, we've talked quite a bit about emergence that these are emergent properties, that consciousness is an emergent property, that the gods sort of emerge from this meta divine realm and that this meta divine realm is sort of this. If we're talking in biological evolutionary terms, this this meta divine realm is kind of the the meta divine cosmic soup out of which gods emerge. And then the stories get going. The forces and powers of the meta divine realm and the nature of this realm will vary from pagan tradition to pagan tradition. It might be water. It might be darkness. It might be spirit or in ancient Greek religion, a more sort of philosophical polytheism. It might be fate. Even the gods are subject to the decrees of fate. They have no control over that. And you'll you'll find I think it was in one of Tom Holland's books, you know, that in some ways the competition is that the fates then get personified in Greek mythology. And they're sort of gods. But but what's interesting is that the fates as gods are then in always some weird competition with the other gods and fate. Do the to the should we personify the fates or is fate this impersonal force that is happening for which there's the the fates have no intentionality or purpose. It just is. And you can see when we're getting sort of to the limits here that we're struggling with with how to conceptualize these things. Kaufman asserts therefore this this belief once you posit a primordial realm, some realm that is beside or beyond the gods, that's independent of them and primary. You have automatically limited the gods. So what I've done is I've spelled out here for you consequences, logical consequences of positing a meta divine realm. You know, once you have a meta divine realm, all of these things are going to follow. The gods are going to be limited. All right. They are not the source of all they are bound by. They're subservient to this meta divine realm. There can therefore be no notion of a supreme divine will, an absolute or sovereign divine will. The will of any one god ultimately can be countered by the decrees of the primordial realm and the will the will of all the gods can be thwarted by the decrees of the primordial realm. And again, it's you know, for Vakie talks about off. I mean, we can't limit. We can't help the we can't help the grammar that we've been given. And so she's in a sense personifying the divine realm. But it's it's, you know, conceptually, it's more like gravity. You can't defy gravity. Gods can, but gods can't define the aspects of the metal divine realm that limit them. And what's interesting is that there's we're seeing here in some ways just in a different cultural context in a different period, some of the same dualities that we're seeing in contemporary conversations. All of any one god can be thwarted by perhaps another god. All right. So the gods are limited in power. They're also limited in their wisdom that falls under this as well. They're not going to be all knowing or all wise because of the existence of this realm that's beyond them and which is in many ways mysterious to them as well. It's unpredictable to them, too. It's not in their control or in their power. Individual gods might be very wise. They might be wise in particular crafts. They might be a god of healing, very, very wise and healing or a god of some other craft or area of knowledge, but they possess wisdom as an attribute, not as an essential characteristic. Kaufman asserts that mythology is basic to pagan religions. Now, she's using mythology in a different sense than Peterson and Vervecky because they were using mythology sort of as world defining stories. And you'll see how she's going to use it now. Mythology, mythologies are the lives or tales of the lives of gods, tales of the lives of the gods and pagan religions. The gods are born and they live lives very similar to human lives, but on a grand scale. And then they die. They might be reborn to pagan religions, contain the agonies, birth of a god, the agony accounts of the births of gods. Now, this impersonal primordial realm, Kaufman declares, contains the seeds of all beings. Very often in these creation stories, there is some sense of some realm from which life begins to emerge, usually beginning with gods. So these cosmogonies and theogonies will describe the generation of sexually differentiated divine beings, also the generation of the natural world, also the generation of human beings and animals. In other words, this is the primordial room for all that is divine, human and natural. It is the source of everything mundane and divine. What that means, Kaufman asserts, is that in pagan religion there's very often a fluid boundary between the divine, the human and the natural worlds. They blur into one another because they all emerge ultimately from the same primordial world stuff. The distinctions between them are soft. We see this in the fact that gods are very often associated with natural, powerful forces. The sky is a god, the fire is a god, fertility, a natural process, is a god. So there's no real distinction between the worship of gods and the worship of nature. Second, he says, because humans also emerge ultimately. Now, right there, there's no worship of gods and worship of nature. Again, you sort of have a blurring of personalities. Aphrodite is about reproduction and fertility. Now, and so if your wife is infertile, she's slighted Aphrodite. And so in order to, you know, gain Aphrodite's favor, you offer sacrifices at her altar. So there's an exchange. Now, it's interesting how these differentiations aren't quite so stark when, well, if my, if I used to have these pumps, these pumps in the Dominican Republic, we'd pump water up from the cistern and into the house, and you'd have to prime the pump. In a sense, the sacrifices prime the pump and they get the gods going. And so the natural, which is impersonal and personal, the lines sort of get blurred with these gods. And in a sense, you know, personhood is a way of, in ignorance, questioning will. Why can't I get from these gods what I want? Ultimately, from this natural process is a god. So there's no real distinction between the worship of gods and the worship of nature. Second, he says, because humans also emerge ultimately from this primordial realm, there's a confusion of the boundary between the divine and the human that's common. He says he chooses the word confusion that's common in pagan religion. And if you go to the early Verbecky things and his Awakening from the Meaning Crisis series, this is the, this is the continuous cosmos, you know, Charles Taylor, sort of gods or kind of like big people. And we're all sort of on a spectrum. And so we often have in pagan religions unions between divine beings and human beings. Kaufman argues, and I quote, that the continuity between the divine and human realm is at the basis of the pagan belief in apotheosis, humans becoming gods, perhaps after death, for example, becoming immortal, or very often kings, when they ascend to the throne, become gods. Whatever power the gods have, Kaufman says, is not due to the fact that their will is absolute or their spirit is absolute. The realm that transcends the gods, this metadivine realm, is that which has ultimate power. And the stuff of which it is made is what has ultimate power. So power is materially conceived. It's, it inheres in certain... Now when she says materially here, she's, you know, this is Aristotelian here. Power is taking this, you know, the different words for this, this stuff and reforming it and applying it to a moment. That's what power is. And in that sense, it's technology and really many ways magic. And this is why Christians will often complain that, well, Jesus miracles are not magic. I understand the confusion, but the two realms that we're looking at here are, is this magic or is in fact there a different relationship here? Because in the metadivine realm, a creature has power, such as, say, a human has power. If a human has power, if someone is physically strong, they can lift great weights. And if someone is less physically strong, they can lift lesser weights. And, you know, that's the sort of power that we have. It's materially she's using here very, I think, very much an Aristotelian sense. ...things and certain substances, particularly substances or materials that are deeply connected to whatever this primordial world stuff is. So there's blood and blood that courses through the veins of living creatures that seem to have some deep and powerful connection with the metadivine realm. And that is where power resides. If it is water, then water will be viewed as particularly materially powerful in that particular system. So gods have power only insofar as they are connected with that primordial world stuff, a technical term that I use throughout this lecture. And this is analogous to, let's say you want some money from the government. You get someone who's got more power in the government to maybe write your cause into the state or federal or city budget. So that, I mean, that's the, in a sense, the relationships of the universe of the metadivine realm. That means that magic is possible in such a system. Because power is materially conceived, in other words, since it is believed to adhere in certain natural substances that resemble or are connected to the primordial world stuff, that's the source of all power, then magic is possible by manipulating those material substances in certain ways. It might be clay, it might be water, it might be blood. Then whatever is believed to hold the power of this primordial life force, humans can tap into and influence the activities of the metadivine realm. So through manipulation, magical manipulations of certain substances, they can harness, Kaufman says, they can harness these forces, these independent self-operating forces. And so the human magician is really a technician, and he can make these forces come to bear on even the gods, to coerce the gods to do his will and so on. And in that way, you can get the sense of this great chain of a technical universe where you're just working your way up to get at the technical stuff. But what that means is that will and telos and intentionality are finally located at this mysterious source of whatever that is, of will, where that comes from. So magic in a pagan system, Kaufman claims, is a way of getting around the gods, circumventing the capricious will of the gods and demons. In other words, you've got these wills all the way up the chain, and if those wills are against you, you find your way around by getting in touch with whatever the powerful matter or element is of the metadivine realm to get on top of the gods and therefore get your will over the gods. And if you read Greek mythology, you'll see that people are constantly wrestling with the gods, the gods are constantly wrestling with each other, and it's all about getting your way in a very complicated, busy world full of lots of willful agents, of which you are a fairly small one. His magic is directed at the metadivine realm, trying to tap into its powers, it's not directed at the gods, it's trying to tap into the ultimate source of power to use that power to influence the gods in a particular way or protect oneself against the gods. Similarly, divination. Divination is an attempt to discern the future that once again heads right to the source of power, it's not directed at the gods, unless you're hoping to use them as a medium through which to get access to the metadivine realm, but ultimately most divination is aimed at untapping the secrets of the metadivine realm. And, you know, even language, once you start getting into this, you begin to realize that, well, this stuff is built into a lot and the lines between them are not always necessarily that clear, especially as expressed in different actions and different individuals, but that which is written in the book. You know, I'm thinking about Sam Harris and Brett Weinstein's talk about this movie. Well, the movie is a newer version of that which is written in the book. And then the question is, well, who wrote it in the book? And you see as Lewis playing with these things and the lion, the witch and the wardrobe, the older magic that the white witch doesn't know. And not the gods. Discerning the will of the gods is really of little use, right? Because even their will can be thwarted or overthrown by other gods or by the decrees of the metadivine realm. The pagan cult, Kaufman claims, is a system of rights. I use the word cult. Never hear people look at me and say, you know, what is cult? I don't even understand what that means. We'll learn more about cult. But it refers to a system of rights. Okay, a system of rights. And those rights are R-I-T-E-S, not R-I-G-H-T-S. So these are rights as in actions, as in cultic actions, as in what happens in a temple. And you can see that then the gods above, it's following up this train, but you can do a work around those gods above by manipulating these elements, which again, all find their source in the metadivine realm. And so they're trying to, again, let loose certain powers, set into motion certain forces that will coerce a god to be propitiated, for example, or calmed or to act favorably or to vindicate the devotees and so on. Some of these cultic acts might be defensive or protective so that the god cannot harm the worshiper. Many of the cultic festivals are keyed in to mythology, the stories of the lives of the gods. Many of the cultic festivals will be reenactments of events in the life of the god, a battle that the god had, the death of the god. Usually in the winter, cultic rituals will reenact the death of the god. And then in spring, the rising or resurrection of the god. These are all reenactment festivals that occur very often. And it's believed that by reenacting these festivals in this cultic way, one brings magical powers into play and can in fact ensure and maintain the reemergence of life in the spring. And so it's essential for the maintenance, preservation of the world. One final and very important point, and we're going to wrestle with this quite a bit during the year. Kaufman claims, again, in the polytheistic worldview, the primordial realm contains the seeds of all being. Everything is generated from that realm, good and bad. So just as there are good gods who might protect human beings, there are also evil gods who seek to destroy both humans and other gods. And now if you pause here and you think this through a little bit about, OK, what do we mean by good and evil when we're talking about an impersonal, meta-divine realm? Right away, you begin to see the edges of these categories. And again, I've listened to this video a few times and I want to listen to a few times more, but just pause right there to think about, OK, what is it? What is it? What is? I just watched the latest Star Wars movie and my summary of the movie is that it seemed to have been written by a child many places in the movie. And in some ways, these have become movies for children, but they just don't think through the force and balance of the force and the dark side. And there's just no thinking about that in any clear or deep way. We're just in a rush to make the money at the box office. And so, you know, but you've got all of those tensions when you're dealing with with something of this nature. And so it's if we translate this into the Star Wars universe, you know, it's it's the force here. Oh, OK. What do you mean by that? Death and disease are consigned to the realm of these evil demons or these impure evil spirits, but they are siblings with the good gods. Human beings are basically powerless, he says, in the continual cosmic struggle between the good gods and the evil demons, unless they can utilize magic, divination, tap into the powers of the meta divine realm, circumvent the gods who might be making their lives rather miserable. But what's important is that Kaufman insists that in the pagan view, evil is an autonomous demonic realm. It is as primary and real as the realm of the holier good gods. Evil is a metaphysical reality. It is built into the structure of the universe. That's the way the universe was made. The primordial stuff that spawned all that is spawned it good and bad and exactly as it is. And it's there and it's real. And what we mean by real. Salvation, he says, is the concern of humans. The gods aren't interested in in human salvation. I'm not exactly sure what she means by salvation, because salvation is a really slippery word from from the capricious forces and powers in the world because they're trying to save themselves. You know, the good gods are being attacked by the evil gods. The powers and decrees of the meta divine realm are hassling them as well as anybody else. So they can't be worried about humans or worried about themselves. Salvation is attained through magic or Gnostic means Gnostic means Gnosticism refers to knowledge of secrets that can in some way liberate one from the regular rules. And so as long as one can somehow circumvent the god, gods tie oneself into the powers of the meta divine realm to be beyond the reach of the demons and the capricious gods who make life on earth and misery. That is the path for salvation. So Kaufman says that the pagan worldview is one of an amoral universe somewhere. There we go. A moral. She's got salvation is escape. And that's that's really interesting. I wish she had. She had said more about that. Maybe. Maybe I can talk to her because I'm really interested in this idea. Not a moral universe, not an immoral universe, but an amoral universe. It is morally neutral. There are gods who are legislators and guardians of social order and justice, but their laws aren't absolute. They can be leveled by the decrees of the supreme meta divine realm. Again, decrees. And again, this has to be conceptualized not as decrees, but as limitations, because again, there's no there's no will in it. And that way it's it's analogous to Darwinian processes that are blind. The knowledge and wisdom of each god is limited. Morality can be defined as what a particular god likes or desires, and that may be different from what another god likes or desires. And there's no absolute morality then. And it's that picture of the universe Kaufman wants to argue that is challenged by the monotheistic revolution. Again, he sees this as a revolution of ancient Israel. So according to Kaufman, the fundamental idea of ancient Israelite writing, which receives no systematic formulation, but permeates the entire Bible in his view, is a radically new idea of a god who is himself the source of all being, not subject to a meta divine realm. There's no transcendent cosmic order or power. He does not emerge from some pre-existing realm, and therefore he is free of all of the limitations of myth and magic. We'll go through these one by one. But a god whose will is absolute and sovereign. So what then are the implications of the elimination of this meta divine realm? Just as these points flowed logically from positing a meta divine realm, what flows logically from eliminating a meta divine realm and positing simply a god that does not emerge from any pre-existing power or order or realm? And again, there's no more slippery word than god. But god, as we'll assume that she's talking again in an Old Testament sense, as a personal god, one that has will, intentionality, purpose, desires, goals already built in. And that this, I just finished listening to Verveckis Heidegger, Corbin Jung, and I'm just now into Tillich and Barfield. And I'm so interested in this stuff. It takes me a while to get through John's stuff. John's stuff isn't necessarily that easy. And so I've got a lot of Heidegger and some of that conversation ringing in my head right now. Well, first of all, there's no theogony or mythology in the Bible. God isn't born from some primordial womb. He doesn't have a life story. There's no realm that is primary to him or prior to him. And there is no realm that is the source of his power and wisdom. So in the opening chapters of Genesis, god simply is. He doesn't grow. He doesn't age. He doesn't mature. He doesn't have in the Bible a female consort. God doesn't die. So in the Hebrew Bible, Kaufman claims, for the first time in history, we meet an unlimited God who's timeless and ageless and non-physical and eternal. That means that this God transcends nature. Which means we're going to get rid of number three as well, right? Number three was fluid boundaries, divine human nature. God is, again, this is if you're familiar with Christianity and traditional Christian theology, this stuff is all built in. God transcends nature. The sovereign of all realms, God isn't by nature bound to any particular realm. He's not identifiable as a force of nature or identified with a force of nature. Nature certainly becomes the stage of God's expression of his will. He expresses his will and purpose through forces of nature in the Bible. But nature isn't God himself. He's not identified. He's holy other. Now, we're going to get into God number one and God number two in this stuff because God's, I often use the verse out of Isaiah six. The whole worth is full of his glory. Nature is an expression of his will and God is known through nature. We call that in traditional Christian theology general revelation. But God is not limited to that nature. God is not identical with that nature. And this is when Luke keeps pestering me about panentheism, why I always pause. And because it's not the relationship between God and nature is this. This is not a simple thing to talk about. And I think in terms of the the current falling away of people, especially with their questioning the morality of God because of and they opt for something else. They opt for something impersonal and natural, even though it's the same event, because it doesn't have that overlay of personal relationship. I'm still working on all of this stuff because I'm convinced that this is this is where many of these current issues now lie. But I'm I by no means have it figured out or or even have the language to talk about it like I want to. And that's why I make videos because what I do in these videos as I talk and I talk through things and as I talk through my learn. He isn't kin to humans in any way either. So there is no blurring, no soft boundary between humans and the divine, according to Kaufman in the Bible. There's no apotheosis in the Bible, no life after death in the Bible either. Did you know that? Now, again, when she's every time she says Bible, she's talking about the Old Testament and she's speaking from a modern critical posture. And so when she says there's no life after death, she'll are you including the Book of Daniel, dating of the Book of Daniel? And all this stuff gets complicated, but I don't want to get into all that stuff in this video. I have to wait a few centuries for that idea to come along. But certainly not in the Hebrew Bible. People live 70 years and that's it. So there's or hundred twenty five, no process by which humans become gods and certainly no process in the reverse as well. Magic in the Hebrew Bible is represented as useless. It's pointless. There's no meta divine realm to tap into. Power doesn't in here and any stuff in the natural world. So the world is sort of de-divinized, demythologized. And even though she's sort of straddling what we dare use that word supernatural, she's sort of straddling that word. It's haunting here. And so because it's much more of a continuous cosmos rather than, you know, as John keeps saying, the Axial Age mythology, a big split. And, you know, so what I. Yeah, there's just so many thoughts. This video for me is so seminal in terms of just highlighting different aspects of the ongoing conversation that we've been having. Power isn't understood as a material thing or something that adheres in material substances. God can't be manipulated or coerced by charms or words or rituals. They have no power and cannot be used in that way. And so magic is sin. Magic is sin or rebellion against God because it's predicated on a whole mistaken notion of God having limited power. Now, I just actually responded to an email today by someone who goes to a church and they've been using Andy Stanley's R&D. Andy Stanley's orange curriculum and Andy Stanley, of course, had a has had some views about discarding the Old Testament. And so I don't always give the longest responses to some email questions that I get. But I did with this one because the stuff that we're talking about in this video, this is all the stuff you lose. If you lose the Hebrew scriptures and the term and the way that they function within the larger Christian Bible of Hebrew and Greek of Old and New Testament, because they very much work together. And in many ways, the New Testament is unintelligible or not properly intelligible without the old. Because in many ways, what the New Testament does is you cannot continue the story if you don't have the foundation of the story. Even though in Andy Stanley says, oh, there's too much stuff we have to get rid of because of that Old Testament. And maybe I'll be doing some videos on that. There are magical conceptions throughout the Bible. You're going to run into them. But interestingly enough, the editors of the stories in which they appear will very often hammer home the conclusion that actually what happened happened because God willed it to happen. The event occurred because God wanted it to occur. It didn't occur independently of his will or by virtue of some power that's inherent in the magician's artifice. So Kaufman argues that magic in the Bible is recast as a witness to God's sovereignty, God's power. And they're stripped. Magical actions are stripped of their autonomous potency. Again, they're serving as vehicles then for the manifestation of the will of God. Divination is also unassimilable to the monotheistic idea, according to Kaufman, because it also presupposes the existence of some meta divine realm, some source of power, knowledge or information that transcends God. And again, it's an attempt to reveal God's secrets in an ungodly way predicated on a mistake. It is permitted to make inquiries of God through oracular devices. But God only conveys information at his own will. There's no ritual or incantation, Kaufman says, or material substance that can coerce a revelation from God. So we will see things that look like magic and divination and oracles and dreams and prophecy in the pagan world and in ancient Israel. But Kaufman says the similarity is a similarity in form only. And it's a superficial, formal, external similarity. That doesn't mean that the people in the stories aren't sort of in a blurred world between these two worlds, the world of a meta divine realm that they inhabit and are so accustomed to because of the embeddedness and they're just soaked in that world. But then then they meet this God and things start to differentiate. And I don't think that's different from us now. And in some ways similar to what we would see, because it could be that secularism is in effect a sort of updating and reintroducing of a secularized meta divine realm. And again, these are all the ideas that are inklings on my part and I'm playing with them. But I just have the sense that that this video and this conception and this framework is really helpful maybe in teasing our way through these conversations that we're having with respect to the meaning crisis, the loss of Christianity, the rise of the Jordan Peterson phenomenon, God one, God number two, all of this stuff. Each of these phenomena, he says, is transformed by the basic Israelite idea of one supreme transcendent God whose will is absolute. And all of these things relate to the direct word and will of God. They aren't recourse to a separate science or lore or body of knowledge or interpretive craft that calls upon forces or powers that transcend God or independent of God. By the same token, the cult, Kaufman says, has no automatic or material power. It's not just sort of a place where certain kinds of magical coercive acts happen. The cult isn't designed to service the material needs of God either. It doesn't affect his life and vitality by enacting certain rituals. You don't ensure that God doesn't die and so on. No events in God's life are celebrated, right? The festivals that are carried out in the cultic context. So the mythological rationales for cult that you find amongst Israel's neighbors are replaced and they're replaced very often by historical rationales. And I would argue by relational rationales because one of the things that this transformation relates to is sort of, and this is where we sort of get into Barfield, the relational arena rather than like this, the Medivine realm and this Medivine material, whatever that might be, whatever the conception of this manna or mara or power or matter that can be remolded and redone into all sorts of things. Now that the primary exchanges are relational. This action is done to commemorate such and such event in the history of the nation. So pagan festivals in Israel, Kaufman says, are historicized. Commemorating events in the life of the people and not in the story of the God's life since we have no mythology. Well, not in the story of the God, but events in the life of the relationship between the God and the people. We are going to be spending a fair amount of time talking actually about the meaning and the function of Israel's purity laws and cultic laws in a later lecture. Now, since God is himself the transcendent source of all being and since he is good in a monotheistic system, there are no evil agents that constitute a realm that opposes God as an equal rival. No. As an equal rival. That's fundamental in terms of what she's saying here. Now, again, she's using, she's limiting herself to the Hebrew Bible and a lot of the stuff that we're familiar with in the Greek Bible and in the Greek New Testament is not necessarily there like it is in the Hebrew. And there's so much, I mean, again, there's so much that's debated here. And, you know, who are the other Elohim? And you go to the Bible project for some interesting videos on this and what are we talking about? And the vestiges of perhaps the pre-redacted elements of this. I mean, it's enormously complicated where this goes. But, you know, again, these are for the most part observations that she and Kaufman are making and right. Divine evil agents. Again, in the pagan worldview, the primordial womb spawns all sorts of beings, all kinds of divinities, good and evil that are in equal strength. They're sort of locked in this cosmic struggle. But in the Israelite worldview, God is the source of all being, then there can't be a realm of supernatural beings that do battle with him. There's no room for a divine antagonist of the one supreme God, which is leading us down here to this point. That sin and evil are demythologized in the Hebrew Bible. And that's very interesting. It's going to lead to a lot of interesting things. Sin is also going to create a really huge problem for monotheistic thought. They're going to struggle with for centuries and actually still do struggle with today. But again, in the pagan worldview, sin is understood very often as the work of a demon or an evil God that might possess a person, might have to be exercised from that person by means of magic. You know, if you tap into some of these substances and you can use the magical, the powers in those substances to coerce the demon to be expelled from the person's body. These are things that are very common in polytheistic and pagan practices. But in Israel, we have no metadivine realm to spawn these evil beings, these various gods. So Israelite religion did not conceive of sin as caused by an independent evil power that exists out there in the universe and is defying the will of God. Instead, evil comes about as a result of the clash of the will of God and the will of humans who happen to have the freedom to rebel. There's nothing inherently and not just well, again, I. Supernatural about sin. It's not a force or a power built into the universe. Kaufman is claiming, therefore, that in Israel, evil is transferred from the metaphysical realm built into the physical structure of the universe to the moral realm. I put it up here for you. Evil is a moral and not a metaphysical reality. It doesn't have a concrete independent existence, and that means that human beings and only human beings are the potential source of evil in the world. Responsibility for evil lies in the hands of human beings. Well, see, you do have the serpent in the garden and but again, these. You have John Walton. Well, it's a chaos creature. Now, of course, the serpent in the garden will get connected with the serpent and the dragon in the Book of Revelation and that great serpent and enemy of the faith. These New Testament conceptionalities. But yet the. The the scorn that the Hebrew prophets will have on the gods of the other nation. This is all she's she's doing an introductory class here, and so she's she's using broad strokes and we should recognize that and what she's doing here. And when you get down into individual passages, things can get complex, but this is this is very, very interesting idea. And again, I'm really I had to buy. I bought the book used because I'm cheap and they can't buy all these books new. And so just for a few bucks, I can get a book. What a wonderful thing. But I haven't had a chance to look at it yet. So I want to very much want to take a look at this. And the Hebrew Bible, no one will ever say the devil made me do it. There is no devil in the Hebrew Bible. So the invention of a much later age and that is an important and critical. Epic invention or discovery. Revolution. Evil is a moral and not a metaphysical reality. You had a. Great. That's what you get to talk about. Wonderful question. Well, what about when Eve is tempted by the serpent? Who is this serpent? What is he doing? What's going on? What is Kauffman claiming? OK, that's exactly the kind of stuff that should be popping into your head. What about? What about? OK. And in section, you're going to be discussing exactly that story. OK. And that's one of those texts. And in a minute, if I haven't at the end of the lecture, ask again if I haven't kind of gotten to part of an answer to your question. OK. But again, this emphasis on evil as a moral choice. Think of Genesis four where God warns Cain who's filled with anger and jealousy and is thinking about doing all kinds of horrible things to his brother. And God says, sin crouches at the door, its urges toward you, yet you can be its master. Right. This is a question of moral choice. Final point then is we're not going to talk about salvation right now, but we're going to talk about the fact that the supreme, the only supreme law is the will of God. Because God is a creator God rather than a created God, he's imposed order, an order upon the cosmos. And so the pagan picture of an amoral universe of just competing powers, good and evil, Kaufman says, is transformed into a picture of a moral cosmos. The highest law is the will of God, and that imposes a morality upon the structure of the universe. So in sum, Kaufman's argument is this. Israel conceived of the divine in an entirely new way. Israel's God differed from the pagan gods in his essential nature. The pagan gods were natural gods. They were very often associated with blind forces of nature with no intrinsic moral character, he says. And the God of Israel was understood to transcend nature. And his will was not only absolute, it was absolutely good. And more a lot of people say, well, in a way, didn't we just rename the metadivine realm God? No, because the difference here is that it's positive not only that this God is the only power, but that he is only good. And that was not the case with the metadivine realm, right? That was a morally neutral, but there's a moral claim that's being made by the writers of the Hebrew Bible about this supreme power, this God. God is depicted as just, compassionate. Morality, therefore, is perceived as conforming to the will of God. And there are absolute standards, then, of justice and reverence for life. Now, Kaufman says God is demythologized, but even though he's demythologized, he's not rendered completely impersonal. He's spoken of anthropomorphically so that we can capture his interaction with human beings. This is the only way, Kaufman says, you can write in any meaningful sense about the interaction between God and humanity. So he has to be anthropomorphized. But the interaction between God and humans, he says, happens not through nature, but through history. God is not known through natural manifestations. He's known by his action in the world in historical time and his relationship with a historical people. I just want to read you a few sentences from an article Kaufman wrote, a different one from the one that you read. But it sums up his idea that there's an abyss that separates monotheism and polytheism. And he says that it would be a mistake to think that the difference between the two is arithmetic, that a polytheistic tradition in which there are ten gods is a lot more like monotheism than a polytheistic tradition in which there are 40 gods. Because as you get smaller in number, it gets closer to being monotheistic. He says the pagan idea, and I quote, does not approach Israelite monotheism as it diminishes the number of its gods. The Israelite conception of God's unity entails his sovereign transcendence overall. That's the real issue. It rejects the pagan idea of a realm beyond the deity, the source of mythology and magic. The affirmation that the will of God is supreme and absolutely free is a new and non-pagan category of thought. That's in an article in the Great Ages and Ideas of the Jewish People. And he goes on again to say that this affirmation isn't stated dogmatically anywhere, but it pervades Israelite creativity, biblical texts. He also asserts that the idea is kind of developed over time, but that basically there was a fundamental revolution and break, and then more within that there was some development of some of the latent potential of that idea. So, which is it? Which is part of the question that came from over here. You have on the one hand the claim that Israelite religion is essentially continuous with ancient Near Eastern polytheism. It's merely limiting the number of gods worship to one, but it houses that god in a temple. It offers him sacrifices and so on. And then on the other hand we have Kaufman's claim that Israelite religion is a radical break from the religions of the ancient Near East. Well, the value of Kaufman's work, I think, lies in the insight that monotheism and polytheism in the abstract, I'm not sure they exist anywhere in the world, but in the abstract are predicated on divergent intuitions as systems. They do seem to describe very different worlds. And therefore, as a system, the difference between Israel's god and the gods of Israel's neighbors was not merely quantitative. It was qualitative. There's a qualitative difference here. However, when you read his work, it's clear that he often has to force his evidence and force it rather badly. And it's simply a fact that practices and ideas that are not strictly or even strongly monotheistic do appear in the Bible. So perhaps those scholars who stress the continuity between Israel and her environment are right after all. And this impasse, I think, can be resolved to a large degree when we realize that we have to make a distinction between, well, let's do it this way first. We're going to talk about a distinction between the actual, I hate to say that, as if I can somehow show you a snapshot of what people did 3,000 years ago, but between the actual religious practices and beliefs of the actual inhabitants of Israel and Judah. We're going to call that Israelite-Judean religion. You know, what somebody back in the year 900 BCE might have done when they went to the temple and what they might have thought they were doing when they went to the temple. Because I'm not sure it was necessarily what the author of the book of Deuteronomy says they're doing when they go to the temple. So there's a difference between what actual people, inhabitants of Israel and Judah, did. We'll call that Israelite-Judean religion. And the religion that's promoted, or the worldview, I prefer that term, that's being promoted by the later writers and editors of biblical stories who are telling the story of these people, we'll call that biblical religion, the religion or the worldview that we can see emerging from any biblical text. That distinction is found in an article in your Jewish Study Bible, an article by Stephen Geller. You're going to be reading that later on in the course. But be aware of that distinction in that article. What second millennium Hebrews and early first millennium Israelites or Judeans, or Judeites actually believed or did is not always retrievable, in fact probably not retrievable to us. We have some clues. But in all likelihood, Hebrews of an older time, the patriarchal period, the second millennium BCE, they probably weren't markedly different from many of their polytheistic neighbors. Archaeology would suggest that in some ways. That's true. We do find evidence in the Bible, as well as in the archaeological record, of popular practices that are not strictly monotheistic. The worship of little household idols. Local fertility deities, for example. Most scholars conjecture that ancient Israelite-Judean religion, the practices of the people in the kingdoms of Israel and Judah in the first millennium BCE, was maybe monolatrous. They might have promoted the worship of one god, Yahweh, without denying the existence of other gods and still kept their little idols and fertility gods or engaged in various syncretistic practices. It was probably monolatrous rather than monotheistic, really asserting the reality of only one god. Moreover, our evidence suggests that Yahweh was in many respects very similar to many of the gods of Canaanite religion. And we'll be talking about some of those at the appropriate time, but continuities with Canaanite and ancient Near Eastern religions are apparent in the worship practices and the cult objects of ancient Israel and Judah, as they're described in the biblical stories and as we find them in archaeological discoveries. The Hebrew Bible also contains sources that exhibit features of what Kaufman has described as contemporary polytheisms. In Genesis 6, I mean, the text you pointed out is a good one, but even better, go look at Genesis 6, where you have these Nephilim, these divine beings who descend to earth, and they mate with female humans. That's a real fluid boundary between the divine and human realms, if you ask me. But it only happens there, in one spot. In many passages, too, Yahweh is represented as presiding over a council of gods. Certainly in the Psalms, we have these sort of poetic and metaphoric descriptions of a god. It's okay, guys, what do you think? Or he's one of them, actually, in one psalm, it's great. He's one of the gods, and he says, you know, you guys don't know what you're doing, let me take over. He stands up in the council and takes over. So there, and there are other passages in the Bible, too, that assume the existence of gods, other gods worshipped by other nations. So there's certainly stuff like that in there you're going to have to think about. Now, nevertheless, the most strongly monotheistic sources of the Bible do posit a god that is qualitatively different from the gods that populated the mythology of Israel's neighbors, and probably also Israelite-Judean religion. In these sources, Israelite's deity is clearly the source of all being. He doesn't emerge from a preexisting realm. He has no divine siblings. His will is absolute. His will is sovereign. He's not affected by magic or coercion. And biblical monotheism, biblical religion, assumes that this god is inherently good. He's just, he's compassionate, and human morality is conformity to his will. Because certain texts of the Bible posit this absolutely good god who places absolute moral demands on humankind, biblical monotheism is often referred to as ethical monotheism. So it's a term that you'll see quite a bit. Ethical monotheism. Beginning perhaps as early as the eighth century and continuing for several centuries, literate and decidedly monotheistic circles within Israelite society put a monotheistic framework on the ancient stories and traditions of the nation. They molded them into a foundation myth that would shape Israelite and Jewish self-identity and understanding in a profound way. They projected their monotheism... There she used myth in the other way. ...onto an earlier time, to a foundation myth that would shape Israelite and Jewish self-identity and understanding in a profound way. They projected their monotheism onto an earlier time, onto the nation's most ancient ancestors. Israelite monotheism is represented in the Bible as beginning with Abraham. Historically speaking, it most likely began much later. And probably as a minority movement that grew to prominence over centuries. But that later monotheism is projected back over Israel's history by the final editors of the Bible. And that creates the impression of the biblical religion that Kaufman describes so well. But the biblical text itself, the biblical record, is very conflicted. And that's part of the fun of reading it. And you will see the biblical record pointing to two different and conflicting realities. You will find religious practices and views that aren't strictly monotheistic. And you'll find later religious practices and views that are. And the later sources, which we might best call biblical religion, are breaking therefore, not only with ancient Near Eastern practices, but also with Israelite-Judean practices, with other elements within their own society. So biblical religion, as Kaufman describes it, isn't, I think, just a revolution of Israel against the nations. I think it's also a civil war of Israel against itself. And that's an aspect that is really not entertained by Kaufman. And I think it's an important one for us to entertain. So that we can allow the biblical text to speak to us in all of its polyphony and not try to force it all into one model. Well, I know this is a monotheistic text, so gosh, I better come up with an explanation of Genesis 6 that works with monotheism. You're going to be freed of having to do that. You're going to be freed of having to do that. Let the text be contradictory and inconsistent and difficult. Let it be difficult. Don't homogenize it all. So the differences between the god of the monotheizing sources of the Bible and the gods of surrounding Mesopotamian literature and older Israelite ideas, perhaps. They're apparent from the very first chapters of Genesis. That's a creation story in Genesis 1. We're going to see a creation story that's added to the Pentateuch, the Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible, Genesis through Deuteronomy. This creation story is added to the Pentateuch, probably in one of the last rounds of editing, probably sixth century, perhaps. And again, she's got all of this pretty standard stuff for critical secular biblical studies. You're going to find biblical scholars in the church and many other places debating all these issues, so don't get too tripped up on it. The main point is this distinction between the Medi-Divine realm and God. And it's very interesting, very interesting. We don't really know. Genesis 1 is a very strongly monotheistic opening to the primeval myths that are then contained in the next ten chapters of Genesis. So next time we're going to start with a close reading, an examination of Genesis 1 through 4. We're going to read these stories with an eye to Israel's adept... Okay, I'm actually going to do class stuff, but we're not in her class. Anyway, I wanted to make this video. I wanted to get that video, this idea out into the conversation that at least I'm stewarding here because I want to be able to use it as shorthand in upcoming conversations because I think it's helpful in looking at the biases and assumptions and presuppositions beneath a lot of the elements that we're using in this conversation.