https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=VpR-o7wuT2g

 How are you doing? Oh Did we lose sound Well, oh Okay, okay. I hear you again. Yep. Yep. Yep. How are you doing? I'm doing well. I'm doing well. That's good. So tell me a little bit about yourself. So I am Email so I'm here to fight no You're not here to fight we're there No, we don't know how to talk Pentecostals right we just so it's you know, we just the resorts physicality No, so I am Canadian my name is Thomas I've been in Canada my whole life and Suppose what? prompted me to reach out to you in the first place was I've been following your videos and sort of tracking along with Peterson since his start and sort of I remember seeing your first video relatively close to when it came out and kind of matching the two and finding marriage between the two and being in Canada Peterson was obviously very salient because it's It's in the news when a Canadian professor is I Stray, that's big. That's right. Yeah I've got a cold so I'll be hacking and Eating cough drops through so go ahead. That's fine as long as I can drink the coffee. So then we're good drink away Yeah, it's actually funny thought or notes you shared a video a little while ago of Peterson on Steven Pagan Where he was originally talking with a lady from it was debate like is there a god? He had a beard very very old clip of them and he was talking to the lady from the United Church. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, so it was funny when you shared that video I had a memory jog that that was the first time I'd ever seen Peterson live me and my dad watched that and I remember my dad's comment being something to the effect of Yeah, I wouldn't want to be debating him oh Interesting it's very funny to think back to that because I was so young I must have been Many many years ago now. So that was my first actual interaction with Peterson was Steven Pagan. So thank you big He was on that show a lot he was yeah, yeah a lot of videos of him on that show Yes, which is so funny that The Lindsay Shepherd thing was played with him as a guest considering how many times, you know Been on the show so it's pretty It really is hilarious you're playing Ontario Public Television not can't do that Yeah, and someone who's been on for 15 years. Yeah Well, yeah, it's just a Insane what's wrong with consistency, right? Why would you want to have that? But I so I Discovered Peterson almost at like a perfect point in life It was like a combination between long commutes easy to do work and time to listen So it was sort of a good time to be discovering him early on when there was lots of interviews And he was on lots of YouTube shows and very accessible the content was kind of coming out rapidly, right? Even more rapidly than now, which is sort of hard to believe And I think that's the thing about Peterson And I think what was so interesting to him or for me anyways was that as A as a Pentecostal there there isn't a lot of Let me put actually here's a good way to explain it growing up and I never knew That I wasn't or that I was Armenian I just knew that I wasn't Calvinism Right And then it's funny anytime I've met a Calvinist they always can articulate why they're a Calvinist and anytime I've met no mean yes They're always just know they're not a Calvinist There seems to be this weird dichotomy where there is Like yeah, I don't know. There's this Calvinist there. They certainly got it wrong. Don't know why but And so as much as like I was very lucky to have a church of pastors who were well-educated and put a lot of energy and time into cultivating a Church body that was still had some substance behind the expression Those sorts of discussions just never came up. So hearing Peterson Who tackled the Bible and bring God into a conversation where Previously, I think I'd only ever heard God brought into the conversation with the people he was conversing with that were like Josh McDowell or Rabbi Zacharias or others where it's all apologetics based It's sort of Well to be honest with you reframed theology to some extent to me it reframing the idea that this wasn't Just apologetics that there was something deep to learn kind of for yourself And that there was something you could you could take away deeply that was incredibly meaningful to you and to other people and it didn't have to just be a Defense of you know, biblical literacy or whatever other sort of idea It was this the idea of bringing metaphor in and and which I suppose you then leave the learn like other traditions It's not something I was surrounded with I say I would say growing up so Watching Peterson go through that and then at the same time, you know You listen to enough Peters and starts to rub off like a the only reason I have an office with guitars hanging on the wall and wood paneling is because I Continually heard clean up your room and then I'll also make it beautiful so it becomes sort of a project back I can see these little Peter Sony and Quirk start working their way into your life So it started having a profound impact impact on me in that way And then also at the same time I was I was kind of experiencing him using God in ways I just I didn't I didn't I didn't seek out either to be fair Like I think from about 18 to 29 now I spent the last nine years It's almost narrowly focused on career and every piece of information I consumed was about business and kind of learning growing that so I sort of left the The study side of the Bible by the wayside I mean when you're involved in churches have ways I am and you're you know running small groups and all that you're You're involved in programs and you're going through the video series and you're reading the books, but it was all again purpose There was a purpose behind everything. There was never any sort of free inquiry And it was being exposed to Peterson that sort of reopened that That's really just something that it might even be interesting if I'm honest, it's interesting dealing with We're talking with or even seeing intellectuals Excuse me Thank you Lousy cold Keep going I'm listening I can I got a long cord so if I disappear I'm still listening Especially like When you grow up in the tradition Pentecostal tradition or something that is that has a little bit more I would say emphasis on the here and now a little bit more emphasis on the practical little more emphasis on evangelism Most of the time you come up against people who are You know studying deeply or want to get into an argument about infant baptism versus you know not You sort of have this view of them, which is like I think you're missing the point Like this is great. We can debate it whether you know you should baptize your infant or not, but it Why? What is the purpose we serve is it to build up our own ego? Is there a really anything of value and I suppose we'd always land on the idea of Sure, we can talk about it, but that's for the ivory tower. We're here to do God's work So it and that was always I think the lens which with which any sort of free inquiry or study was viewed Through people I grew up with or the tradition grew up even the people we would listen to is like, you know We're really stretching ourselves. It'd always be someone who was relatively practical you listen to like an Andy Stanley or someone else where it's very Practical Bible basics sort of teaching and that's not a knock-on. It's just it just is what it is So I spent time listening to Peterson I opened my mind up to Treating theology with more free inquiry and I think that's when you enter the scene and almost that day almost at a very perfect moment where I Was starting to sense that I've been listening to too much I it's I you know, you can only when you look back over all this material. I've listened to all of this. This is maybe Maybe too much. I might I might be listening to too much of this I think that's when I saw when you're was either your first or second video talking about it and it was became a very good Conversation partner because it was almost a way I could enjoy the Peterson that I love but then when I would hear things go on a There was always your voice to sort of bring it back But and then you could kind of jump past the bigger picture which To me was the right approach there. I mean, there's a lot of people with different opinions on Peterson, especially Educated people they have varying opinions on him And what I found is that most tended to miss the mark I think they wanted to treat Peterson as a theologian and then criticize them from a theology perspective or Man, you do not understand your Bible, but I don't think that was ever Peterson's role it I don't think he would have ever even claimed that for himself. It was it's almost like attacking Someone like quotes from science everyone's not And they sort of missed the point of what he was doing right it was almost the criticisms always reaped of too much jealousy Hmm, I read I think it's Craig Boyd He wrote a bunch of articles crap, yeah, yeah, yeah I read about some of his articles on Peterson Yeah, and most the time I read through a second. I think you're missing the point I think you're criticizing them from the wrong perspective and there's a little bit of I would have done this better if I was in his position leaking into leaking into it So there's a lot of Peterson envy around a lot There's a lot of academics and pastors who look at Peterson and say why it wasn't I on the status rocket Why isn't my book hasn't my book sold 2.5 million copies? Why haven't I visited 115 cities in? 2018 and had everybody dripping on my last word. Yeah, there's a lot envy around. Yeah. Yeah, there's If you only understood for a buck like I did Sorry No, so I just I found that It's very easy to criticize Peterson on a lot of things But it's also very easy to take a lot of good away from it. And to me I tended to look at him as If they're not good, I'm not going to be able to do that I'm not going to be able to do that I'm not going to be able to do that I'm not going to be able to do that I tended to look at him as if there was you know a chasm between Faith in the Christian belief and Sam Harris, I don't know put them on opposite ends it was almost like there had been a flood that filled the gap and we'd seen a migration away of Christians and and he He almost laid a bridge that was like permission for people to to come back And I think I always look at people who follow Peterson is like they're standing in the middle of the bridge And so they're no longer on Mount Harris. It's there somewhere in between and so Where what Peterson Duns it gives the platform for other people to to join and call on either side I always found that as soon as people tried to go outside of that A little missing the point because he never he never goes past that in his talks He never he's not willing to commit one way or the other and so he's not willing to commit and you have to sort of play in With the plane I suppose he's playing Mm-hmm He's playing is that No, that's right. That's right. That's and and there's still plenty of question What which game exactly is he playing or rather which which game is at the top of the hierarchy of the games? He's playing That's not entirely clear, but no, you're right. You're right. It's also not clear if he knows I Agree with you a hundred percent on that. I I'm not sure he he strikes me again as again someone early early on When somebody contacted me who knows him personally and fairly well, and I asked him I said, do you think he has a plan? I said, nope He's and and most of the time when he like at the beginning of the of the hang style video Hang style video Hang style video he was kind of rolling out the beginning of 2018 I he's taking it as it goes and so he's riding the wave That's what he's doing Believe in things like the lecture series the biblical lecture series, which he's talked about fondly and sort of helped propel him Yep, I just keep getting pushed because things come up and I think he He's a yes, man to some extent too. Yeah, I'm and it's yeah, I mean sure yeah so I I wonder too if there's also an understanding of how rare of an opportunity this is where you had a book you've been working on for how was it four years he said before and At the right moment you're caught up. Oh Here I have this book ready-made for popular consumption. Let's publish it Yeah, too bad in publish it in with an American publisher, but the Canadian so that the New York Times could snub him No, you're exactly right. I mean you look at how this thing went over and it's like this doesn't happen a lot It's it's this is a this is a big deal And I know a lot of people I said that to people people like is it a big deal? I think that this is a big deal. Yeah timing is It's interesting, right? It's a bad idea to sell umbrellas till it rains Because it's you know, nobody buys it's really the plunger. No one buys a plunger preemptively. That's right Or no one calls a plumber preemptively. That's right But it's but it but it was almost like here's Peterson in in 1849 in the foothills just east of Sacramento and he's got a whole train car load of shovels You know, it's like there he was he was right there and Yeah, it's it's pretty amazing. Yeah Yeah I Know what that is I think it's really good. It is it's an amazing thing. It's a it's not you don't want to start saying words like divine or Routine but it is amazing. I Why not say those words, you know, I well, okay. I'm showing my Calvinism, but God God does what he wants and in Surprising ways and and this is part of the story of the Bible I mean the the the amazing thing about the Old Testament is that the Jewish prophets convinced the people that God brought Babylon against them and They still stuck with him. Mm-hmm. That's that's pretty incredible So God, you know now exactly what God's gonna do with this Who knows I don't know but Peterson would say God only knows but But no I I think this is I think this is a big deal and I I wouldn't be doing videos on it for a year if I Didn't think it was a big deal. It's been a big deal for me. Yeah, it's funny. I was talking with my pastor And he he brought up the book of Amos. He said, you know, it was the last time you're reading Amos But he mentions there's this line And I won't try and quote the verse because I got it wrong But essentially it was I helped the Babylonians or whoever escaped from Their captors and it was basically saying all your enemies. I was behind the movements of of their geopolitical Right wars and helped shape the world as it were. That's right. That's right I think I brought it up to the point of we were talking about Business dealings and do you pray before a business deal? And I sort of joke after Why why would he I'm going up to strike a deal with some other person in the church. Do you think God favors? I mean, obviously there's there's something that he values in the interchange and relationship between the two but I It's sort of like sprint praying over sporting events to some extent Boy but when I was we know when I was 11, I sure prayed hard for those Yankees, you know I'm listen about side of Toronto Well, McAlvin is he also he also are others to lose Like the Sacramento Kings and My first experience with CRC in general was I Took a job at a marketing agency unbeknownst to me that everyone who worked there was CRC I'm one of the you know, they had their their interview and mentioned Are you believer because we're going to talk about faith in the workplace and we just want to make sure that's something you'd be comfortable With if you're not still we fine, but there's going to be discussion and Sure, of course again all my interactions have either been with the bloody Baptists or you know fellow was within the denomination And actually it was one of the One of the best experiences I had interdenominational Because I was sort of confronted by people whose worldview was so Wildly different on a lot of subjects that I just assumed that nobody And again poorly and arrogantly that's you know for sorry to the YouTube comments it's just It was into business doesn't business So it was a fantastic experience because you know, I was able to sort of glean these things from Other denominations that you can kind of see where your own house is lacking when you're exposed to more More options as it were. Yeah, so when I first learned your CRC it was funny I had this almost like Warm connections The wonderful CRC gentlemen Smoke too much probably but you know Well, you know the Dutch the the the CRC in Canada immigrated after the Second World War that was a totally different wave that let's say my my great-grandparents came in the 1890s and so and immigrants always bring with them the culture they leave and it kind of it kind of It kind of sets then in a certain way they preserve that culture So it's it's it's in the CRC, you know It's two-fifths of the CRC is Canadian and three-fifths is is on the southern side of the border So it's it's an interesting dynamic. Yeah yeah, it was interesting to me because it it was a this this whole other culture to like where especially Canadian CRC everyone owned their business and also had 12 kids which was so foreign to me because I grew up where everyone's like, oh you took it It's a pretty big family Take her easy. Yeah, it was a sort of a beautiful experience in that way and the value on family and also actually interesting the value on Bible teaching again Yeah Sort of similar viewpoints which was which was great I was it was a good experience to sort of pulled out of your world a little bit and then have something common where we're all In marketing we're all working together. So there's that common elements and that common faith, but they will discuss our denominational heresies It's that I totally believe it that's that's the CRC it's It's it's you know, it's a little different from what I I grew up kind of half in it because I went to day school and because CRC People are big about their day schools. So they're private schools But but then of course my church my father's church was black. So It's I lived in two worlds growing up. And of course when you grow up with something You don't realize that doesn't everyone live in two worlds growing up. No, not everybody does I did but it was normal for me. So Sorry get my weird mixture of all the weird mixtures I am Yeah, it's funny especially watching some of the people interact in comments or even talk about different topics being in Canada because even though I grew up in a relatively Like middle-classy waspy town All of my friends growing up were of various backgrounds and you know, it's like my best friend was Somali and my you know, good friends were all I you know ride to school with the seat children and it is a totally different experience so sometimes when I when I see even transplants from The states and and how even the culture works It's so interesting because the problems they have are so different when they're integrating other cultures where I think In Canada, there's almost a there's this lack of identity So there's not you're not trying to preserve an identity because there's been no identity to preserve Yeah, you're trying to just figure out who you are and where you belong and every church is trying to do that to some extent It's every city is going to be like a Pentecostal church 40 minutes away from me is going to be very very different than in my town Because we're not linked by those denominational or even demographic Consistencies everything's very different I think that's a very interesting thing I've never i've never been to toronto. I've been to burlington because the crc has offices there and I had to go there for a meeting That's where I live. Oh, well, there you go but I one of the one of the things that's that's often struck me is are some of the similarities between california and places like toronto that are They're they're hyper diverse And and that dynamic where they're california has often been a place where people in the eastern part of the united states go to Get away from their past and california has higher than The west coast obviously has higher percentages of asian Immigrants because obviously around the pacifics you've got japanese communities chinese communities vietnamese communities mung communities korean communities and all of that and you've got african-american communities that came out came over during the great migration You've got white folks who came over you've got more indigenous populations. You've got the whole mormon thing going So and then you continue to have waves of new immigrants cal or california is Continues to be a net loser to other american states in terms of migration Americans move out of california to other places in the country, but because there's so much immigration foreign immigration into california Up from mexico over from asia from all over the world It continues to grow so it's similar to that and you know, I don't know a lot about toronto, but some of the you know one of the things that struck me in in watching these dynamics Is you know peterson peterson? it's so funny when people just kind of try to peg peterson as some right winger because I think he's He's a he's a canadian moderate that puts him left of center on the american spectrum in many ways and he's very used to cultural diversity and diversity of many kinds because that's the Context that he's been living in and working in for a very long time. And so when people misread him as some kind of isolationist You know right-wing ideologue. It's like you're not listening to the guy. You're not really paying attention to To who he is and where he fits It's nigrin statement. It really is because they Well one you just have to look at his lecture videos and his classes are incredibly diverse He teaches at university of toronto Yeah, you can't find a more diverse University except maybe downtown new york and even then probably not just the type of university that university of toronto is You can look at his classes. You can look at enrollment in those schools. You can look at the people he would have interacted with Yeah and before that he spent time in montreal it's It's a it's a really ignorant statement Yeah, never spent time in toronto or living you don't survive in toronto as a racist yeah, no you'll no You'll move out. Yeah Now what what do you think about peterson in terms of Um your church are you like the only person in your church that you know of that looks at peterson or I don't know the demographics of your church uh We so we're a relatively large church for canada, which isn't saying much because our population is small But so we're I think we average somewhere between 1113 100 a week. That's a big church Yeah, I mean about so we had a pastor join us about nine years ago. Maybe 10 years ago I think we were a church of 290 315. Okay, so He he's one of those Like I think if you drop to moon middle of the forest with an axe He's peterson's class which is chopped down trees all day. He's just sort of It's on every board for all the domination sits in the school board finishes masters Like while doing and growing a church and does leadership training. He's just one of those people. So I think he By nature of him coming he attracted a whole bunch of go-getters So our church is largely I would say middle People with the young kids, I think we have 300 kids in the uh, the kids programs So it's it's a lot of families. I think we're 70 or 80 nations represented. So it's pretty multicultural. Wow church and As far as we're not a university town in burlington, so we lose kids at about 18 to 25 So they don't typically come back at 25 because burlington's a little more expensive. So Okay, we see them move back mid 30s When they've had their first kid and they're looking to kind of suburbanite themselves Um, they'll move back into burlington and then we see them join So typically our church will range from like 35 to probably 55 somewhere in that range Um, we used to be a largely senior church, uh with a lot of youth but demographics sort of Changed as we've grown so As far as young adults, there's not many to begin with but as far as Those of us that are there all the men Uh consume some degree of peterson content really? Yeah That's interesting. Yeah, I I run a a young we call like a young married small group And I would say Every guy that attends consumes into some degree So there'll be some that consume everything he's put out and some that you know, listen the odd once every once in a while But everyone's consumed or consumes a little bit of it So is peterson a guilty pleasure or do you actually have conversations about him on church grounds? Uh, definitely have conversations on church grounds, but that also might be because What is being on church grounds mean to right? Yeah, that's true But but are you do is there any kind of programming at the church that in any way? Engages peterson's work directly No that no it's it is I would say The staff are too busy because i've talked to my pastor about it and his um, I believe him he's he's aware of it and aware of the phenomenon is aware of like as much as I think he can Give himself the time to take on but i'm sure he's like most and sees a four-hour video goes on Yeah, yeah, I have other studying I need to do right now Yeah, but I was never saying anything negative except that he's seen the positive bits of it Um, and the other pastors when I've spoken about it, they're all aware and I but i've never really engaged in a long conversation with any of them About it The young men, I think it's it sort of happens Naturally the conversations regarding peterson and talking about the ideas and throwing them back and forth so I don't know that there's ever really been this need or We haven't perceived a need to have a group I suppose because it happens so naturally Uh the conversations and people will see each other on a sunday Or something will come up and it'll come up in discussion. Um, but I think peterson is less Less important to some of them where they're trying to balance that with whatever other content they're consuming um, so I don't know i've never The truth is I also I've never tried to start one or invested in and started energy to what it would take to start something like that. Yeah Uh, so I don't know so who so who is so who is peterson for For these men I mean is he so you got joe rogan you got peterson you got jaco you got uh You know, I mean where where does he kind of so they're watching his videos is he entertainment? Is it I mean what's happening in there? I'm really curious Most of them don't wouldn't consume Yaco or they wouldn't consume too much joe rogan maybe a little bit. Okay. Um, I don't think most of them would consume dave rubin or Ben shapiro, I think would be consumed by a bunch of them mostly because but I think ben shapiro's entertainment I don't I don't know that they're watching him to uh Well, you're not you're not voting in the united states. So no no, uh I would guess that in some cases What peterson is to me is similar to what he is to the others. It's it's almost like there's this There's an element that's missing from Church for I really can appreciate when you say if someone listens to your videos and shows up to a church service on a sunday morning It's going to be very difficult for them to make that transition. Yep there is a lot built into church and what sunday form factors are and People will be a little bit shocked at how much we sing and that takes a long time to get used to Because it's a lot of singing we don't I we're talking about this a little while It's a lot of singing like oftentimes you're gonna have half hour of singing songs that you're not going to know and That's right a very condensed message that's polished because you have to split the difference between You know those in a church who they had their phd and those who you know, didn't graduate high school Even though they tried uh, like you're you're really splitting the difference between those groups. And so There's a form factor to it And I think no matter How good you try to? Make that form factor. There are limitations there are A lot of limitations made is the best way to describe it. And so I think peterson is It's a bit of escapism Because there's more to peterson than just the theology or the discussions of god. There's the self-responsibility which um in a lot of denominations People in similar more charismatic denominations. They tend to feel more feminine in their expression there You're going to There's a little more emphasis on experience. There's a little more Emphasis on feeling and sensing and there and some of that's good and some of it's some of it's not so I do think There's an element of it that that part's missing for them So to hear someone say listen guys, you kind of just have to get your shit together and get moving here that's Meaningful, um, and then the way he approaches integrating god into conversations I think that for a lot of them is it goes beyond what you're going to hear at the That your typical apologists talk um, and I think it's it's intriguing and interesting and the ideas are something you can take and bat around and beat up a little bit and depending on your level of Understanding you can you can engage with them more and and they're sort of You're sort of never-ending and how deep you can go into the subjects and and then what's great about them is the encouragement to dive into other texts so So sort of around the same time I started to engage in peterson I started Arthur holmes philosophy course he recorded it back. I got the recommendation for you. Is it carrie price? Is that his name? I'm getting it Philip carrie bill carrie carrie price. I think it's a golfer. Um Uh, so I started going through his course as well and then you know you go back and you read start reading play-doh and aerosol And work. Yeah, you get bored and you try and read a little care card because And you sorry you go back to these original texts and so it sort of encouraged you to go into text Probably at some point we're either forced to read or you you know, purposely avoid it so I think there's an element of it too where it's it tends to be a catalyst because he starts making references to Notes from the underground and then you go read notes from the underground you go Oh like I have a whole nother context on what peterson's saying References this line from this book and I you know, I also can see how much Clearly influenced him because you see so much of it coming out in the way he speaks and and i'm sure it's with all its resources Or all his influences the more you read them the more you see him Them come out So I I think there's a couple one is that there's there's a little The missing masculine push Hmm, I want to be careful. I say that though because There's it's a loaded statement to some extent if you if you say it's missing masculine push because then you're you're making statements on one the church to the the the relationship with their fathers and three their own Personal masculinity, so I want to be careful. It's not it's not that it's that it's just that it's a It's a more raw Conversation that I think You see behind the door conversations that you don't see on from the onstage conversations peterson has this very albertan style Of conversation and so i'm born in alberta family all live in alberta very familiar with roughnecks I I think actually people don't appreciate how much that affects peterson People don't appreciate how much that affects peterson. Oh, that's right The reason why peterson likes to talk to rogan and yako Yeah, and camille. Actually there's he there's this toughness that he's attracted to because he grew up around it and it's really hard to Even people who complain about not getting to have conversations with them There's they also have to factor that in people he likes to talk to Are particularly he has a type That's right There's a type of person he likes to talk to right? That's right And spending some time in alberta would help people kind of understand that a little more Yeah, my my brother-in-law is from manitoba And when I started watching peterson, so I know my my brother-in-law obviously and his brother I know a brother of his you know fairly well, too and I saw it immediately The you know, he's from the west And and so that I think that's I think that's very true That's really interesting you know, there's been a lot of I was trying to think of You know about well So the promise keepers, I don't know how to what degree promise keepers hit canada the way it hit the u.s Especially in in pentecostal circles. I'm trying to think of the guy's name um Pull up the I think I know what you're talking about the eldridge. Um Um Wild at heart I think was his book. Um, oh wait a minute maybe that wasn't that um No, I'm not looking at but but there was a there was a yeah john eldridge. That's right wild at heart uh richard, I mean there there's been There's been a lot of Masculinity Questions have been creeping around the edges of evangelicalism including I mean pentecostal communities are very deeply evangelical in many ways many elements of the culture and and so these these Conversations have been lurking and stalking For for at least a couple of decades and they get manifest in the roman catholic context richard roar uh, so these these things are out there and A number of authors have been they've been really wrestling with trying to figure out what What this means and you know women women have the the conversation about Christianity and masculinity is a is a deep one Even even though a lot of people on the surface say well, you've got father son and holy spirit at least two of them are male Uh, you don't have mary and then you get the yugyan questions about masculinity and femininity femininity and femininity and the godhead and so but but the arguments among many about the The the feminine The the feminine ethos of evangelical churches And the church in general not so much the orthodox but roman catholic and protestants I mean those are long old conversations And so, you know what you say doesn't surprise me Because I don't know We've we've kind of had man culture alongside of church culture in many ways And And the attempt to integrate well, you'd have you know, for example we have women's bible studies and Our women's bible studies. They are strong. They grow they go They men don't have to do a thing but but they're for years I you know was trying to do some men's bible studies and Never never got the traction And and now suddenly i've got all these men coming to church for meetups to talk about jordan peterson And it's not a bible study. We're not studying the bible at all, but It's kind of like there's something to that and I don't I can't put it all out there and I certainly can't Resolve it but there's something going on there and it's interesting to me that your church That a fair number of men doesn't surprise me fair number of men of a certain age are You know, they know who jordan peterson is and they're watching his videos or at least some of them and to one degree or another They're they're in there, especially in a conservative christian environment mainline You know, it's going to be a different it's different situation but How then the question is okay, how is there integration? and It's it's been interesting that the A lot of the movement we've seen in peterson among men has been sam harris tribes um people kind of Moving out of evangelicalism and then maybe coming now back in with him so it's It's it's really interesting to me And I don't have I don't have it figured out by any means how this stuff plays and what it means So so it's I mean what the stories that you've told me is just I find it very interesting data And it would be again. I have all these ideas that if I if I could just spawn myself I would go do I would go up to your church and I would I would spend a few weeks interviewing Interviewing young men and listening to them and trying to figure out. Okay. Well, what's what's going on with peterson? Why are you attracted to him? And you know? He's he's definitely masculine. He's definitely canadian this this rough edge of canadian culture um but yeah But then he spent a lot of time in major cities, that's true time around students, that's true That's very true Well, and and you can see those you can see those well, so he grows up The irony for me is that I could have My father coming at a seminary had two calls One was to paterson new jersey, which he took because his his bride's family was four hours north in massachusetts the other was to barhead Alberta I mean this way up there And I could very well have grown up in you know that region not far from peterson um I would have been a different person So but peterson grows way the heck up it goes up way the heck up north very new town very rough area indigenous population so on and so forth, but What are his parents jobs? They're teachers and and if you're in a if you're in a If you're in a kind of a frontiersy area It's the teachers are always kind of That they're not far from it because they're definitely involved in the culture in the town because they're with us the children of the workers But they're the bookish sorts and they're you know, they're they're they're a little they're a little bit apart. So It's you know these These tensions within his own story are also interesting And and while he's a a bonafide academic This this this desire to integrate and and I could look at my own story like that so i've got my i've got my dutch calvinist christian school upbringing, but i've got my impoverished black community struggling side of me and so And in that way i'm also always been an integrator I'm always trying to take things that don't quite fit together and say well how how do these both really live occupy the same world so It's it's interesting to me the story you tell about your church and even even a church that large in canada is very interesting because You know talking to crc pastors I know from canada. I mean canada Religiously is a very different place in the united states. There is no guilt on sunday morning to go to church No, no, no and and to have a To have a 1500 member pentecostal church in north america. There's tons of them Yeah, there's probably only a handful of them in canada So it's to me it's very interesting that in in your particular subculture that there's There's a lot of people a lot of young men your age listening to peterson. That's not a surprise. That's his demographic but then Does it is it integrated into? Is it alongside is it to me? That's those are very interesting questions So a few things as you're talking. Yeah in relation to His parents being teachers in a small town Yeah, it's what's super interesting about that to me is that Teachers in a small town tend to have also a very different view of their students Yes, twice a teacher and when she's taught up in schools in smaller towns or private schools in smaller towns The relationship to the students and the interest in their education is much higher Because you're you're the only one in a lot of cases to teach them Anything it feels like they're you're the last line of educational defense before they Yep often to the world and many of them won't go off into the world. They will go to the rings, right? right, so your Your sense of duty to your students is very different than A public school where you're just seeing so many kids move through in a big city and it's it's very difficult They become more of a number. Yep There's a few that stand out, but you're not going to see a whole class from kindergarten to end of high school closely, right Um to throw another wrench in your My church and the subculture Again based on who my church attracts. It's not even that the young men at my church are Watching peterson out of the need to straighten their lives out many of them have their lives figured out Yes, the other part where they're all career oriented married buying their homes and bucking the culture in that trend Just because that tends to be Who my church attracts um, which is maybe part of the reason why it's It's growing and I obviously I make jokes about the pentacostalism because there's a lot of oddities and again 40 minutes outside of my house I know people are dancing with flags and blowing shifars every Sunday. So it's very easy to make fun of my It's an all the nation. Um Well, well there are there are lots of layers to pentacostalism. It's a huge world and And i'm very aware of that I should say ags because that's probably less of yes, yes, yes, um But it's so much more fun to say And watch people's eyes bugger, uh, and then tell them the size of the church, uh, so It's very interesting because peterson doesn't seem to be Helping them straighten their lives out. He tends to be helping them Orient their thoughts to some degree almost there's almost like an intellectual challenge to peterson I think a lot of times when people are listening to him and again for All the people who may eventually watch us I'll send it to you. You can decide There's this I understand that nt right exists and I understand that there are but there the truth is there are so many theologians and when you grow up in a tradition where there is an emphasis on practical application of the bible and there is An element of well, it's all great that you know your five points of Calvinism, but have any of your friends Receive Jesus as they were in saviour as being you know as a result of being friends with you. That's right And there's that there's that emphasis and again That's where you can do this interesting debates and cool do numbers matter is it go make disciples not numbers and then as a marketer I can argue. Well, it's really easy We can actually measure that because you can measure anything you care about and Yes, that's maybe a bit of a funnel and some people come in the top and they follow the sides But your your net numbers, I mean, there's lots of stuff you can do and have those debates back and forth Which I think are useful, but I think um What was missing was some of the intellectual challenges everything was very practical How do you live as a man? How do you as a teenager exist in high school? But outside of high school and resist the temptations everything was very Practical life application and so I think peterson presented an intellectual challenge You know packaging that was interesting He happens to be charismatic. He happens to be from northern alberta and have some of those manly Rough-necked charms that come along with him. He happens to be willing to drop the gloves and fight but also be very sensitive There's just there's a lot to him that makes him interesting. And so he's a good conduit for I at least I found in my tradition for people to Reorient their thinking about what they're consuming for mental food I think that's just all it where it's He's helping guide them towards nt right is someone that Since listening to peterson two years ago has become interesting to me It's a philosophy something that was never Interesting again over the last couple years has become very interesting And you realize then once you get interested then you go read the original text then you realize oh my gosh I've heard people misuse this text many times and it becomes this Path you sort of start to bark on. Yeah But I and i've noticed that the people who consume peterson in my church, they're all at different parts in that journey Some it's just Hey, you know, what kind of podcasts can I listen to that would be interesting and others it's there They're already debating with him on the topic side You know peterson missed this part completely and really what he should have been talking about is this and so More than anything, I think that's where he's been helpful to and actually funny you called my tradition conservative, which is Weird because I growing up we never thought of ourselves as conservative. We always thought we were the crazy liberals compared to The conservative baptists down the road and right, you know Do you know that they're not allowed to have an electric guitar on sunday, right? Right, and then then you run it to the crc and find out that hymns are too new Singing psalms baby. What are you doing making up your own songs? I don't like that. It's weird. It's like there's a bible verse about it or something. I don't know Oh boy I actually, you know, it's I had this thought the other day and i'll say it and then there was one thing I wanted to hop back into that you said earlier that was very interesting, but The the modern pentacostals or at least evangelicals that are adopting sort of the the new expressions with music and Lights and all the stuff it is it's very catholic It's it's very catholic because catholicism is interesting to me in their expression the I don't I suppose i'm sure there's a reason because there's always a reason if it's catholicism But I I never quite understood why gothic architecture was where they decided holiness lived And why they decided that realms from victorian ages was that's the appropriate where because first off it's not Accurate. It's the timeline of you know when jesus walked to the earth and two the world has moved on in its expression of arts And you like to me you would think that a frank Lloyd Wright building would be a more beautiful expression now of a church versus a gothic and you could argue you might prefer one to the other but You would think that the expression would continue to evolve as time went on because if we're paying homage through art Why choose a gothic era? many hundreds of years after So it's just something to be thinking about. You can find very modern Roman catholic churches you can you sure you can but even the expression the dress It's always interesting like the idea is that we're presenting our best Then wouldn't the best in today's world be different than the best in? That's that's not the only idea i'll say it that way but fair enough But but you know not to defend but but your observations are right because what you're expressing is are these two You know these different sides of These different approaches to god and I mean evangelicalism It's it's it's his own thing it's it's got its own values it's it's it's shaped the way it is for a reason it's just true and Um and and certain things are valued in because there is a theological There there's a there are there's a theological economy under that and or a theological let's say Geology under that and it's getting expressed in the landscape by the forces underneath And so yeah, it all has history. Oh, that's right Yeah, it's just that's what's so interesting about it, right? Because there's criticisms of it's almost like You find denomination stuck in different time periods and i'm sure in 20 years Will be stuck in our own Expression that people will look back and be like man, why would they still be? Expressing it this way that times of move can change. So I find there's this Well, so Rather than finishing that thought i'll jump to What I heard you say earlier and what I thought was interesting Which is you were talking about Men and the different ways that Masculinity has been displayed through different denominations and One thing that struck me as listening to peterson and taking his personality tests and then watching other people take personality tests Is it's very interesting to me to see what types of personalities congregate to different styles of expression Now it's not perfect to say that people will congregate around their personality type because people are born into it And that's where you're going to have the heretics within your own church and those who love hate your expression the expression of worship yeah, but there is something to be said about the The sam harris crowd would be very Unhappy in most of the Pentecostal churches. Oh, yeah Oh, yeah and on the on the alternative side of that the artistic crowd would be miserable in a lot of the I don't know church environments that the same heres crowd might like right, so let me use that yes, I have a friend who We've been conversing and he was at one point a staunch You know took every chance he got to fight with me about whether there was a god or not and it was good I found that over time we just kept a relationship and kept talking, you know one day he sort of admitted to me Hey, i've sort of been thinking that maybe it wouldn't be such a bad thing if you know life didn't just end and it was all meaningless and so And so since then Obviously, it's been interesting to have conversations with him and sure and he has been following the petersonian path as well, yeah, uh, but for him Based off his personality which like, you know, all good friends. They're totally opposite to mine. He uh, He loves the structure and many of the things that to me would feel Rigid or stale of some of the more traditional denominations it appeals to him and He likes the idea that you know, there's a long history of tradition and It's not new and when we did this personality test him, I think on openness is like close to zero And the 99th percentile so the idea that things are changing is death so there is something interesting about how I'd be curious to know or to see something some research done into How much of our denominational differences are really personality driven more than anything else and we're justifying our beliefs You know after the fact with the verses and but we're essentially aligning ourselves with a tradition that we prefer Or an expression of worship that we prefer based off of a certain type of personality now It's I understand it's not perfect because there are true theological differences and there are things that you're born into and there's a lot To it. Yeah, but I would be interested to know how much you think personality plays into that where Because for me, I don't think I per from a personality standpoint would have stayed in the denomination I was if I wasn't born into it I just realized there's too much of me that as much as I might be high in openness there are things I don't like Yeah, but I spent so much time in it that you grow to love What you have and you grow to love your church and you grow to love the people And then you you can also evaluate, you know If I can be involved somewhere and bring a differing opinion or or add value. It's probably to a place where I have some disagreements um And it can be a more I can be a greater service here as a servant than to go to somewhere else Which we perfectly aligns with my my personality or how I like to experience things or even how I like Who I align with perfectly theology But then miss the opportunities to serve and bring a differing view. So I'd be curious to know what your thoughts are on the How much our personalities impact or as people say here's an idea for you Tell me what you think You know, there's there's no question that that different denominations have cultures that align with certain personality elements more than others and exhibit it A question would be You know, obviously well You know Oh, it's just so complicated because people get born into families and then You know, for example my older sister So I had an older sister. I have an older sister and my younger sister died, but temperamentally My older sister and my younger sister are in many ways for our part. My older sister is an artist. She's a musician She's expressive. She's super high in openness. She's terribly creative. My younger sister is also in many ways very open and creative and and She she she did english so So it was much more in literature that she expressed herself where my older sister was in music and art and some of these things My younger sister loved routine and so She camped in the same campground every summer tried to camp on the same site every summer She went to the same church Every week same service every week sat in the same seat every week. I mean just that was my younger sister my older sister It's totally different and and so my older sister has been in and out of pentecostal churches and ministries and situations and You know because that in many ways fit to a degree something of her of her temperament, but here's here's a funny thing about pentecostalism too because These these questions of order and chaos Um, you might look at my older sister say oh, there's so much chaos in her. She likes spontaneity. She likes all of this It's also interesting that in many pentecostal traditions you get some very you get some fairly rigid ideas of authority and being submissive to authority has a very high value in certain areas of pentecostal tradition and and so what we we tend to find is that in the church traditions the order and chaos things tend to Continue to balance each other out and whereas someone comes into a pentecostal church and thinks well, this is just This is just crazy This person is speaking in tongues over here and they're trying to interpret over there And and the music is completely modern here and you got the lights and the smoke machine and you got the The the music leader in skinny jeans and the pastor is you know begging the people to you know but within all of that seeming Expressiveness there's also real structure and traditions and repetition and So and and what you tend to find is that for a for a tradition to actually flourish There's going to need to be those balances within it, too And so you can go to one of the most How you know one of the most creative Pentecostal churches and find right next to all of this expressiveness Very set repetitive Well, this is the way we do things. These are the things that hold us firm. All of these things are variable so You know the bible is our foundation for everything But we can change the liturgy and the music and everything depending on what's hot and relevant because That's and what we're trying to do is land people on the bible Whereas an orthodox church Jonathan Peugeot says You know the reason I go to an orthodox church is doesn't matter if the pastor is a crazy get He's gonna they're gonna be up there doing the the liturgy and there's gonna be a little maybe a 10 or 15 minute homily And so we all come for the liturgy and okay now for the homily so the idiot has to share with us is is incredibly is incredible banality, but it doesn't matter because And and and so but then on the walls then you've got you know, you're gonna do this You're gonna have jesus in the dome and you're gonna have the disciples on the walls and And then some new places are going to try to add innovation and once they do innovation others are going to turn away from that So so you have these dynamics that get expressed through all of these different areas and and generally speaking If a tradition is going to flourish they will find balance within the tradition Even though it would be easy to say My older sister fits better in a pentecostal church because in many ways she does And my younger sister, I know she doesn't want to deal with that. She someone's standing up and You know having a word of knowledge or uh, you know or a prophecy or you know, my my younger sister would be like Why don't you do that at home? You know I'm not i'm not saying anything about it. But why don't you do that at home? This is my church time and I have my expectations and I expect it to go according to script. So That's that's And and the thing is i'm right in the middle of both of them and it was like I don't know how in the distribution things were but I got some of my older sister and I got some of my younger sister and i'm the only boy so So And and you see that with denomination so you'll go, you know, if I look look around here Let's pluck. Where is um, where is Where's gordon fee? um Gordon fee A terrific new testament Pentecostal scholar, you know his his commentary on first corinthians um, you know wonderful stuff Printed in the new international commentary of the new testament by Erdmans grand rapids michigan founded by dutch reformed people. So, you know this is and and so then when you get to someone like um, Richard foster Springs of living water. I used to have that down here. Um So so richard foster then says coming from the quaker tradition look at these traditions You've got the reformed and you've got the pentecostal and you've got the roman catholic and you've got the orthodox and And god uses these traditions to express himself in a whole variety of ways that You know just like one kind of beetle isn't enough one kind of denomination isn't enough because god is just that big and just that rich and just that glorious that we we can we he's born witness to in the in the contemporary rifts of a dynamic two-hour worship set in a pentecostal church and the quiet of a the quiet predictability of an orthodox liturgy And the frozen chosen reformed folks who are, you know holding on doggedly to their their versification of the psalms. So Eugene peterson says eugene not jordan eugene peterson god god plays in a 10 000 places so There's my take yeah It's interesting like even the differences between what you call order and chaos in the church and the different denominations because You're you're right in a lot of the more Charismatic expressions the leadership holds a much stronger place in the minds of the the attendees whereas In more traditional maybe expression in church, you'll find that people are like that. It's just the pastor I can debate with him all day Well in in in reformed, especially in some reformed churches where the pastor is not that high up He's subject to the council but you go to an orthodox tradition tradition And I just spoke with an orthodox father this morning and afterwards I thought I should I should have called him father because I was to an orthodox listener I was probably way too dismissive but in a black church, you know The pastor boy the pastor can be really high and lifted up as in a pentecostal church If it says really anointed pastor boy, you know Yeah It's amazing how how these things get expressed Yeah, which is why that's why the the personality aspect is so interesting to me because again like you said everyone fits on the spectrum differently and The idea that personalities aren't so perfect that it's like oh you're this type of person You'll like this because there's experience and then there's also learning there's all these different things that go into it but One of the things I would love to see is a little more unity in in churches So i'm always so curious like what what are the elements that we can find and agree on? I was I think was bishop baron said this recent. I don't know. I can't remember when but he was I think he was talking with Might have been ben shabiro. Um He was talking about the different denominations and how it's like listen I love my protestant brothers, but there's 30 000 denominations. We have one one church and and it struck me it's interesting because there is As much as I would come from a tradition and likely in the end would go To some extent there's something valuable there, right? That there is this hierarchy and this tradition where we're all moving together towards the same goal and there's Some unity within the body and there's place for disagreement, but there is kind of a final head to say This is what we do now. Yeah Yeah Then again the roman catholic church has two popes right now One retired but you know, it's it's it's It's really hard and you know people talk about unity and say, okay. Well, what does unity look like is it institutional? because What's interesting about? Evangelicalism is they too are striving after unity, but they do so in a different way So they'd say well you need to go someone moves into that you need to go to a bible believing church Well, there's a structure of unity And that actually comes from the frontier so These these it's It's a complicated business to talk about to figure out what unity is not to take anything away from the roman catholics and bishop barron's point about protestantism is dead on right but it's You know, it's Jesus wants us to be one. Okay define one Is it okay or uh That there's going to be different cultures. Yeah, that's a different expression. So I think you can't get away from that. Maybe it's we do a a weekly Community dinner where we essentially invited people from the community to a do a weekly dinner And one of the things that we were purposeful was to partner with other churches of different denominations within to help fund and put it together um, so to me it's like you can find the small examples like that and how do you How do you scale that to the place where? You can worship in the place that makes sense for you, but that Maybe we don't kill each other in the streets That'd be a good thing. I would agree on that Let's not let's not let's not kill each other over our our confessional differences But that's something that's something we had to figure out and it took a long time and So and you know, let's hope the world of islam can Maybe learn something from that and then not kill each other over um Some of their differences But yeah, no, these are these are all good hard questions And and yeah, then that sometimes yeah anyway go on forever on this Any any last things we should probably land the plane at some point yeah Yeah Well One I I wanted to make sure I properly thanked you for your contribution And thank you also for making a podcast because that makes cute listening so much easier. Oh, yeah It does Because I appreciate it because I noticed that rogan and and rubin both had I thought I thought yeah, that's just that's just that's just easy on folks. Yeah, it's Being able to passively listen is nice right, you're not consumed by a by a screen, although obviously you miss something with the screen, but Yeah, it allows for a lot more I don't know Well, you're you're very You're very welcome because again, I feel I feel gratified and honored that that people like you will that you and people like you will Will give me your time that's I mean time for us is an incredibly precious thing and So I I frankly am humbled by this whole affair I many days. I don't quite know what to think about it, but I this seems to be You know in I I do think that peterson's Explosion is an act of god and maybe my little My little pop is an act of god too because I've been I've been gratified by this and blessed by conversations talking to to you and to many others and I have learned I have learned a tremendous amount in this process and in so many ways i'm indebted to To so many people for everything that i've learned and I I deeply appreciate it Well, and it provides a lot of extra context that those who would Spend so much time consuming peterson's content would miss and while there are other people jumping into the game Like we kind of discussed the beginning of conversation. It's hard to know whether they're adversaries or Or not. So yeah, it's a valuable piece to have and it's it's helped me immensely because it took me from Having sort of singular focus on things I would did which is very maybe not transactional, but to some extent transactional where I have a goal I'm going to consume the content required to get me this goal. Yeah, I have a bible study we're leading I'm going to consume the content necessary for this bible study. I whatever whatever the goal was and so being able to Define good enjoyment in pulling back and looking at the bigger picture and And taking the reading suggestions and the course suggestions and listening through the content now as an adult or hopefully an adult and and And finding the joy and even learning You know the platonic influence on christianity and then reading those sources and going. Oh my gosh. It's you know, those are the things you My tradition didn't encourage or That may be the biggest gift peterson has given to a lot of people because not only has he been a gateway drug into Christianity he has been a gateway into a lot of learning for a lot of people And and even though he's You know on one hand he's a clinical psychologist very much wanting to help individuals sort their own lives out He's also a teacher and what he's really done is open a much bigger educational world For many many people and i've seen that as i've been, you know, i've kind of been Working the peterson crowd That's that's essentially what i've done and and that's one of the big takeaways from from What he's what he's really gift that he's really given Perfect well, we are over time. So oh, thank you thomas. No, that's absolutely fine. It's the end of the day So we got a few extra minutes to get a little more flexibility. So In the middle of the day, i've got people stacked up and so I don't want to rob time from the other but I appreciate it. I appreciate so thanks for thanks for reaching out and giving me another hour of your time And what i'll do is I will I will render this right away and I will send it to you And you can decide what you'd like to do with it. Let me know If you ever want to have more torontoian men interviewed i'm happy to film them and send them Oh, that would be fun that that like, you know, you never know what'll happen But if I get up to toronto, I just might take you up on that say round a bunch of those folks up I want to I want to pick their brains. I want to listen to them. So Perfect. Take care Bye bye