https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=z2TLOIyUx3E

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to do a little teaser for you of the next series of videos I'm going to be doing. I've often thought if there was one C.S. Lewis book that I could get into Jordan Peterson's hands, it would be The Abolition of Man, because I think it deals most directly with exactly what Peterson is trying to deal with in terms of engaging Sam Harris. So I'm going to do just a little short video now where I play a little bit of Peterson and a little bit of Lewis and a little bit of talking, and that'll be the beginning or an introduction or a teaser to the longer series. Most of my videos are one to two hours to the longer series of videos that we will be that I will be doing in terms of covering the entire book, The Abolition of Man. So if you only listen to short videos, well, this one's for you. So this is Peterson summing up. This is Peterson trying to sum up what he believes they have covered at the end of the two Vancouver talks. My problem is I'm not sure how to do that. I don't believe that you can derive a value structure from your experience of the observable facts. There's too many facts. You need a structure to interpret them, and there isn't very much of you. And so part of the reason, part of the way that that's addressed neurologically is that you have an inbuilt structure. It's deep. It's partly biological. It's partly an emergent consequence of your socialization. And you view the world of facts through that structure, and it's a structure of value. Now, that structure of value may be derived from the world of facts over the evolutionary timeframe, but it's not derived from the world of facts over the timeframe that you inhabit, and it can't be. So the problem I have with our discussion so far isn't really any of Sam's fundamental ethical claims, because I do believe there's a distinction between the hellish life and the heavenly life, say, the life that everyone would agree was absolutely not worth living and the life we could imagine as good. And I do believe that we should be moving from one to the other. The question is exactly how is it that we make the decisions that will guide us along that way? And I don't believe we can make them without that a priori structure. In fact, I think the evidence is absolutely overwhelming that we can't. And I mean also the scientific evidence. And I would like to go further into the devil that's in those details. And so that's my situation at the moment. And I think that's just a terrific summary of Peterson in terms of this whole project. I'm not going to play Sam Harris's take. If you go ahead and listen to Vancouver 2 after this, we're at 2.09 and change, you can go ahead and listen to Sam Harris's response. It's really rather underwhelming. He doesn't give a cogent, specific summary. And this goes into my overall take on these talks where Jordan Peterson is actually trying to accomplish something. He's trying to accomplish something specific. What he is saying is that there is a structure that is built into us and really what he's saying. And he is looking for an objective order of value, an objective value in the universe that will guide our behavior. And as Peterson said, none of us live long enough to develop this ourselves. And again, Peterson is coming at this from the bottom. So he says over huge expanses of time, a priori filter structures have built into us so that we can we can organize the facts in the world into value hierarchies and live productively and engage productively in the world. This is actually exactly the kind of stuff that C.S. Lewis is talking about in his book, The Abolition of Man, because what C.S. Lewis is trying to get at in that book is objective value. Now, both Harris and Peterson want to say they're not relativists. They both want to say there is such a thing as objective value in the world. But the question is, how can you get it? Harris believes that you can just sit down long enough in terms of rationality, maybe talk with a few people and boom, there you'll have it. You can just figure it out. You can derive the values from facts within the lifetime of a human being. Peterson is saying we actually have values that we have inherited and these have been developed over huge expanses of life. Actually, if you get later into Harris's summary after this, he'll basically say we need a new set of values. Now, I'm going to get to that when I look at Chapter 2 of The Abolition of Man, because that's where C.S. Lewis addresses this directly. Now, part of why I'm going into this is every year about usually around Easter time, billboards will appear in Sacramento that look like, not every year, most years, that look like this. God-free, happy and inspired by wonder will sharp Sacramento technology analyst atheist from the Freedom From Religion Foundation. And basically what he says, which is what Sam Harris says, which I've heard other atheists say, I don't need a God. In other words, I don't need Peterson's God number one. I don't need this stuff in order to experience wonder, in order to experience meaning, in order to experience the kinds of things that religious people say they derive from their contextualized experience of having an imaginary. And when I say imaginary here, I'm not meaning that pejoratively because Christians do use their imagination when they think about their relationship with God and imaginary relationship with a divine being that Christians will say that gives me meaning. And an atheist will say, I can find meaning in that. But what we're really talking about in many cases is meaning as an experience. And whereas neither side will usually peg it that way, if you really push the atheists, that's where they will go. They will say this is an experience. And what's interesting is that that's exactly where Sam Harris goes when he starts talking about consciousness and his quasi religious experiences of consciousness, whether by using Buddhist meditation or psychedelic drugs. He will say, I don't need to inhabit this entire, I don't need to inhabit space within a story in order to experience meaning. Meaning is something I experience. Wonder is something I experience. These are just words for experiences. That's what they are. They are not now Harris would push back and say they are not facts. Well, maybe I can testify to the fact of having an experience, but it is not the kind of fact in the world that Sam Harris wants to ground his his metaphysic on his ethic on. What strikes me is that right at the beginning of C.S. Lewis's book, just as he opened the Miracles book with a ghost story, he opens the Abolition of Man book with a story from a children's school book. Now, this book was written in 1943 and it deals with two issues of natural law and objective value. So let's let's take a listen. A little book on English intended for boys and girls in the upper forms of schools. I do not think the authors of this book, there were two of them, intended any harm. And I owe them or their publisher good language for sending me a complimentary copy. At the same time, I shall have nothing good to say of them. Here is a pretty predicament. I do not want to pillory to modest practicing school masters who were doing the best they knew, but I cannot be silent about what I think the actual tendency of their work. I therefore propose to conceal their names. I shall refer to these gentlemen as Gaius and Titius and to their book as the Green Book. But I promise you there is such a book and I have it on my shelves. In their second chapter, Gaius and Titius quote the well-known story of Coleridge at the waterfall. You remember that there were two tourists present, that one called it sublime and the other pretty, and that Coleridge mentally endorsed the first judgment and rejected the second with disgust. Gaius and Titius comment as follows. When the man said, this is sublime, he appeared to be making a remark about the waterfall. Actually, he was not making a remark about the waterfall, but a remark about his own feelings. What he was saying was really, I have feelings associated in my mind with the word sublime, or shortly, I have sublime feelings. Here are a good many deep questions settled in a pretty summary fashion. But the authors are not yet finished. They add, this confusion is continually present in language as we use it. We appear to be saying something very important about something, and actually we are only saying something about our own feelings. Before considering the issues really raised by this momentous little paragraph, designed, you will remember, for the upper forms of schools, we must eliminate one mere confusion into which Gaius and Titius have fallen. Even on their own view, on any conceivable view, the man who says, this is sublime, cannot mean, I have sublime feelings. Even if it were granted that such qualities of sublimity were simply and solely projected into things from our own emotions, yet the emotions which prompt the projection are the correlatives and therefore almost the opposites of the qualities projected. The feelings which make a man call an object sublime are not sublime feelings, but feelings of veneration. If this is sublime is to be reduced at all to a statement about the speaker's feelings, the proper translation would be, I have humble feelings. If the view held by Gaius and Titius were consistently applied, it would lead to obvious absurdities. It would force them to maintain that you are contemptible means I have contemptible feelings. In fact, that your feelings are contemptible means my feelings are contemptible. But we need not delay over this, which is the very pons a senorum of our subject. It would be unjust to Gaius and Titius themselves to emphasize what was doubtless a mere inadvertence. The schoolboy who reads this passage in the Green Book will believe two propositions. Firstly, that all sentences containing a predicate of value are statements about the emotional state of the speaker. And secondly, that all such statements are unimportant. It is true that Gaius and Titius have said neither of these things in so many words. They have treated only one particular predicate of value, sublime, as a word descriptive of the speaker's emotions. The pupils are left to do for themselves the work of extending the same treatment to all predicates of value. And no slightest obstacle to such extension is placed in their way. The authors may or may not desire the extension. They may never have given the question five minutes serious thought in their lives. I am not concerned with what they desired, but with the effect their book will certainly have on the schoolboy's mind. In the same way, they have not said that judgments of value are unimportant. Their words are that we appear to be saying something very important, when in reality we are only saying something about our own feelings. No schoolboy will be able to resist the suggestion brought to bear upon him by that word only. I do not mean, of course, that he will make any conscious inference from what he reads to a general philosophical theory that all values are subjective and trivial. The very power of Gaius and Titius depends on the fact that they are dealing with a boy, a boy who thinks he is doing his English prep, and has no notion that ethics, theology, and politics are all at stake. It is not a theory they put into his mind, but an assumption, which ten years hence, its origin forgotten and its presence unconscious, will condition him to take one side in a controversy which he has never recognized as a controversy at all. The authors themselves, I suspect, hardly know what they are doing to the boy, and he cannot know what is being done to him. Before considering the philosophical credentials of the position which Gaius and Titius have adopted about value, I should like to show its practical results on the educational procedure. In their fourth chapter... I'll pause it there. That'll give you a little taste of what we're going to be going into. And right away, Louis begins by saying, Now when I say, I have wonder, what do I mean? If I walk into Yosemite Valley and say, it is sublime, am I saying I am having a feeling of... And then I don't know what word I might use. I'm a feeling of awe. I'm having a feeling of... And in other words, what you're saying is, even though you say Yosemite Valley is sublime, you're not actually talking about the valley, you're just talking about your feelings. Well, this is the difference between sublime and beautiful, because when you say Yosemite Valley is beautiful, okay, it's beautiful. But what Coleridge, and you can Google this story, what Coleridge, the point that Coleridge was making was that when you say the word sublime, you are saying something else. You are referring to a value that you say the valley has that is something not you. This is exactly what Peterson and Sam Harris are trying to get at in these talks. They are trying to find objective value. Peterson begins the talk one by saying, Sam Harris has already rejected subjectivity. In other words, he begins by saying, what the Nazis did in the Holocaust was wrong. It was bad. It was evil. What the Soviets did in the gulags was wrong. It was bad. It was evil. This isn't relativism. And Sam Harris jumps on that right away in Vancouver 1. I want to say that. I want to say that. Okay, so you're saying there is such a thing as objective value. There is such a thing as moral knowledge, because you would need moral knowledge in order to say the Holocaust is wrong. Okay, now here's the question. Where do you get that moral knowledge? Well, Jordan Peterson wants to say, okay, it comes from below, and you can find it in this filter that we've been shaping, and it's derived from facts, but it's not able to be derived from facts in any one lifetime. In fact, it's been derived from all kinds of lifetimes over long, long, long, long periods of time. But there's finally a problem with that, because very quickly, and this is where Brett Weinstein jumps in, suddenly you have the question of, well, is the telos, the end of that moral knowledge, is its goal survival? Because that's what Darwin says. We are geared towards survival, and so therefore the end is survival. But very quickly you have the question, survival of what? Survival of mammals, survival of creatures with complex nervous systems, because we're talking about, in terms of very long evolutionary processes, lobsters, chimps, human beings. Then you get into Harari and others later. You get, well, what's beyond human beings? Are we talking about the survival of that? Are we talking about good being the survival of, we don't seem to have an ethical problem with the demise of the Neanderthals or the demise of the other asserted ape, asserted ape ancestors of human beings. We replaced them. You keep following along this path, especially along the simulation thing, will be replaced ourselves, or maybe we already have been replaced and what we're experiencing here is something next to like a Neanderthal going through and living within some simulation by whatever has gone beyond the Neanderthal. So these are where we get our questions. And the problem is then when we use the words good and bad, right and wrong, good and evil, are those really the right words. So there's a little teaser. This is where we're going to go. We're going to use the Abolition of Man. We're going to dig into that book. I'm probably going to be pausing the book and giving commentary along the way within the book, The Abolition of Man, just like I do. Sometimes people who watch the videos complain because I pause the book and they want the book to go on. My job here is not to give you a free copy of the audiobook of The Abolition of Man. That would be a violation of copyright. My job here is under fair use of copyright to give you commentary on the book. If you'd like the book, buy the book. I'm not giving it out for free. I don't own it to give it out. So there's a little teaser for the videos that I'm going to be doing. Probably next three or so videos, this is what I'll be working on. So let me know if this sounds productive to you. And again, I decided to do this a little bit shorter. So those of you who just click on shorter videos, you won't be turned off by one or two hours.