https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gSmlBO3aZyQ

 Great cool. Well, thank you. Well, it's a pleasure to meet you. I just I just skimmed the email you sent Let's see. How long ago was that? Not too long ago Sorry, it just broke up a second. Oh, okay. I just skimmed the email you sent me. Oh Wasn't too long ago. No, it wasn't Well, why don't you now you I know you introduce yourself in the email I'm recording this and you don't have to post it Of course, but I'll send it to you after we're done. Yeah, sure and Why don't you introduce yourself a little bit to me and yeah go from there. Yeah. Yeah, so Yeah, I'm I live in Gardnerville, Nevada originally from California though grew up in a kind of a tiny small town up there group small farm you had some cows and some sheep and Really wonderful, yeah, I'm in not the urban California the other California Yeah, yeah the county I grew up in actually is one of one of two counties that has less than 10,000 people California. Yeah. Yeah, so I did that and then I Went to went to school in Redding and studied theology there and then moved to the Bay Area To Do good to go to seminary with the Fuller's extension campus there and started working at a pretty big church down there and then moved to Gardnerville of last November Yeah, so that's been it's been fun Well, whatever you are I mean a lot of people don't understand that there's kind of urban California and then there's really rural, California There's places in California where you just drive and drive and drive and nobody's around. Yeah Yeah, you know that was the thing that I can when I looked at the Bay Area I think that was one of the things that I I kept telling people because I met a lot of people who just moved To the Bay Area and they're like, oh, this is California California's Gray said no Go about 50 miles inland and it is very different. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, I mean politically, you know Where I grew up you you wouldn't see a You wouldn't see a Hillary or Obama sticker during any of the last election campaigns, but you in the Bay Area It's obviously, you know completely the polar opposite. Yep. Yep. Yep I just got finished talking to a guy who grew up and lived in the Bay Area and we were talking just about that Yeah, so then you went to you went to college up in Redding and studied theology and then you did fuller extension Then you worked in a church and yeah, are you working in a church now or? No, actually I'm actually working in construction right now. Okay, so church you worked in a church long enough to know You didn't want to work in a church I wouldn't say quite like that It was Maybe I needed a break. Okay How long did you work in the church before you needed a break four and a half years? Oh, that's pretty good run Working in it you were on staff at a large church. Yeah, it was a large church large mega church and For the most part, you know, I really I really enjoyed Parts of it Yeah, but then there was other things I just realized I'm not Part of that in the mega church world you end up with this whole like corporate Culture and I'm more of a small church guy. And so what about last Last July I think it was I kind of started having this intuition that I Would try to help with the spirit This just said hey like to do ministry. You don't need to be paid by a church And so I started kind of thinking like well maybe for for now You know, maybe I won't work in a church. Maybe it'll turn into something by vocational little bit down the road and then maybe even I Will probably be back on staff at a church sometime in my future. I think It's you know, it's a church business if we could call it that Yeah, there are I mean the church church has kind of there's the middle has kind of been squeezed out of the churches So there are many many many tiny little churches of which I pastor one and I'm fortunate to be able to work full-time At a church that I that I pastor a small enough church. Yeah, and then there's the mega churches, but you're right the mega churches There is a corporate Once you get to a certain size The patterns of the how society manages people Impose themselves and even the legal situation impose itself so that you you have to You have to do it in certain ways and I remember, you know working with the denomination Which so that denominational entity? It's not really like the church. It's more like a business and yeah, there are sides to that But if you're going to work in the church at least depending on the tradition, you're either gonna maybe work by vocationally and scrimping You know try and get by in a tiny little church or you're gonna be in this corporate environment and there's something that sort of You know The corporate environment and church work. It's not an easy fit Yeah, no, it's not no it's kind of one of the things I realized is like I went in there thinking like I want to be a pastor but I felt more that most of the time like a kind of a glorified administrator and So I was just kind of like, you know, and plus the Bay Area was it was just getting a little too crazy for me Busyness and stuff. So yeah, you know my wife we decided to take a risk and just try something new and Yeah Yeah, so so you're thinking Did you already have some of these skills you studied you studied? Theology at your college. So Because sometimes when people get out of ministry, it's really tough because they don't have any other skills Well, well for me I think is like because I'm still kind of young so yeah But yeah, I you know growing up I I learned a lot of you know, I learned how to work manually and Then at the church I was there before and a half years But actually well I would from the first couple years there while I was going to seminary I worked in I split other facilities guys. So I learned a lot there. Okay Yeah, you know, they're not without practical skills. That's a good thing Yeah, and that was kind of something that I I was thinking of when I made that decision is like well, I'd like to Develop some other skills So how was it for you and your wife looking, you know looking for a church being you know Going church shopping. Did you find a church that you're satisfied with or yeah. Yeah, you know, we're going to Non-denominational church something that we found and felt was, you know pretty close to what what we were were like It's kind of an interesting interesting thing Sort of where I have landed theologically I you know, I Sometimes I get a little uncomfortable with like the the real conservative fundamentalist type of church, but I'm also Definitely not a liberal. Yeah. So one of the things is when you Well in a smaller community like this you tend to either get either extreme You know the school church with like ten people going to it or the You know evangelical church fire Brimstone You know, but we found a good place Okay, okay And you and somewhere along the line you must have found Jordan Peterson because you're talking to me and that's how usually people usually find me Yes, I found Jordan Peterson. I actually started When he released his first video I started following not too long after that I remember I was watching reading something online and that referenced him about political correctness or something and I've been doing as what 2016 so I was doing a lot of thinking about You know privilege and things like identity politics because In some of my classes of fuller, I mean fuller is a great place But there was sort of some of those influences of that left-wing postmodern modern thought So I was kind of trying to figure out what I thought about it and then I came across to Peterson I started watching some of the stuff on Jung and Victor Frankel Freud and I just started watching everything came out and then I Was thinking like oh wow, well, this is this is really cool. I don't know where he is Theologically, but he's doing theology in a very real sense And then I found your channel. Oh, wow. This is great, you know someone You know is talking about it from a Christian perspective Exploring some of the theological themes. So I've really been enjoying Kind of your commentary on it Yeah It's given me a lot of good food for thought So so did you have to did you have to shut the door and turn down the volume in your church job when you're? listening to Jordan Peterson or Sometimes Sometimes I yeah Really it's Tim Keller, it's not Jordan Peterson. Yeah No Actually, I was lucky there and the church that I worked at was very open intellectually And Yeah, I think actually weirdly enough once I once I started listening to Jordan Peterson, I started becoming more more conservative I think and You know as we especially in the Bay Area You know talking about those issues and Jordan Peterson's thoughts started really kind of informing how I would I would think about those things You know when you know, we have someone be like well, you know, we need to you know, do you know a diversity? training for everyone or whatever I Jordan Peterson kind of gave me some Some tools I guess I what I was more Resistant to some of those things never got me Sometimes say like well, I don't know if this is the best way of addressing some of these issues But yeah, I drove Peterson was was great back to you know, I even I occasionally teach a Sunday school not Sunday school class a Wednesday morning class for the seniors at the church and I never said his name but some of this stuff from the Bible lectures definitely made its way Yeah, I'm guilty of that too, yeah people watch my stuff and they're like Just Jordan Peterson stuff in there. Of course, there's Jordan Peterson stuff in there. It's coming out of the same head I listen to guys like Jordan Peterson and Tim Keller and I read book because I Want to I want to learn and bounce things off and discover things. So that's why you do it. It's ongoing education Yeah Yeah, yeah And I became kind of an apologist for him around there when I would have conversations with people other staff members or even the you know congregants and They would say, you know, they'd say, you know, what are you reading? I've been listening to this and you should check it out. I had quite a few people tell me like oh man This is awesome. So yeah, I became an evangelist for that area Yeah, so so what's on your mind what's on your list to talk about everybody everybody's got a list so yeah Yeah I wanted to talk to you to guess a little bit about the idea of Jordan Peterson as a liberal theologian Because that was kind of one of the conclusions I came to You know, I don't know whether I doubt he would accept that label but As I was listening to him and I was listening to Bible lectures seeing how he did His theology and I was trying to think like okay. What like what is this? I started thinking, you know, this actually sounds a lot like Certain liberal thinkers I read last summer. I was Re-reading Paul Tillich's The Courage to Be I thought oh my gosh like this could Be Jordan Peterson in a different time. I don't think he was he wasn't ever as popular I don't think it he definitely wasn't as clear but I noticed they both have And with liberal theology in general this desire to improve people's lives nearby improved society without necessarily carrying all the metaphysical baggage that were Orthodox Christianity would have yeah Yeah, that's I agree 100% Peterson's really funny because he's got all these streams in him and and so I mean liberal theology I mean, so what what happens after the Enlightenment is that there's there's there's this sense that The traditional church is is is Slowly retreating and there's a tremendous amount of fear that Well, we've got all these sunk costs into Christianity. We have to somehow save it So so much theology for the last two hundred plus years has been written as a way to save Christianity from secularism Mm-hmm. And so to reframe I mean Schleiermacher I mean Schleiermacher I mean just go through the list of classical liberal theology. This is exactly what they're doing and what's interesting about Peterson is he's not a I mean even bark with neo-orthodoxy an attempt to you know regain what had been lost to read justify because obviously through the the catastrophe of the Second World War and the the catastrophe of The church's performance in that crisis that you know to fail with the exception of some like Bonhoeffer But they know even Bonhoeffer is, you know, neo-orthodox So I I think you're very right except that Peterson whereas Bart or Tillich or any of these often German theologians Schleiermacher These these guys They're trying to save Christianity and save the church, which is what you know liberal liberal churches do Peterson comes along and he's not trying to save the church the church is incidental if not Problematic. Yeah, trying to save you know, the the daughter of the church, which is Western Post-christian Christendom. Yeah, I think you're very much right on that and that's what's so interesting about Peterson because He's he's that's very much a piece of him. Yeah liberal theology But in a way that many in the Episcopal Church Would have a real problem with because they're all doing woke theology now It's like the because I live so much liberal theology right now allies itself with kind of a far left Social agenda. It's just it's out of touch with what I think most people are at and I think that's a good point that you brought up. I Think there's a subtext Well, so Peterson I think ends up bringing people into the church Whereas liberal theology tends to even though it's trying to save the church it ends up really like shrinking churches because underneath a lot of different theology is the subtext of You don't need the church actually, but we still want you to come and so the people will say, okay Well, if we we can't trust the Bible everything is contextual we need to You know not just not get too Close with some of those earlier beliefs or those fundamentalists or whatever What it ends up coming down to is? Why should I get up at eight o'clock on a Sunday morning and go to church for Peterson since church Isn't really part of his thing He actually ends up doing kind of this working with the same Framework is a lot of liberal theology, but he approaches it different So saying you can't trust the Bible like those ignorant fundamentalists do he says well, let's just look at the Bible Psychologically and there's a lot of interesting stuff in there so he manages to pull people who are Just interested in that stuff and then they end up Finding their way in which is interesting So his his way of kind of drawing people in or more towards Christianity is ironically It it's only possible because he stands outside of that tradition which is weird Well, and it's also So so again liberal liberal theology was an attempt to save the institution of the church Yeah, Peterson has no such project. I mean Right, and so I'm really looking forward to this conversation with Bishop Baron because I mean to me Bishop Baron from what I've seen of him represents some of the best of of the Roman Catholic Church he is Educated he's pastoral he sharp I mean the dudes got gifts all over the place and so what a wonderful guy to talk to but Peterson is Doing this and so I haven't gotten the second session back from the conference. I did in Australia but part of my part of my thesis for that second talk was Was Essentially what happened with Darwin was that in the middle of the 19th century Darwin convinced a lot of people they didn't need God in order to explain the The world the the physical stuff of the world and that's you know, it's where God number one God of general revelation Comes along and basically says well, okay Let's let's assume you don't need God to explain the existence of things and he's he's he's pretty coy about that You listen to a few places where he talks about it But he goes on to say basically but you can't really You can't really go on without the idea of God and have us work psychologically and socially we need that layer in order to deal with Consciousness and consciousness as a sorting of the world and so in a funny way he reconstitutes the need for God that Darwin dispelled and and so you you still will continue I think I'll say let's let's think about Jordan Peterson's church Jordan Peterson's church would sort of be like a liberal church in that You know, are you going to? So if I get another chance to talk to Jordan Peterson and if the conversation is the right context I'd probably challenge him on hey a mythopoetic guy. What about ritual? You know, you talk a lot about sacrifice Don't think that maybe building the altar and and laying the animal Don't you think that in an embodied sense that sacrifice is pretty important Because that's the cultic aspect and so he in a sense like liberal Christianity wants to You know revivify some of this stuff, but he's not looking to He's not looking for the cultic Aspect of it and so his his twelve rules for life in many ways I think you're dead on right here is classic liberal Literature because it doesn't need the cult and when I say cult I don't mean, you know, Jim Jones I mean, you know what? I mean technically in the theological sense the cultic aspect of it where we perform ritual and which is really ironic because then you've got a guy like John Verbecky Who is all about the play and the ritual and the embodiment? but He's a secularist essentially and of course, you've got Peugeot over here who is full-blown Orthodoxy where hey, we've got the ritual we got the liturgy We've got the cult if it's if it ain't broke don't fix it Yeah, yeah Yeah, it's really interesting there and he I mean, you know I even thought like when you when he does answer it answered the questions and I just watched his Become a couple of his videos he released over the weekend about belief in God You know, but overall I thought like that is such a classic classic Liberal theological answer is well, what do you mean by God? You know, he's he's I think he obviously wouldn't be comfortable using the language of Trinity Maybe not, you know Jesus is he different in degree or in kind, you know, that's a real real sharp sharp one So, yeah, I mean it just made it's interesting that he Seems to be drawing people in whereas if you you can hear almost the same metaphysical statements from from someone in the liberal tradition You know, where's the where's the meat to this And for me, you know, I think that's that's the thing that's Kept me more, you know away from kind of the liberal side I guess kind of kept me grounded in the Orthodox Yeah smaller Orthodox Yeah, you know, I went up to Berkeley once to the graduate theological union there And for an event and it was it was weird I mean, you know, there was representatives from you know, you know extreme womanist theology queer theology all of these You know different different things. I mean, it was such a strange strange experience to be literally the most conservative guy in the room and You know to know that like wow, it's like I met a crowd where if you Know that like wow, it's like I met a crowd where if you were to make a statement a classic Orthodox day statement that you know, Oh Christ is fully fully divine fully human. I mean people would raise eyebrows at you You know or you know make any sort of ultimate claim for Christianity that you know, that's the big one now But I find myself in places like that sometimes and I'm just fascinated by The by the language Because you know what they what what the whole What the whole thing winds up becoming is a whole series of circumlocutions avoid anything Especially avoid any specific Christian language and you have a prayer that's gets a little too much So we're gonna have an invocation. Well, there you go. There's a dollar word instead of a kind of invocation What exactly is that? Invocation what exactly are you invoking? Do you ever look up the source of that word? You know and and so then and and we're gonna be present and we're going to be mindful and we're going to be and and it's almost you know, John McWhorter has a has a has a wonderful riff on on On racism where where he says, you know all these people at Aspen. They're just so you know You know, we've not yet arrived and so John McWhorter says what can you tell me what arriving means? I mean, I can kind of think of a soundtrack for it but but can you actually describe it and that's exactly it the the liturgy becomes sort of a soundtrack, but it's it's and and and you know what I really liked about CS Lewis is CS Lewis, you Know basically made the comment that you know, here's the thing about reality real things are You know real things are hard And and you get the sense listening to some of these groups that there's it's all just gonna float away Yeah, I'm gonna float away because Goodness don't dare say anything that would attach it to any historical reference anything that's ever happened in the world Exactly. Just yes. Just give me some just give me a drug and let me you know, yeah Oh But but but again the fascinating thing about Peterson is that's not Peterson, right Peterson when he read 12 rules It's very practical in a sense Where you know, this is this is how to this is how to do it So and and that's where I see him as different from say He wouldn't be offended if you said he was like a classical liberal Theologian because he put classical liberal and assert that politically but I I really don't think he has I Don't know if he has any idea If you would say liberal theology what whether he would be able to frame that Conceptually in terms of the history of theology. It's just not what he studied. Yeah, I don't think you would so And that's why you know, he's It was so funny because he lands at Liberty University and I thought well, that's a funny place to go He's trying to get into Cambridge divinity school and I thought well, that's a funny place to go You know, where are you gonna where are you gonna do next? Go to go to Salt Lake City and hang with the Mormons I don't know. Do you understand this theological landscape at all? To me the Liberty Episode I mean it was wonderful I loved it but to me that really indicated I'm like Man, you have no idea what American Christianity looks like I mean that's like it's so far So far right that But you know, I guess for a lot of people I mean that is when they think of Your standard evangelical. I mean they think Jerry Falwell and You know that is a very big big school And I got a lot I got a lot of mail from people after that that basically saying and I I very much accept what they say They said well Liberty is a you know Don't don't pay too much attention to the political stuff that there are a lot of good professors there and there are a lot of Good professors there and I'm sure there are a lot of fine students there. So I don't want to Demean them but it's just it's just funny because I he I Don't think that he has he doesn't have a map He's got a map of meaning but he doesn't have a map of the American Christian or the world Christian landscape and and you know but also I just I don't know that he has any I I Haven't heard him articulate any goal that would Intersect with that map in any way so, you know, I just listened to his he released the Sydney talk where he talks about belief in God and It's interesting. So of course he he he goes after the Marxist And and then he goes into his other stuff and it's like this is just it's very original Which is what makes it so fun which is why I part of me wasn't terribly disappointed when he Didn't get a chance to go to Cambridge because I thought well, I was afraid Cambridge might spoil the Exodus lectures if he ever does them Oh, yeah. Well, and I think you know, that's one of his big strengths is that he is not tied to any sort of Either a dogmatic tradition or Even a scholarly tradition, I mean he would go to you would go to Cambridge to learn about Exodus and he would spend his whole time trying to you know, study the Which source is what from Exodus and I you know, I think I agree with you I think it may have would have taken away sort of the the mythological Creativity. Yeah, you know, I think it may have helped his exegetical skills in some way, but Overall, yeah But no you're I mean, I think your main point here is very true he's in what And so it's so hard to locate him So part of him is kind of a classical liberal theologian the art of him is is mythopoetic is There's a piece of that in terms of classical liberalism because they caught that too. Yes He you know, there's another the Jungian side of him is you know That's that's a whole nother thing and then but he acts like an evangelical where he's aren't storming around the world You know talking to concert halls. You know, and You know, it's so funny too because he you know The one time he visited an Orthodox Church with his wife that at least it was talked about and she really liked it And he thought you know, you know, why doesn't he go to church? He can't sit still, you know Orthodox service you're gonna be in there two hours work through that liturgy and That's right. Jordan's gonna be fidgeting and you know Have one thing that made me think of Let's see, what was it he Jordan Peterson in the Orthodox You know I Just look at it just look at my mind You know if it comes back all let you know, but you don't have notes in front of you lots of people have notes Oh, I do Okay, yeah, I don't mean to give you a hard time I do sometimes that people Any names here but I'm from New Jersey. I tease people like sure If I'm being too nice and maybe a better, you know, they're like what's what's going on? Yeah, what's what's wrong Paul? You're way too nice. So yeah. Oh You mentioned this union side I Mean, I think I've heard you talk about it. But you know, I think when Jordan we When you see his influence from you a lot of times you I think it's impossible to miss that The the influence of Jung's father and that they kind of account this tradition I mean when I've heard Jordan Peterson say I remember the first time I heard him say like well God is whatever is that your highest Yeah, you know your hierarchy of values. I thought like I am that's like a classical reformed You know, I mean you can be quoting Calvin there or Augusta yeah, and you know, I think you know, we can't lose the fact that you know, I mean you was a reformed Pastor's son. That's right in that color and a liberal reformed pastor's son I mean liberalism was already well underway in the middle of the 19th century and I and and and Jung's father not a very happy pastor either, you know and Jung You know, and I think I think part of I get into trouble every time I talk about young Young to You there's there's a way in which Jung's Enterprise can also be seen in the light of this of this saving Christianity movement I mean he too is he's not a theologian. He's a he's a psychologist but he too is in many ways part of that whole project of We need to save we need to save the church from modernity because this can no longer be believed but we have so much sunk costs in Christianity at how many different levels as a civilization that it needs to be Reformulated in order to be saved and and I have You know I have so I was just did a video You know before I did these conversations today I'm sort of between Verveki and Peugeot on this which is kind of sort of where Peterson is too in that I don't know that we can simply go back and and I also and I also don't think that the Orthodox are I mean they're using YouTube there Orthodox in America are amazingly media savvy. I'm very impressed by what they're doing You know you can't really fully go back in or if you're going to engage this world you have to engage those issues so and then the question is well how and what to keep and and what to what needs updating or Nuancing or and that's always been the case in the church Paul or you know Paul and Barnabas go to Antioch and Well gosh, what do we do with these people? They're Gentiles and Peter goes and you know to see Cornelius and Paul sees Lydia and just these women outside of Philippi and and so the church is always being forced to adapt and the scary thing is that It gets a lot of things wrong and and it's usually over the very long haul that orthodoxy and heterodoxy get worked out and and so the the challenges we face in our lifetime we will mess up and and heresy is almost always a product of Church's missional engagements with frontiers. It's never been exposed to and it takes a while to work through so We're we're in that process now. It continues to be a live process Yeah, yeah, it does I think you know, I think maybe some of the promise with Jordan Peterson is in the That he is opening up the doors for those conversations to happen You know, I think it's You know, it kind of goes back that it's always that that the attention you get between your natural theology and theology of revelation Got number one got number two You know how far can How far can human intellect go? And I think it can open up doors. We need to of course every theologian of revelation believes in reason and you know being informed I mean you Carl Bart who you mentioned earlier, right? You know, I can just as Elizabeth Peterson talk about him. I can hear rolling because He is so full You know, we don't got at all except Jesus Christ that word everything else You know is Missive that I believe that but what I've also planned is, you know, there is a place for this nap theology because it is oftentimes the place where start and No, you Belong, you know all Target Apples the unknown God say hey, I'm gonna proclaim this to you And open up that door to revelation So, yeah, you know, I think that I think that what Jordan Peterson's doing has a lot of potential for engaging people especially men church and I think that You know if it it's a good it's a good door opener and do that allows, you know better conversations to happen and then But it's something that liberal theology I think would like to have done but just never could never could do Yeah, you know it's Well, we should you know over on the on the side of the church that has always resisted liberal Theology we should in a sense give them their due It sort of reached it sort of reached its heyday in the Cold War But and and there are there are many fine Christians that remain in mainline churches it's Yeah, it's it's It's tough to it's tough to work through and you know, even as you mentioned, you know a school a school like Fuller So rich Mao, of course was was president of Fuller. He was you know, he was a philosopher from Calvin College I had a course with rich Mao when he taught at Calvin and Rich Mao continues to show up at CRC events because it's kind of like favorite speaker But you know and of course Mark Laberton another wonderful guy Fuller always sort of tries to stay at that edge of of Order and chaos when it comes to And that's you know that that in a sense is you know a certain wing of evangelicalism that the kind that doesn't Get defined that way in the newspaper so much, but it's and neo Evangelicalism as you know Molly Wortham called it in her really fine book on evangelicalism Billy Graham, you know for all of his he really tried to bring in a sense These things together and a lot of what Christianity's today does, you know, Calvin College has often tried to do is say let's we need to continue to we need to continue to think and do theology and and Find out where these lines are and and work those problems so and and I you know for me I I Like you welcomed Jordan Peterson's contribution and continue to welcome it But you know I have to process that through myself and and find out you know where I agree with him where I disagree with him What I think is helpful what what challenges me to think in some new ways But Jonathan Peugeot and and his last question the answer I thought said something quite well He talked about he says he says there's sort of a new openness right now About talking about some of these things and I think Jordan had a big part in creating that new openness Mm-hmm, and you know, I sense that with you know, whereas Jonathan John Verbeke isn't speaking from you know A Christian tradition, although you know, I think he did grow up in a church It's part of his growing up years. So he's Christianity to him But there is a you know, there is sort of in this new internet YouTube space a an environment where we can talk to each other which to me is hugely welcoming and I did a you know, I had a meet-up last night and a young man stayed late and we talked and he Still sort of considers himself an atheist and he just was you know I he's just you know, so you guys are doing this in a church and I said yeah this I've always wanted the church to be the kind of place where we can have these conversations and And And I that's been difficult in a lot of evangelical spaces because of the fear of opening the door a well-found fear But we have to talk to each other. Yeah, even even though Missional movements are the seedbeds of heresy. We can't stop doing mission So we keep trusting, you know the whole business is trusting Jesus so trust Jesus for Pete's sake Oh Yeah Yeah, no that that's true and you know I think yeah risk is risk is part of and that's one thing Jordan Pearson's really helped me with is Taking more risk, you know, I did the self-authoring thing. I did the you know, I'm High in openness, but you know, I'm not a risk taker but You know that that idea of you know, we figure things out by talking Which a lot of times in churches, you know you get that exact opposite is we are going to give you the words to speak Which is interesting tension to live with because what Peterson objects to Being told what he can and cannot say is something that is part of the Christian Heritage. Yeah Yeah, and when when it but when the church just becomes a purveyor of propaganda And I was I've been fortunate in that I've always You know my father's church you know, my father was also very high in openness and It was a church in a very missional place in that and as this church is in here in Sacramento So these are places where? You're always dealing with things that are a little off the map yeah, so and other people understand that so they give you a little leeway and I'm just happy to be able to open the doors and have all kinds of people come in and we have meaningful conversations and we take it from there and You know again, I mean if you I tell people this I say, you know If you if you believe you're gonna trust Jesus for your afterlife Well, shouldn't you kind of trust him for your life too? Yeah, and that tends to be what a lot of Christians do They're like well, I trust Jesus is gonna take me home when I die. Well good So you trust you trust him before he takes you home? Yeah, that's really hard and that's where the rubber meets the road so Oh, we got a few more minutes yeah, what do you what do you got on your list that you that you really got to cover You know, I think I think we covered it Quite a bit really You know, I'm trying to figure out what what to do with this you know, I Think in my future. I'm looking at actually go back and doing a good a PhD in the theology Really? Yeah, where do you have any idea yet? I think my first choice actually Baylor University yeah And so I you know, I'd like to maybe go somewhere like Duke or something. I don't know if I can get in there To try but you know Yeah, I'd like to I'd like to integrate some of these these things into that course of study because I think it's a it's a interesting cultural moment that we're living in and The effect that he's having the church on men and women in general Yeah, so it's been kind of That's kind of on the horizon for me his whole experience with the the Academy the You know kind of what happened to him and what's been happening to a lot of other professors Definitely gives me a little bit of pause there You know, I mean even in those as you probably know and a lot of concern even Christian Universities, you know you do run up against some of some of that Ideology that you know has taken out a lot of a lot of the professors So that's been kind of I guess that maybe that's the reason why I'm in Investing my time right now learning how to do carpentry and stuff like that You know how many PhD you know how many people have PhDs in theology and don't don't use it for their jobs And I yeah, I plan on doing this for a long time then I kind of gave up No But listening to Jordan Peterson has Kind of motivated me to say hey, you know aim at that See if you'll hit it if you can do it go for it. Yeah, that's you know, if you I Think it's a I think it it's a it's a fine thing and and you'll learn you'll learn stuff that there's no other way You could learn it Yeah, yeah Well, this has been fun Brandon, yeah And I will I will send you this I will send you the recording and and you can let me know what you want Do with it. Yeah, go ahead and post it if you want. All right. All right, great. Yeah. Well, thank you Brandon Hey good talking to you. Take care and if you're ever down in Sacramento You know, you can keep a look on the meetup thing cuz I think I think you'd have fun I think you'd have fun dropping and you're not that far. You're just you're just a little bit east of Lake Tahoe So yeah, you're not crazy far. So no we go back to the Bay Area Sometimes to see friends so we pass through there So there's a there's a link in the notes on all my videos to the to the Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetups thing So if you just click that you'll get notifications when I set new meetings and actually we're doing actually To Sundays from yesterday We're doing we're helping start a new group in Nevada City, which is a grass valley Which is actually closer to you than Sacramento is cool So yeah, so yeah, if you want to check that out you can check that out because she's a woman wants to Where she's been driving down here about an hour and some and she's like this is a far drive I said, we'll start one start one by yourself. It might be small, but yeah, we'll help you start it. So Right on well cool, that's exciting. All right, Brandon. Will you take care? All right you too. Okay. Bye