https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=T-SSY9kd7rI

 Hi, this is Paul. Got a comment on a couple of my videos. This person put it on a couple of videos. Why no comment on Robbie Zachariah's death? And the honest answer is, I don't know much about the man. I've read the first few chapters of a book of his, which I very much enjoyed. I thought it was really great. I've heard podcasts where he did some commenting on Jordan Peterson. But other than that, I've had very little involvement with his ministry or haven't really known a lot of people who have, except maybe via the YouTube thing. So it wasn't a part of my life. Now lots of people died. Eddie Haskell, actor who played Eddie Haskell, died. Fred Willard, comic clown, entertainment guy, he died. Jerry Sloan, basketball player and coach, he died. I didn't talk about any of them either. Way, way, way more people died than talk about any of them. So what? Well, this is going to get into basically the way we work. Now behind the, I can't believe Paul Van der Kley didn't talk about Robbie Zachariah. Well, somebody in someone's mind, it's not unreasonable, it's completely reasonable. Well, Paul's a Christian, Ravi Zachariah is a Christian. Paul's, you know, someone might argue I'm an evangelist of sorts. Ravi Zachariah was an evangelist. Paul's sort of an apologist. Ravi Zachariah is apologist. Paul and Ravi are on the same team. They're both Christians. They're both conservative Christians who believe in the resurrection. There's lots of different ways. Again, we're very much getting into vervechies, stuff about categories. And, you know, okay, so what essence does Paul and Ravi Zachariah share? And how are they different? And well, why do we clump people together? And in fact, we do it so instinctively. We make associations so naturally. Well, we do because it's a big world and it's a small me. And last week, Monday and Sunday, I talked about, Saturday, I guess, for the rough draft, I talked about like stories of old and the difference between story and reality. And this is going to come up in my rough draft, which I will record after I finish recording this. The world is big. We create JPEGs of being. We have to. And so, well, Paul and Ravi, they're, let's associate them. And why, if Paul's on, Paul and Ravi are on the same team, why isn't Paul showing loyalty to the team? And going forth and, you know, in heroic fashion dealing with, I actually did on Twitter, get a little involved in a little conversation about his death, mostly because right away, some of the controversy about him came up. And just the tiny little bit of reading I saw on those controversy, I thought it was a small thing, but this one particular reporter thinks it's not a small thing. And off it goes in internet land. But it was kind of interesting to me why someone who, it seemed to me, with a very low resolution picture of him that had a remarkable career, why the dirt kind of comes out even if you're doing a 240 character tweet. You know, it's 280 characters. And that's kind of thought. Guy lived a remarkable life. He was a sinner. And then that got into just all kinds of other things. So, but again, watch what I was doing. I was doing the same thing. I'm playing these associations all over the place. And we can't help it. Because again, big world, small me. I need story. I need narrative. I need tribes. I need groups. That's the only way I can promise, I can deal with a world that is so big. We mentally create teams. And these teams have missions and agendas and stories. Now, last week, because I'm sending this out on Monday, I do a little bit of planning. Not a lot. We have that conversation in the Discord, the Friday Discord voice chat this week. How much left brain stuff I'm really putting into this. We'll get to this by the end of the video. But I had this conversation about conspiracy theory. And you know, Brett really wanted to have that conversation with me. And he, you know, he, he, people see opportunities and threats. And when I have someone like Brett on my channel, when I have someone like Brett on my channel, Brett, you know, was, wrote a book and came on my channel. And after being on my channel, the book got a bump. And Brett's like, going and talking to Paul helps sell books. Let's talk to Paul some more. And then he reads the comments in the audience. And he discovers that, wow, I did a little bit of comparing between the comments. Because Jonathan Pageot posted the same conversation that I did. And so I was just a little curious about, I wonder what the culture of the two comment communities on the same video on my channel and Jonathan's channel and what those two communities will be. And I even asked the Discord what they thought about that. And it was interesting. And so Brett wanted this conversation about conspiracy theories. And I thought, oh, OK. I like talking to Brett. And often when I talk to Brett, I think good things happen. I learn a lot. I enjoy it. And he's got a lot of information. And he's fun to talk to. And he's fun to listen to. So sure, I'll talk to him. And then he's like, well, he sort of wanted, well, I'm going to, I kind of get the idea that he's going to come on my channel. And Paul is basically a platform. And I can go on Paul's channel and present my ideas and get them out to the world through Paul's channel. Paul's not a very affording platform in that way, because if it's boring, I don't like having my channel be that. I want to have a conversation. And I'm going to have my say in at least 50% of this conversation, generally speaking, sometimes more, sometimes less. But I'm going to want to mix it up. And that conversation really kind of got me thinking a lot about what we call conspiracy theories. And Bret Weinstein in these conversations with his wife, this livestream 16, people have sent me that conversation. And I watched it. And haven't made a video about it yet, but been thinking about it, because he had some interesting things to say. And it sort of really got me thinking about, well, at a certain level, individuals and groups are always conspiring to move their world story through the world in order to achieve the outcomes and desires they want. That's nearly the definition of agency, at least personal agency. And, well, this is going to get a whole lot. The more I thought about it, the more interesting and complex this whole thing got. And I thought, oh, that's part of why I released the conversations. I had all those three conversations, Bret and Jonathan and Dr. Jim. I released them all throughout the week. But I had them all the same day. And it was a fun day. Good conversation. Good conversation partners. But, boy, what isn't sort of a conspiracy when you think about the world we live in? And in the comments section, Karen, who runs the Meaning Code channel, said, oh, this is like my conversation with Michael. And Karen and Michael have good conversations. They're both sharp. And when they talk, they have a way of just kind of wandering. And because we're all sort of talking about the same thing. And I had the time. So I slid over there and started to listen in on their conversation and thought, oh, yeah, this does have a lot to do with this. My relevance realization is clicking now. Now, 12 rules for life on page 170. Jordan Peterson is talking about sacrifice. And it occurred to me that this general idea is something that we have come to get quite a... Now, before she gets too far into this, again, I'm way too ADHD. I'm way too right brained. At the end of this video, I'm going to deal with the question that I've gotten 10 people asked me this week and why this week have 10 people asked me this. Maybe it's just sort of where we've come in the pandemic or so. But everyone this week wants to know, Paul, what are you doing? Where are you taking us? I don't know. But I'm having a lot of fun because I think it is so cool that I have these really smart, committed, capable conversation partners and they're making videos I want to watch and I'm making videos they want to watch and we're having this conversation. That is totally cool. And I'm loving it. But anyway, sorry for the interruption. Vivid picture of July on page 170. Jordan Peterson is talking about sacrifice and it occurred to me that this general idea is something that we have come to get quite a vivid picture of in recent weeks just in terms of sacrifice on the parts of a lot of people. Okay. He says, we'll start our analysis with a truism, stark, self-evident and understated. Sometimes things do not go well. That little knowing look Karen gives is just sometimes things do not go well. Yep. That seems to have much to do with the terrible nature of the world, with its plagues and famines and tyrannies and betrayals. But here's the rub. Sometimes when things are not going well, it is not the world that is the cause. The cause is instead that which is currently most valued subjectively and personally. Why? Because the world is revealed to an indeterminate degree through the template of your values. If the world you are seeing is... Let that sink in. The world is revealed through the template of your values. Again, Jordan Peterson stuff. What he was trying to accomplish with Sam Harris. Sam, there's an a priori filter that has been built into us for a very long time. You don't see the world directly. You see the world through a template of your values. John Vervecky, relevance realization. I mean, okay, those of you who believe in science, well, there's the science boys and girls. That's what science tells you about you. It's not the world you want. It's time to examine your values. It's time to rid yourself of your current presuppositions. It might even be time to sacrifice what you love best so that you can become who you might become. Think about Abraham sacrificing Isaac. And that really struck me because it seems like right now everyone is being asked to sacrifice whatever it is they love best. They recorded this in April in the middle of the lock. Hopefully April was the middle of the lockdown. Maybe some people, what they loved best was football or basketball. Let's say basketball going into the playoff. But they're being asked to sacrifice basketball, whether they're a player or a watcher or an owner, whatever that was. Some people, what they loved best was their freedom to do whatever they want, whenever they want. But everybody's having to sacrifice that. Some people, what they loved best was their 401k or their Anyway, you get the idea. Everybody's being asked to sacrifice something. And why is that? It's because the world is not matching up with what our expectations of it were. And there's a massive reordering of some kind going on. And so then when you come to maps of meaning on page 256 to 258, I'm just going to read a few sentences out of here. I've tried to pick out the sentences that give the general idea, and I'll try to update a little bit as I go along. Now he makes a statement here that I don't think is actually completely true, at least not in our nation, but I think he's talking about an ideal situation. All the individuals in a particular nation agree fundamentally about the nature of the unbearable present, the ideal future, and the means to transform one into another. Okay, that's key. So everyone implicitly, they have this story in their head. And listen to what she says. She's reading from Jordan Peterson. Listen to what he says again. All of us have in our head, whether we're paying attention to it or not. Fundamentally, all the individuals in a particular nation agree. And I think that's the agree part that's a little problematic in there because what there's a there, well, Michael will suss it out. Fundamentally, about the nature of the unbearable present, the ideal future, and the means to transform one into another. So it would be good if all the individuals in the nation agreed on what constitutes an unbearable present and what constitutes an ideal future. And up until two months ago, our nation was completely torn apart at the scenes because there were two movies playing on one screen. Completely torn apart at the scenes. Stressing. Half the people were saying, this is what an unbearable present looks like. And the other half were saying, no. Opposite of that is what an unbearable present looks like. And then both of them had a completely different picture of what an ideal future looks like. But right now, everybody agrees about one thing. The unbearable present is the coronavirus. And the ideal future is the day when we can get back to having life with one another and being able to have fellowship with our family members and to be able to see people that aren't being overwhelmed with illness. And now in late May, they're talking in mid-April, in late May, we can see that, yeah, indeed, as we're starting to come out of lockdowns, now suddenly those scenes are reemerging. And you can find little videos of people coughing on each other, spitting on each other, not wanting to wear a mask or demanding someone else wears a mask. So the scenes are reemerging. But when the coronavirus came, all those other things got submerged. People that aren't financially ruined. We all agree now on what that is. Well, I would say, I don't know, this is my particular opinion or perspective, but I think there actually is way more agreement than we might suppose in terms of what our, like, as he says there, in terms of what we imagine a better future to be and what it looks like and what it's composed of. I think that we might be way, way more aligned on that than anybody imagines. But the problem is we don't really talk about that. It's kind of assumed in certain frames of mode. What we do talk about, everything has become political. And politics is about the means whereby we try to improve things by. It's not at the strategic level, it's more at the tactical level of what do you actually do to get down that path. And I think that's where it's like we've lost the capability to engage the grand narrative. It's all become political. And part of that's because we've lost religious language. Religious language has been lost to. And not, see, I'd nuance this a little bit. It hasn't been lost. It's been pushed aside. Because remember, last few videos I've been doing about religiosity and this religiosity has become the, has become the thing by which different communities afford or take away status. Okay. And so in many ways in terms of the naked public square, religious language has been excluded. Well, what are the unintended consequences of that? Well, now political language comes up. But as Michael is nicely showing, political language and religious language work on different layers and do different things. Again, one of the observations from Sevilla in my conversation with her a while ago and Jordan Peterson when he was meeting with the Ayn Rand folks, he made the observation that, you know, with a lot of when he was working as a clinical psychologist, with a lot of patients, we couldn't get anywhere. We couldn't make progress until we got to the place where we were using religious language. That's really interesting. And it talks about the fact that political and religious language have, languages have different registers. Now this is really key when we think about, let's say, the agenda of the celebrity atheists. Well, their, their assertion is that religious language can be gotten away from completely and ought to be banished. That religious language is a type of language that is no longer useful. It's archaic. It stands in the way. We'll all be better off the sooner we get rid of it. And now, and I think Michael is making a really important point that, in fact, if we're going to work together in a healthy way, religious language is going to have to be a part of it. And I think this is part of the reason why, you know, when I was talking to Jonathan Pujo last week, Jordan Peterson kind of made the IDW work because via him, it's kind of like Thor in that movie, Jordan Peterson sort of made the connection work so that somehow Ben Shapiro and the Weinstein brothers could be on the same page and along the side of the Weinstein brothers, you know, Sam Harris and, and yes, Sam could go on Ben's show, but, but it didn't have Jordan. Jordan was sort of the missing element that, that the kind of chaotic conductor that brought excitement and tension and sparks. And, and so that's why the Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris conversations were really interesting because, you know, and they'd use someone then, then it's kind of Bret Weinstein or, or Douglas Murray became the chaotic conductor because they're all sort of lined up in terms of where they're at in there. But, but Michael's observation about religious language, I think here is, is really vital and crucial and correct. Popular discussion as a, as a, it's all become political and that part of that's because we've lost religious language. Religious language has been lost to popular discussion as a, as a means of, of understanding ourselves and even just having a dialogue conversation. These kind of conversations about what's most meaningful, what's most important, we almost can't have it. So we have these proxy conversations about what should we do that, that have underlying assumptions about, you know, a better future, but aren't we, we, we can't make them explicit anymore for some reason. I think that's part of what Jordan Peterson does so amazingly well is that he, he brings forward into explicit conversation that which was hidden implicitly under all this stuff. Now this implicit explicit, we're, we're, we're starting, I think, again, to get into the long running conversation about the, it's not so much the layers of reality, but the sacramental nature of the physical world. I noted today in a video I was listening to someone said, well, it doesn't matter. Okay, go back to Verbecky's lectures. What is matter? Well, matter is the Greek word for wood. Well, matter is the, matter is the pliable stuff. And now again, Brett Sockel mentions, notice how the definition of the word substance has shifted. Matter is the Plato that we have before us, but there's something behind it. And again, we haven't lost this completely because we'll pull up the word spiritual. What do you mean by that? Well, that's the thing behind it that's moving the Plato. That's the thing behind that that takes the matter of wood and makes it into a chair or a table or a spoon or a child's toy. That's the, that's the, you know, the, the, the formal cause. The, you know, so again, I mean, this is, so what Peterson is doing is, is beginning to, I'm jumping ahead in the video, you know, Peterson is, Peterson is exposing the fact that modernity is running out of steam. And I think Dr. Jim was exactly right when he said, you know, when the celebrity atheists, when the new atheists arose, they arose for a reason. And usually when someone arises like this, it's because they feel their grass being lost. And same thing happens, same dynamic in Christian circles. And, and you might say the rise of the moral majority in the 80s. They, they arose because the, the consensus of the Cold War of the 50s had been undermined in the 60s. And so the rise of the religious right and, and so understanding the new atheists in that context, well, modernity is slipping away and the rise of the IDW, especially, and I mean, if there's one thing that sort of holds them together, again, it's modernity slipping away. And, and if modernity is gone, these are academics noting that, well, well, well, wait a minute, we're losing science. Science was, we all thought science was the bottom layer. It isn't, it's just the matter. And something behind the matter is giving it form and shape. We're, we're, we're losing the matter. We've got to rush in and bulk, bulk this up. And, and so part of what Jordan Peterson played was that. But Peterson was playing a lot more things on the way. And I don't know why. I think part of why it's necessary that it becomes explicit is because that's all we have value for now. If it isn't explicit, we don't have value for it any longer. And that's peak materialism right there. Oh, it's only the explicit is what's relevant. Oh, you'd better throw away that word spiritual even in an amusement park, psychedelic meditation type way that I can be perfectly fine and go on little brain vacations via drugs or meditation. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, that's not. You know, that's like, that's like riding the little, riding the little kitty ride. It's got the, you know, maybe the little play tank so you can go bang, bang, bang with it. No, no, no, that's, that's not what the people who, the people who developed those practices believed they were doing. The implicit stuff is we don't have time for it. We don't. It doesn't. I don't know. It doesn't make an impact anymore. It's it's still there. It's still doing things. We see tanks on the kitty ride, but meditation is for fun. It isn't for the thing which shapes the matter. Still, but it's not. It's nowhere on our hierarchy anymore. Well, I part of part of the reason the implicit stuff is not on the hierarchy is that we're we're so distracted by all of the the enticements of technology and all of the enticements of. This is this is affluenza. Okay, everything's secure. Everything's okay. We've got professionals keeping the water and the lights on and police and health care systems and this this this chaotic anxiety ridden life thing that most human beings had to go through that also afforded them meaning. Well, that's all flattened out now. So now let's just do psychedelics for fun. Well, let's just go to church with the best praise and worship because gosh, I love I love me some church with some praise and worship and and let's get that good looking podcaster Paul the light bringer and and he can play his guitar and wear his skinny jeans and and when he's singing those love songs to Jesus boy, I can just see he really means it and that's more fun than watching Netflix, but they're the same thing. You know what were the enticements of our our physical wealth as a nation and you know all the opportunities that that provided and everything so very little self-reflection very little time alone very little time to ever allow the implicit to bubble up to the surface which this is changing that as well because people are having more time alone and having having to consider more time what it is that they really think about things and there's only so much Netflix you can watch well there's HBO and there's Amazon and there's Hulu and there's there's only so much TV you you can watch if you don't believe me let me tell you about Freddy Freddy all Freddy has is TV no job no girlfriend group home and the reason he calls me sometimes eight times a day and it's got nothing to talk about what's going on give me some I can only watch so much TV Paul and um yeah so that's all very interesting as well well it's okay so he goes on and he says the mismatch between what I desired and what actually occurred constitutes evidence that one or more of my assumptions are invalid but I don't necessarily get the information about which one or at what level now now go to the beginning of Jordan Peterson's conversation with Roger Scruton again that's one of these videos that Peterson did that's really a a touchstone it's a landmark and what they're trying to talk about the transcendent and Peterson makes the point that transcendent is what you bump into when you realize something's wrong okay and and it's very much along the same lines as the the passages from 12 rules and then later from maps of meaning that that Karen is reading here so you know you have this what is and what should be and that plays out on both national level our agreement about what is and our agreement about what should be and how to get from one to the other but it also plays out on an individual level each individual has some idea of what is and what should be and how to get from one to the other and we are sometimes successful in navigating that and sometimes unsuccessful when we are successful it's usually because nothing has come in to change our our perspective or not not no unintended consequences have come along that have caused us to to get off of our path well specifically no consequences occurred that we can't explain within our existing faith yes exactly so see and right there so so a little later I'm going to talk about this Steven Pinker tweet that got so much attention on the internet and then Ross Douthit tweets out yeah but I'd really like them to explain what they're talking about in this 2004 slate interview where they you know they saw a ghost or something happened you know it's exactly like the beginning of CS Lewis's book miracles something something happened that you can't explain within your framework what do you do now if it's a one-off thing and it doesn't seem to matter you sort of put it over into this box of things in your life that's like that unexplainable just push it over there but what if it intrudes even further so when you when this mismatch comes along when you you can't there's some anomaly something comes in place and stumbles you from getting from here to there it gives you some information okay there's a problem here but it doesn't always give you the information about what the problem is and let me just read a little bit more that goes with this because I think this is very important the outcome of such a mismatch is application of other patterns of action and associated expectations associated with gathering of new information through active exploration the further down the hierarchy of assumption that the mismatch occurs the more stressful the occurrence and the more fear is disinhibited and the more motivation there is for denial but also more necessity for exploration and more necessary reprogramming of behavioral assumption and matching sensory expectation in other words if you just stayed at the del coronado in san diego and you there was a you had a you stayed in the right room and those of you can google and look that up you stay in the right room and something happens it's like oh i saw a ghost that was fun or that was scary or that was well i'm not going to stay there again but then i don't know you play christmas carol a relative or your parent comes to you at night and says you know and says something about your life that you can't dismiss what do you do then and well and peterson notes at one hand and then caron's about to give a really tremendous illustration that as a pastor i'd be proud to give such a fine illustration of a an idea like this but you either sort of start taking apart your life to get to find out where you went wrong or you start taking apart your life to find out where that went wrong and that might be a good thing or a bad thing and i thought they'd be i can give you a good example here i'm wearing this knitted scarf okay now megan knit this scarf very complicated requires a lot of thinking a lot of focus and very very careful work because if she were to make a small mistake somewhere the mistake wouldn't show up for rows and rows and rows and rows but when it did show now if you're listening on podcast i was looking at my analytics which i don't often look at and just about as many people listen on not quite probably two-thirds is 70 i'd have to do the math but just about not quite as meant just about as many people listen on podcast as watch on youtube that was interesting to me it would completely undo the whole design so it's a beautiful scarf it's got a it's got an intricate pattern and it's very lovely but it's obvious that if the pattern were disrupted it would take away from its glory and all of a sudden you'd have to look at it and say wait the design is wrong where did i go wrong was it in the previous row or was it 80 rows before and there's no way to know without painstakingly going back through it row by row and going back through the instructions and trying to find where you got off the path well for many many many decades in our nation we've been we've been on many different kinds of wrong paths because we've been seeing all sorts of symptoms of problems whether it's in our health care system or whether it's in our financial system there's all kinds of problems but nobody's ever taken the time to unwind it and go back to try to find out where the problem first began i don't know that it's nobody's taking the time it's just that it's very difficult in a nation to grab the consensus to do that because all the political arguments just say well let's fix this little piece of it or let's fix that little piece of it we'll just take care of the fringes we won't we won't work at trying to find out what the fundamental problem is but this coronavirus comes along and it shows us wait a minute we've got all these problems something is seriously wrong and we don't know where the problem came from so he goes on to say and i think this is just so smart he says well there's two things here one is that a truly unexpected event sequence like covid-19 upsets the implicit assumptions upon which the original particular fantasy was predicated and the consequence of such a violation is the breakdown of expectation and a consequent generation of both fear and hope followed by exploration now this consequence requires three things it requires number one the paralysis of the old model which is the united states and every government on earth has said stop the old model is paralyzed right now the second thing is a reversion of otherwise stably maintained affects to competition and chaos i'm not quite sure what he means there but i do have an idea and the third is the exploration guided reconstruction of order so so we've been called to a gigantic stop everywhere in the world and that's given us time to reverse course and look at where the problems are with competition and chaos within the system and once we've had time to do that then it would be possible to begin to move forward with an exploration guided in other words step by step moving into this future this trying to find our way into the ideal future with exploration guided reconstruction of order so this it's the reversion part that is the like the most dangerous part of all of this because to to know what the correct answer is is almost impossible for any one person to know not right we don't seem to have a lot of respect for that concept that in that in some sense there isn't a right answer and and that whatever it in in getting the right answer is less important than the process you use to update your knowledge if you watch for vicki stuff and you get to the end of 50 hours of awakening from the meaning crisis that idea that michael just laid there john vervecki keeps saying okay you're all looking at the outcomes pay attention to the processing parasitic processing opponent processing all of these processes because you don't you're you're uncertain of the let's say the you're uncertain of the near-term telos so pay attention to the process the process is important so that your you whatever path that is you're taking can be improved over time that's more way more important than getting the right answer now we have this sense of like you get to the right answer and you have 99.9 certainty that you have it and then you go we're in a situation where that's just not where we're being confronted with the fact that's not possible i think it was always always true but we're having a practical manifestation of it yes exactly the limits of our knowledge right now yeah exactly and and so one of the things that's so interesting about this is that i'm gonna i'm gonna talk about lex friedman in a second you know he is the ai guy yeah yeah so he gave this well that's that's interesting too but i'm only going to play this part so so so the process so pay attention to the process okay just a little review of so you have the sacrifice you have the implicit the explicit and the political which is practical it's now ish and the religious which is strategic and it's always ish and and you have time in the knitting of the scarf okay so these are sort of the components here and and michael ends with but you got to pay attention to the process now let's get back to this religious word because if you've been watching my recent videos um did this did this video on eric weinstein and ryan holliday religiosity is the idw's final frontier because religiosity as as robert putnam noted in his book from 2010 religiosity is now in a sense the tell all right and it's the tell for who you're going to size up with now remember where we started here the world is big and there's a small me and so i need jpegs i need stories i need teams i need missions well well religious so so pretty soon we have team religious over here and we have team non-religious irreligious over here and i think what michael exposes is that team irreligious has a problem because there's a certain register that religious language has always functioned within and for that is now gone and and they're trying to get there via politics but politics isn't the right vehicle to get there and so now you need something in place of religion and i want to be careful here because so in terms of so you've got the idw and then you've got the little corner of the internet and in the little corner of the internet is me and jonathan bageaux and civilla king and and christopher mastro prieto and and guy sangstock and and that's our little corner of the internet here and you know a couple of us are sort of sort of idw adjacent or but in the little corner of the internet jonathan bageaux and i are basically the ones who say no you're not going to get you're not going to get away from religion it's you're gonna you're gonna have those those structures are simply too essential and the the entire project of modernity which were an attempt to somehow save these sort of hollowed them out and made them useless but you're you're gonna have to go back and be really religious again and and and jon verveckis counter to that he's got a strong argument argument when when jon says i'm worried about nostalgia because they don't work like they worked and and you know for as much as jonathan bageaux and i sort of say we're skeptical about that claim it's a strong claim and and sort of where i fit in so like i said before you kind of had the winesteins and sam harris well there's really sam harris and the winesteins and then jordan peterson and then ben japiro in terms of that spectrum you've got jonathan bageaux and and jon verveckis and i'm kind of in the middle of those two because i'm protestant and some might say that the protestant reformation caused this but i would also argue the protestant reformation expressed this and the what jon is addressing in that moment is what many of you who listen to me tell me and and again going back to kind of reading the comments of the same conversation on jonathan's channel in my channel obviously more protestants in my world and i've kind of become a bridge person for people say maybe heading to orthodoxy to not totally lose their protestant roots but i'm also kind of a bridge person for people who are christianity curious but but not ready to go there and and they don't believe and and so i'm kind of a transition person there because uh jon or jon vervecki has a point and it's not a point religious people like to to deal with and again i'm i remain skeptical but i feel its power and and part of what makes this little corner of the internet so precious is that we're trying to live in no man's land between the religious and the irreligious and they're shooting back and forth and you know there's always still sort of a line and you can sort of see it between pageau and myself and jon vervecki and some others and some people kind of hop back and forth over the line but religiosity is the line and others will look at jon's project and say oh no he's religious i mean that he's running morning meditation sessions on youtube and and and and so maybe it's christian religiosity and so the whole thing gets complex fast granted that but for those who are the hardcore secularists religiosity has become the patch of burned skin and and i've used this in the past emotional burn victims you can't get certain things can't get it's kryptonite it's they just pull away and the google algorithm uri harari that's going to be our new religion harari says the google algorithm dished up for me a video that seemed totally random and i've i've lived enough with the google algorithm now to notice that when something looks totally random it probably isn't because the google algorithm is not random google is trying to dish me up things that based on who's watching my videos and whose videos i'm liking and subscribing and all of this that according to their patterns paul you might be interested in alice roberts morals without religion oh well that sounds kind of like what i so then i click on it and i start watching it and here's a woman who for the first part of the video what she's basically doing she's a brit she's in the uk what she's basically doing is complaining that all of the choice schools close to home are religious schools and i don't know exactly how the british school system works i'm sure some of you will enlighten me i saw some of this on an australian sitcom that was on netflix that i was watching it was a it was a good sitcom and some of these issues were in that sitcom too again this gets back to the jordan peterson thing once you see it you see it everywhere well is it because it's out there everywhere or is it my salience my my my relevance realization the verveki language that's making me see it and she's she's complaining about the fact that the school she wants to get her kids into are religious but they got all that religion in them and and all the religious people are saying it's a religious school but she's like yeah but it's close to my house and the same things go on in san francisco with the catholic schools that you know they're all they're all woke and and progressive and everything but when it comes to where their kids go to school you're really going to send them this has been a true long time in new york city area you're really going to send them to the public school i'm i'm down at you know it's the limousine liberal thing you know i'm down with the movement and i'll i'll vote for you know i'll vote party line for the dems and even though i really wanted bernie and and and you know but am i really going to send my kid to public school you know the people of color i like in my life all have advanced degrees from the best schools and you know maybe i'll give to the charity where the the other people of color are getting stuff from me but i mean i i've seen this stuff all my life so religiosity so you know come on i and so we're going to pass laws in in the uk to make sure that the religious people can't you know they have to learn evolution and they you know and and i know some people that have grown up in you know the uk systems and and and so as a religious person part of me is like really really well what about the non-religious school but they don't have the they don't have the what isn't there a little part of you in there that somewhere deep inside is your consciousness congress still has a few anglicans back there and so here we are so what is religious and and you know this is this is very much a i mean so when john vervecki talks about a religion that isn't a religion he's got something in mind and and you know even sam harris you know has his app for meditation and so that's not religious no that's not religious so what is well christianity and stuff oh but so so we can have buddhism without yeah i know i know i've seen that and that's sort of makes it cool but and correction and my jonathan peugeot con conversation it was they were hindus who were sacrificing the goat that that's a little easier but then again i've known traditional buddhists traditional buddhists here in the states and robert putnam makes an awfully cogent argument because when i drive down the street and i find the buddhist church it's like buddhist church this stuff is a lot slipperier and more subtle and and and way way harder to wrangle than our jpeg low resolution stories and the management of them really afford so on twitter i'm coming up his name shoot eric eric haynes asks me in a tweet this is what's nice about being low status every now and then when when eric or brett would brett or eric pick up an app mention that i do with them on twitter it's like how can these people with six figure twitter followings read their ads come on i want to slide under the radar pay no attention to the pastor in sacramento just forget it the way it's making comments but they're two hour videos you're a busy person don't listen to the video for pete's sake leave it alone but let me keep let me stay under the radar i like it down here and i had a lot of comments conversation about that that we'll get into a little bit later in this video but you know another must read article for people who've been following matt pole prof um and we'll get to him a little bit later work on the rise of post-modern conservatism intentions within traditionalism would love to hear paul vander clay and ron dard eventually dive into these waters it's a great topic maybe i'll ron's usually up for a conversation maybe i'll shoot him a message and we'll talk about it because ron would be ron would be a good conversation partner for that because i in case you a pattern is developing that i go to different people sort of who i've talked to about different things be partly because their conversation styles and and some people a little more professorial and ron dard's pretty professorial and ron dart knows a lot of things so i kind of go to ron dart and teach me about this and let me poke around in it and and and that's that's kind of the role that ron plays in my cast of characters and my in certain levels of my conversations on my channel so you know there is some thinking behind some of this there really is but there's been this little spat going on since the the covid thing hit and and rusty reno kind of went off on first things and that caused a panic and rod drear and you know there's there's our own ecosystem over there and and they and first things has been an important piece for a lot of people even even even some people oh 10 15 20 years ago in the calvin college camp who who tend to skew more progressive evangelical or now now mainline even uh thinking about some of my old profs at the college not so much at the seminary but you know first things is sort of someone on twitter i won't mention names too much if you want to take credit for it in the comment section go for it said well there's the intellectual dark web and the intellectual light web and what do you mean by that well and i guess i get to be in both um thanks to rebel wisdom and their ordination of me in the video of the pastor of the intellectual dark web but i guess i'm the internet pastor of the intellectual light web but there's more pastors in that light web there's like bishop barron and people made their lists of it it was kind of fun so what's the light web well the dark web are sort of these and i think you know eric concocted this and so i'll give him canonical status in terms of defining that because uh these are and eric postures himself outside the citadel and you know he's kind of the the the left the left side populist not wanting to be elitist and and wanting to be an everyman and that's sort of where eric's at in there and but it's the dark web they're under the surface well what's the light web the light web is really the um people who have institutional credentials and are kind of flying the flag of their institutions i'm a christian reform minister to the degree that the christian reform church always wants to own me for the work i'm doing here some do and some don't bishop barron hey bishop barron you know frontline dude um he's even on thinkspot which isn't really flourishing yet um if it will at all you know and jonathan pageau these are people who are you know will say right at the bat i'm a christian i go to church i'm religious and i think it's important and i'm not going to stop and take away all my status for it go right ahead but i'm here i'm religious i'm not going anywhere first things is a really important place for people that they could have especially for conservatives and now richard john newhouse founded this and for those of you who don't know anything about this history doing a little bit of research on richard john newhouse would be you might find fun he talked about a lot of these things a generation ago he died a while ago um but his his story is not uncomplicated either because of course the iraq war you know flung out people like damon linker and rod reere and and a whole group there but you know before there was an idw or an ilw you know it was richard john newhouse who was lutheran and became roman catholic and interesting interesting guy powerful thinker controversial you know a lot of what we're doing now has been done before and first things was sort of the center of it and to have rusty reno kind of lose his stuff about the covid virus so we're going to get into this whole bunch of whole bunch of people panicking and that's where matt mcmahonous came in via eric haines's tweet to me and i didn't know who matt mechanics was so hit follow because i'll those of you who know me on twitter know i'll follow you just if you have a good tag that's because you know twitter algorithm that's doing their thing i don't think it's quite as good as the google algorithm but twitter algorithms doing its thing and it's kind of fun to see what it surfaces if i follow a sufficient number of people but a professor at um some university co-author of myth and mayhem a leftist critique of jordan peterson and the rise of postmodern oh boy it's back to peterson oh and it's published by zero day books and now i just now a bunch of the burn patches on some of your some of your skins just got triggered and there's gonna be some stuff in the comment section and i like a little rough and tumble sometimes with this kind of thing it's fun i'm from new jersey that's the way we roll so i i'm gonna have to look at this because now randart did mention the book and i didn't know what he was talking about sometimes ron he's talking about stuff and it's like i just nod my head because it's like i'm listening i'm listening i don't know what you're talking about i don't know who this guy is i haven't looked at the book but now suddenly remember again back to the beginning paul why didn't you talk about ravie well it didn't really have any association with him but now oh zero day myth and mayhem jordan peterson these are the anti peterson tribes oh oh oh now we're in jets territory aren't we jets and sharks west side story dated pointing so do i spend another 10 bucks on a kindle book i blow through my book budget pretty fast these days and i got lots of books i haven't really read i just start reading them and then another book and another book and i'm like the squirrel and thing book oh see it's a disease i gotta get them all out of my parents house when my mother dies it's gonna be a problem because it's all paper books oh heavy i can't resist let's check out the teaser this is why i always record with screen capture of sore programs because i can kind of get out of the box and start playing around in some fun places and nine ratings i wonder i wonder i wonder about the ratings let's read them first one doug ryan five stars that's quite a good review really i found i should just uh very you know help me not buy the book i'm not sure if that's what amazon wants uh secondary and some of you are like you you you clicked helpful for a five star review on a book from that tribe yeah i did why because it was a helpful review doesn't mean i'd necessarily agree with it but it was well written and it was it was detailed and but that click is given don't worry about it another five star review from elliot oh diane one star review this is a preliminary review another one star review i've not read the book in its entirety a five star review by sad it's sad the cult got to this so early oh so it's the tribes it's tribal warfare and cool guy one one starred review hard to read each paragraph unrelated to the one before it or the section it's that doesn't sound so good five star review review patience of saints one star review pathetic oh we're we're playing tribal warfare now well let's uh let's jump in oh look jordan peterson is symptom of what by slavoj zizek now i don't know anything about slavoj zizek i did watch his conversation with jordan peterson and i did enjoy it i paid money to watch it never actually got a chance to watch the one from the money i paid i had to watch a bootleg which is funny um but slavoj zizek interesting i haven't written i haven't read anything that he's written so he's good writer so let's read some the art of lying with truth and if you remember my take on slavoj zizek from my video commentary on their conversation zizek is it appears to me to the degree that i can know him the ultimate post-modern he's a chameleon he's an atheist who loves gk chesterton he's a marxist who's really a hegelian does he have a core does he have a center i don't know um turn my watch off because they're chatting on one of my family message groups the wide popularity of jordan peterson is proof that the liberal conservative silent majority finally found its voice his advantages over the previous anti-lgbt plus star milo enopolis are obvious well not enopolis was here's the thing if you say milo enopolis well who will get summoned enopolis was witty fast talking full of jokes and sarcasms and openly gay he much resembled in many features a representative of the culture he was attacking which of course made him interesting peterson is his opposite he combines common sense and the appearance of cold scientific argumentation with a bitter rage perceiving a threat to the liberal basis of our society peterson can get ragey it's part of why some of you really like him his stance is that enough is enough i can't stand it anymore no that's that's that's a peterson the cracks in his advocacy of cold facts against politically correct dogmas are easily to discern and right here i think we have the problem because i don't think gj sees peterson clearly all the way back to my conversation with dr jim why did the new atheists arise because cracks were appearing in modernity because the the the old style materialism that c.s lewis i think pretty thoroughly addressed in miracles is coming apart at the seams and so those who don't want to see it go away just like how many philosophers and christian theologians in the last 200 years rise up to try to save it and well the new atheists i don't think they really contributed much to it but what they mostly did was just kind of be mockers and debunkers and we're going to keep this from happening by social pressure and so now when social pressure arises that is being used to make modernity go away now they're really upset and hence the rise of the idw but peterson's not the cold facts man peterson peterson is about facts but he's not a simple modernist and again carl's gonna not like what i'm about to say right now but he's a post-modern classic liberal why do i say he's a post-modern classic liberal because to some degree we're all post-modernists now none of us are naive because once we've seen derrida and foucault we're no longer virgins we're no longer naive now we're all reconstructed and that's sort of jane ka smith's point and say now you can really know agustin because he did this before or naivete innocence is gone jordan peterson isn't just the cold facts guy no no you're reading him wrong it's not who he is the cracks in his advocacy of cold facts and again talk to ron dart ron will set you straight on this i think ron ron's not a warrior in these battles i mean that's sort of what some of you don't like about ron and ron of course has his location and whereas he stands in church world and it'll make some of you happy it'll make some of you unhappy but your happiness or unhappiness is your own ron is ron but ron will look at this and say no don't dismiss jordan peterson that way that's that's not really who he is it's not it's not really a fair way to address him his big image is that of the political leftist conspiracy after communism failed as an economic system and there was no revolution in the developed west marxist he claims decided to move to the domain of culture and morality marking the beginning of the post modern neo-marxism its goal is to undermine the moral backbone of our societies and thus set in motion the final breakdown of our freedoms but this kind of easy criticism avoids the difficult question how could such a weird theory such um find such a wide echo a more complex approach is needed now that that telling of peterson and some of his claims is a bit more true than just seeing him as a modernist um so well let's get into that a little bit it jacques lacan wrote that even if and this is great writing i can see why jisac has a strong following very gifted here skilled and and that was evident at the that was evident at the um at the conversation with peterson and and as i mentioned in the commentary there peterson and peterson came to a postmodern fight with a revolver made for the first world war but peterson had to adjust and he did you know he came because he was going to talk about the you know he's going to talk about the communist manifesto and all the marxists are saying oh oh oh communist manifesto oh you're back in the industrial period we're long away from that and they are whether they're right or not there's another question but marks marks we put up statues of marks but nobody really takes marks seriously anymore and they're right so jacques lacan wrote that even if a jealous husband claims about his wife that she sleeps around with other men's is all true his jealousy is still a pathological phenomenon now pathological is in italics and the italics should put up a little flag that you are getting pretty postmodernish fudgy on that word on pathological and and we might not we might have a conversation about what that word means because me being although certainly buffered and impacted by both post modernity a rather undeconstructed theist says i think i have an idea what pathological means and um i don't find his jealousy pathological at all so what do you mean by that word well he's a good writer he's going to tell us his jealousy is still a pathological phenomenon the pathological element being the husband's need for jealousy as the only way to retain his dignity and identity even ah now we are really postmodern now we are we have we have we have really come up and the the the jealous husband is sort of floating out there and he's getting his identity and his being from his jealousy now if i were to sit down with that husband as his pastor and um on one hand if it was like week one and he came into my office and said my wife's sleeping with another man and i'm buying a gun i'd say let's hold off on that gun thing okay now let's say he confronted her and she said yeah you're a jerk and your breath is bad i'm leaving you and she leaves him and he's depressed for a few years and then he loses some weight and tries to date again and i say well anyway so so ten years later and i sit down with them and i've been sitting down with them for ten years and said my wife cheated on me well now suddenly i'm more in the pathological definition that zizek is pointing to and i would say you know what uh there's a reason in the church we talk about forgiveness and i know it feels like letting her off the hook but you got to let yourself off the hook and yeah she cheated on you and yeah she left you and yeah she said your breath smelled bad but you know what it's time to let it go so let it go because you're deriving your identity from the wound see so yeah i can be an undeconstructed theist but i can speak postmodern i know what he's talking about so on to peterson along the same lines one could say that even if most of the nazis claims about the jews were true in other words that they exploit germans that they seduce german girls etc which they are not of course their anti-semitism would still be and was a pathological phenomenon because it represented the true reason why nazis needed anti-semitism to sustain their ideological position i also read a lot of history and in a sense what you're doing number one those might be some of the political reasons remember when we talked about michael and political language and religious language those are the political reasons that nazis might have trotted out especially to sort of win support in their broadly christian nation but if you actually read what nazis wrote there were religious reasons no no they were very anti-religion they were social darwinians and and it was against religion and i'd say well now it's time for me to play a little post-modernity with my words and i will say no they're religious nazism was a religion and and it might not be the kind of religiosity that everyone is recognizing as the dividing line through the country but it is the true function of how religious speech functions in the world with us and all those made-up reasons about the jews weren't really the reason that nazi philosophy thought they were the problem read timothy snider he lays it all out there's you know i i can point to other nazi scholars who are christian that i don't want to read any christian book okay don't read a christian book just read timothy snider he's plenty secular for you so what are we saying here about jordan peterson in the nazi vision with their society construed as an organic whole of harmonious collaboration an external intruder is needed to account for division and antagonism see here's the thing about these post-modern tools they're not faithful to anyone and what i said to jonathan peugeot in my conversation with him about like stories of old i'm not terribly worried about that because his tools are in many ways christian tools and at some point the hammer's gonna pull up the hammer's gonna start talking to him kind of like baleham's ass the hammer's gonna start talking to him and say you know what if you if you really deconstruct us if you really deconstruct story you're not gonna have anything real to hit anything real with that's exactly what's going on here because i think in some ways peterson is exactly where the nazis fall into here let's keep reading the same holds for now today the anti-immigrant populace deal with the problem of refugees they approach it in the atmosphere of fear and the incoming struggle against the the islamitization of europe and they get caught in a series of oblivious of obvious absurdities here's the issue it's not merely psychological and it isn't just the refugees if europe and america hadn't been taking in partly probably to offset their you know to offset their lack of reproductive numbers hadn't been taking in so many immigrants just regular old immigrants they probably would be less allergic about the refugees and all you need is for someone to come along and say refugees immigrants build a wall you just just poke at that piece of burned skin and they say ow they say it's the mexicans or it's the africans or it's the polish plumber it's the jews that's political language and as michael said it's operating at a certain level and when you don't have that religious language functioning and you're not taking care of that layer these are the things that you get and what they don't understand about and again some of their critiques i can say all right okay okay but the main critique against peterson is that this is all peterson is that peterson is and now in reading this i understand the complaint peterson is a grifter peterson is just you know he's basically doing what trump did about the wall and mexicans no it's not that's not at all who peterson is peterson is saying no it's the religious language that you post-moderns everything is a bulvarism search bulvarism on wikipedia and c.s lewis everything is a bulvarism it's because it's because you hate mexicans it's because you hate jews and you know when i was doing my videos a number of months ago and i was digging into some of the nazi stuff and working on the tom holland stuff i wanted to know why do the nazis hate jews because i'd hear this kind of thing and i'd say no that's the political layer that's not the religious layer it's got to be something deeper and so and then when tom holland in the in the deling pod interview said well it's because they were arden environmentalists and i said like what they're arden environmentalists nazis oh start to dig start to dig start to dig and it's like oh they had a religion under there wasn't christianity it was a social darwinism and they believed in it they really believed in it like religious people try to really believe in their religion and you know a lot of the political stuff that's just talk peterson knows this dynamic and everybody has a politics everybody has their thing and yeah right here cultural marxism bloody post-modern cultural marxism identity politics moral relativism these are all the a lot of the fuel of jordan peterson status rocket and when he you know went off on c16 whoosh off it went but you're not reading peterson correctly why can't you because like michael said all the talks up here it's all politics and i'm saying no actually there's a religion down there there really is now tomorrow so this is monday and tuesday i'm going to release my conversation with gordon menzies that i did what to you now is last week gordon menzies says he has this book called western fundamentalism he says all these people in the weird developed west have their own presuppositions democracy free markets sexual liberty and gordon has his own take on these things but here's the thing secularists are running around up here using political language and saying oh oh the political language isn't working it isn't working to what it isn't working to unite the country it isn't working to create community it isn't working to to alleviate our meaning crisis it isn't working to to address nihilism it isn't working i can't just use the political language i need a language and so when john vervecky comes along with his awakening from the meaning crisis he spends the first 25 episodes doing philosophy why because religion and philosophy pretty close pretty close not identical philip carry something that i was using a a great courses series very early on so here's philosophy here's religion and they they but you know but why is john vervecky but why is john vervecky talking about all that stuff and then he goes on to the cognitive science i mean that's his project because john vervecky knows inevitable religio religio let's use the latin inevitable religio the politics up here as michael said it's not working it's not working we can't find political harmony because we have a rift on the bottom side and so when people are reactive to religiosity yeah it's a tell it's a tell something else is going on who is jordan b peterson now if you've been watching my later videos we're getting fudgy on the word person is jordan peterson something that is enclosed in skin with a skeleton and you know historic continuity and meat space yeah he's that that's a lot more than that he's he's a rider on a wave and does that wave have personhood is it a principality see why are they so anxious about jordan peterson well it's not be jordan peterson had been saying this stuff for a long time gosh it's all on youtube and i think jordan peterson often at his best was those those youtube videos of him in a classroom full of students and and and going and doing his thing tremendous teacher why are they anxious about him because there's an agency and if you read between the lines of this book against peterson there's an agency people are just skin wrapped meat space beings their anxiety about peterson is that he's far more than a skin wrapped organism and we are too and one of one of the things that you know i really like about talking to dr jim well he's smart and but he's a good conversation partner but he know he works with people and so he's he's a medical doctor oh what do you have to be if you're a medical doctor and you have a practice well it's one thing to say well here's all the numbers in your body and with these probabilities you have this chance of having a heart attack or a stroke or he's a cardiologist so blah blah blah blah blah blah blah say that to a person see it's kind of like a pastor well yeah you know uh buying that gun because your wife said she's leaving you because you have bad breath and you're a jerk and you're not the man she married 30 years ago yeah that's a bad thing is he gonna listen now this is the cause of a lot of comments about where we're gonna go with this is what is paul doing now a lot of people have been asking this over the last couple of years and the truth is well i'll get to that but dr jim had that question for me too and the conversation's recorded you can hear i answered but jim laid down yeah the celebrity atheist arose because defenders arise when something is threatened it's the most obvious observation why did the celebrity atheists arise well they arose because islamic terrorists weren't the i always say this word wrong weren't the caricature caricature i never say i can't remember how to say that word they weren't the caricature of what a religious person is what's a religious person it's someone who just grew up there in the islamic world and it's the only thing they've known and and they grew up and they lived in this bubble they're unreconstructed they're naive they're illiterate they're uneducated who drove planes into buildings these were people from the islamic world who had been westernized they had our education they had passports they had visas they had jobs and they didn't deconstruct from islam they reconstructed into a certain kind of islam now and peterson says this so well we're not transparent to ourselves and and and michael and carron were reading from that we're not transparent to ourselves things happen and we find ourselves disrupted and in over our heads and and and we get to the end of the scarf and we realized oh my goodness the pattern is messed up but i have hours of work in that thing and to unravel it would take me all day so i don't want to do that i'm just you know what throw it away you can't do that with your life this is part of the reason peterson's into transformations watches conversation at liberty university with the chaplain there he's very interested in transformations because in a sense transformations come and we unravel our life and we start to try to reconstruct it and put it back together well the celebrity atheist rose because modernity was slipping away and the idw arose because you know the a whole bunch of atheists start to get religion and when the woke stuff began arising i as a religious person watching said oh my goodness i know that it's religion no it's not religion okay we won't use the word but there's the there's the register of language up here and the register of language down here and jordan peterson came in and started talking on this register in a way that people up here could listen to and a whole bunch of people said tell me more or shut the hell up that's why he was powerful and it's not going away so i talked to alistair roberts and that's a while ago i should talk to alistair again and i was a little anxious what you know i was jordan peterson's i'm a pastor i work with people i'm watching the dude he's headed to a train wreck you don't you don't you don't work like this you don't take that status rocket ride you don't have something like this happen to you where suddenly you're the most important intellectual of your age and so the rest of the new york times is going to be shooting at you you don't do this and it comes without consequences what if peterson disappears and he did it alistair said the wave he's riding that ain't going away the celebrity atheists they feel it come and sam harris pay no attention to the religious here do meditation here try psychedelics you can have all the religiosity stuff and none of the belief uh belief is only one quarter of verveckis four p's you're not going to get rid of it but it's not going anywhere remember the rules there's no human agency above human beings there's no intentionality apart from human beings there are no miracles there's the dogma you against dogma you're gonna have to be against those two you want to have an open mind this wave that jordan peterson is riding kind of has attributes of personhood is it a person not not like me but sort of so what is a person so after i did the thing on conspiracy thinking it was like holy cow that conversation really changed me i i and their comments the comments were i know some of the comments i knew were kind of predictable but i started thinking about it and it's like here's the thing about being open and trying to be honest you learn stuff and you know i'm not going to be able to do that because i'm not going to be able to do it so you're trying to be honest you learn stuff and learning stuff changes you and so if you have an audience they're going to try to colonize you and you're if your audience is small enough you don't have all the buffers around like you have to have if you have well i thought the winesteins needed it but apparently they don't that's some crazy stuff that they read their twitter that they read some of their twitter at you know sam harris doesn't told joe rogan don't do it joe rogan says he doesn't do it the winesteins do it's like but then steven pinker on twitter oh steven oh steven belief in an afterlife is a malignant delusion since it devalues actual lives and discards the action that would make them longer safer and happier really you're pulling that out things must indeed be desperate because the washington post is spooning out conspiracy theories what's really behind the republicans wanting a swift reopen it's a conspiracy yeah overactive agency detector perhaps see it scales all the way up to purposive creation of the world that's where it went with jonathan and i but yet eric winesteins great quote you might have a hard time finding it but i heard him say it and it's a great quote because i think it perfectly articulates that side of the debate and what makes theism and such really scary for people it's better if there is no god because if there is a god you have to worry about what's on his mind and if we're in a simulation maybe i'm just one of those little critters on on on age of empires running around but this christian god this christian god number two says oh be careful little eyes what you see oh be careful little ears what you hear for the father of above is looking down in love but you let grandpa die and you made me bald so this whole week i've had lots of people saying to me and why this week i don't know is it because we've gotten to a certain point in the pandemic and we're all catching our breath and i'm making more videos than ever and and and and so what really are you doing paul i don't know i'm barely a person i'm part of a body where did these this language came from the body of christ what on earth does that mean the apostle paul saying you're in christ where did these ideas come from why are they so all over the place why is jonathan peugeot why does he say in the middle of our video worship is relevance realization and i thought holy cow it really is and so we had this conversation on the discord this morning i woke up this morning am i going to make a video for monday i don't know what to make but something will come up and i'm running a little late so i have to do my rough draft but which of course came out on saturday and i'm monkeying with your sense of time but i'm sort of right brained here and i'm just spitting stuff out and it's sort of on the line it's you know jeff quacken bush wanted me to kind of do what verveke did i don't know if that's in me and it's not quite how i'm using youtube as i said to dr jim i'm using youtube as kind of my thinking community this one brain is a node in the network and there's a network in the comments section and there's a network on twitter and there's a network on i don't like the facebook network very much there's a network on facebook and there's a network in the discord and there's a network at the meetup and there's an and the network sometimes sends me emails and the network and i'm thinking and you're thinking and i'm being colonized by you and you're being colonized by me and together it's kind of like a person that's kind of how madness and mayhem of jordan peterson he's not just jordan he's a node in the network of course there's a real node node in the network don't think i've forgotten about you i'm watching westworld node in the network long time ago said you should watch westworld they're dealing with the stuff you're talking about i there are reasons i didn't have hbo and even though i did have it i didn't put it on the tv and then during the pandemic all right i'm gonna break down i wanted to watch that mcdonald's thing and it was the nose and the camel now i'm watching westworld and it's like oh yeah those yeah we're talking about what is a person how do i know that i'm real what do i mean by real persons all the way up so what am i doing i'm a node in the network too and i'm talking to you and even though i have a consciousness congress in here together we sort of make a consciousness congress and those those those crazy fellas out there at rebel wisdom you know they want to talk about their distributed consciousness and and and christians we talk about the body of christ and well how does this relate to the body of christ well we're some of us are in the intellectual light web so we say i'm a part of the body of christ where are those skin boundaries one of the things i talked about with jonathan peugeot is that all of these boundaries of the denominations that even 60 years ago were very important you can see that in the john f kennedy election has changed and and so it's very fluid it's all over the place are you a christian do you believe in god how does this stuff work we don't know but what i can say is inevitable religio you know your practices will create a religion you will be working from presuppositions you can't act in the world without them peterson is right now whether you agree with his politics or not these are very complex structures and they're very diverse but i'm listening to you and you're listening to me and we're working things through and we're now in the discord server they're like everybody wants to make me more famous and i think it's because they want to talk to their friends about these ideas and they haven't watched a thousand hours of vander clay and so we need a pocket vander clay and i said to jonathan i said well there's a clip channel i won't make clips of me because i don't know what's important i don't know what's colonizable i just know what's me and i'm only a node and so if you wanna if you wanna use me to colonize your friends and family you're gonna have to put in some work too you're gonna maybe make a clip channel or maybe start a blog or maybe go on the discord and find some partners to work on a project and people are like well will you i'll bless it i i told the discord i think key to the jordan peterson wave was were the clip channels and i know you know there were peterson had some consternation sometimes about that but you know adam friended he ran a clip channel and one of the more successful ones and then youtube demonetized his clip channel and i think that actually hurt peterson because it's one thing if you're colonizing people and they're they're as fans they're kind of promoting your stuff it's another thing if they're even making money from it because there's even more motivation and on and on and on and on and on it goes and the protestant reformation went because martin luther didn't get money from the books he write but the printer next door is like give me more martin they're eating it up and and then look at the look at the wood prints that happened during the reformation and the pamphlets and martin luther writes his 95 theses in latin and puts it on the wittenberg door because he's going to have an academic conversation and the students say let's translate it into german let's go down to the printer let's make some pamphlets and whoosh the network went but if there's one thing that can rival porn on the internet it's religion why it's up here is politics down here is religion and as jordan said people get really upset when you start poking them in the axioms they do so what am i really doing i'm doing what i told you all i was doing when i started this thing and i said it can end at any time i'll shut down the i don't live off the patreon i'll shut it down at any time and see that's the thing it's like ah we're gonna send you so much money you will have to live off the patreon i'm not worried i'm thinking out loud and i said now i'm a pastor what does that mean it means what do i want to leave behind me i want to leave a network of nodes built into a community with some institutional things one of my early issues with what jordan was doing was okay target the individual here's the thing there's target the community target the individual target the target the community target the individual target the institution they all need targeting but they all need targeting and so you're going to have to think institutionally and that's sort of where eric comes in because eric does think more institutionally structurally but he's really still talking politics and it's like eric no it's religion so if you want to send eric a clip right there eric you have to understand politics and religion you have to understand how they come across you're gonna have to deal with your religion allergy i know since the 1950s religion got a little overheated the u.s church and state got a little bit tight the atheists have a point true but inevitable religio it's all there and if you need to talk to someone with a phd in credentials talk to john vervecky he'll tell you about it and he's a non-theist not an atheist a non-theist and eric is so some of you who've been kind of going between the discords not as inflamed by religion and he goes to synagogue and so he's got a higher tolerance for it but he's not doing what peterson did because peterson showed the structure and basically said if you're not talking on this level you're not talking to the elephant and the rider will chatter at you all day long but it's actions that the elephant understands and pays attention to and it's at the it's at the elephant level that the herd actually works so what am i doing trying to be an elephant whisperer trying to be a pastor in the intellectual dark web and the intellectual light web i'm encouraging people to do what you think you should do if you need two or three people together to start a wiki or or start a little channel and that's already happened look at the randos united look at karen's channel that i just played look at mary's channel in fact i don't have enough time to watch all of their great content and but every time i do i always walk away being i'm going to use religious language edified because they're doing great work same with civilla same with john and just listen to christopher christopher mastro pietro talk it's like oh might be a preacher someday christopher i'm warning you i'm warning you it's where this goes it's where this goes because the thing is you start larping and the more you do it the more you want it to be true and the more you live inside of it and the more you say i don't care about my doubts i'm gonna believe i'm gonna join the church i'm gonna take communion i'm gonna follow the program because thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven and i want to see it now but i'm willing to wait because i trust i trust i trust god that's where this goes rat rules and destiny were both right peterson put all the steps up to it everybody boop boop boop boop boop right in so what am i doing i'm not doing anything i haven't said i'm doing there's no conspiracy there's not even a plan i'm just doing what the next thing seems right to do and john vandank comes along and says let's do a meetup tour and we do half of a meetup tour until covid and joey comes along and says let's do a discord so other people can enjoy the meetups we're doing here and we do a discord and the randos come along and say let's do a youtube channel and and randos youtube channel is different from karen's youtube channel is different from mary's youtube channel and i'm i please forgive me if i have not mentioned your youtube channel because there's more of you out there and and what i all the advice i always give people is if it's worthwhile enough for you to do from what you get out of it you'll keep doing it and that was my condition with this channel and if i'm getting enough out of doing these videos i'll keep doing them and i have and talk to jonathan pachaud is like are you still doing them every day six days you shall make videos the seventh day you shall rest or at least put the video on your church channel so yeah not every week you get six seven but lately there's been a lot and i understand and i have to figure out how to get my videos on spotify because i didn't put them upload them all into mp3 but i'll figure out because it's fun and i like it and it's meaningful and it's good and i have great pleasure when i lurk in the discord and i watch people text and i watch friends i watch people make friends and i watch them care for each other and some of you will say well if church was like that i'd join church is sometimes like that sometimes we need to have a fight in church sometimes we need to have an argument sometimes we don't get along well this marriage and families like that too but so what am i really after i'm after the same thing i'm always after my kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven and i'll be after that until the day i die lord willing but the thing is you might not be religious but i think that's what you're chasing too because you might not be real clear on what is good or what is true or what is beautiful but you want all three and you don't want to have to pick between them so this person's all the way up baby Peugeot is right i agree with him now if i talk to Jacob again Jacob and Sam have problems with the trinity okay we'll keep talking but you're not going to get away from the religious layer of language and if Sevilla and Jordan Peterson are right you're not going to be whole you're not going to become fully human Nathan Jacob's language until one way or another you figure out that layer of you as a node in the network