https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1m-WS3thIZQ

 So, let's get into the actual meat of the conversation. They begin with some nice little tea, nice little, they begin with some catching up with each other on a personal level talking about the flooded Peugeot's home and no sound. Okay, let's get into, let's get into the commentary. No, I appreciate that a lot and I'm back to some degree, I would say, I still think I'm running at about 5%. So, yeah, and that's partly why I was concerned about talking to you today. We generally discuss things that are relatively deep and it's still difficult for me to go deeply into anything that's happening to me because it's so unbelievably awful. And it's been hard on my faith, I would say, you know, and my book is coming out, hey, my new book. It's an interesting hard on his faith, love to know. As a pastor, I'd say, what do you mean by that? Book, I should show it to you. I just got problems yesterday. That's awesome. It's unbelievable that you wrote that during all of this. I can't believe it. That is true. When you say you're running at 5%, I think that your 5% is pretty close to the 100% of most people. Yeah, well, I don't know if that's true or not, but it's 5% for me. And getting the book was actually somewhat of a traumatic experience, I would say, because it reminded me like it's a concrete reminder of everything that's happened over the last three or four years. And it all things that I found very difficult to process both on the social front and on the, let's say, biological health front. Hmm. So I was reading, oddly enough, I got a book sent to me by Bishop Barron, the first draft of a book, and it's written by a couple of professors. It's called Jordan Peterson, God and Christianity, The Search for a Meaningful Life. Wow, that's interesting. By Dr. Christopher Caxor and Dr. Matthew Pratchasek, Word on Fire Institute. It's a Catholic response to my biblical series. It's about three years later, but Roman Catholic Church is a very long perspective organization. Hopefully they won't be too upset about me talking about it today, but I won't talk about it that much. The book itself, it was rather a shock to me. They're at Loyola Marymount University, and it was kind of a shock to me to see them talking about my, I mean, these are religious scholars talking about my biblical series. That shouldn't be a shock. Although I can understand, it shouldn't be a shock, it is. But I think people are just, people don't, a lot of people didn't understand, and I could see it in my reaction with the... I'd have to say, looking back a couple of years, boy, there's a host of things I didn't understand. And again, if you didn't hear the disclaimer in the first part of the videos, these videos are thinking out loud for me. That's what they are. I think people were reacting to your biblical studies, the biblical interpretation. People didn't understand how is it that he, we can barely get a hundred people in our church, and Jordan has a million people listening to him kind of struggle to get through these passages and do it in a very improvisational kind of existential way. I like the cat. And to me, it's funny because I mean, I think I have a deep affection for the way that you're approaching it, and obviously we connect together in the way we think. And so to me, it was like, this is what you guys should have been doing for a while, is trying to understand how it is that this stuff is talking about reality. And Pichot's point is right. And it's a point that I've made again and again and again. Pichot's point is right. And it's a point that I've made again and again and again. I guess it's a point of it's easy to get lost and stay lost, and it's easy for traditions to get lost and stay lost, and you stay within your tradition. And again, it's just a phenomenal thing what has happened. And I still don't think the church has paid enough attention to it. Now we'll see what happens down the road. We'll see. And not just a bunch of arbitrary things that you need to believe or that you need to kind of attend to. Because these stories, they really are telling us about the structure of being. And so I think that that's the way that you approach it. It's important to note that when Pichot says the structure of being here, it's fairly Heideggerian. And Heidegger is not in terms of theology and philosophy. Heidegger is very, very recent. And I mean that in terms of that language. And part of what we're wrestling with is that as we sort of continue to go down the road, language continues to evolve for important reasons. And yeah. I coached it, and that's why people are resonating to what you're saying, because they're like, finally, someone can help us make sense of these stories that we're somehow strangely attracted to or frustrated by or disgusted by or whatever it is. But there's this push and pull with these stories. And so I think that I've seen a lot of Christians listen to your biblical talks. And of course, sometimes you say things and they're like, okay, that's way off the rails. Then other times you say things and they can't believe the insight that you're able to to pierce. And so I'm not not all surprised that Catholic scholars would kind of look at what you were doing. And we all hope that you're going to do more of that for sure. Yes. Well, I would like to. I'm thinking about trying to attempt a book on Exodus and lecture to lectures as well. A book. I got a whole row of Exodus books up there. This is going to be interesting. Although I wouldn't say that I'm in any shape to do that yet. But it's a dream, let's say. I mean, I'm pretty much completely non-functional for the first three or four hours of the day. This part is quite. Wow. This is. I know a lot of people who have chronic pain and pain is a weird thing. It's not just. Pain is a strange thing. And in fact, if you want to get a look into the mystery of what we are, just look at pain. Because some people can have no physical pain, but they're completely debilitated by depression or anxiety. These are forms of psychological pain. Well, why would psychological pain so utterly disable us? But yeah, what Jordan sort of lays out his picture here. And if you look at Tammy's had an interview and then also I haven't watched the talk that she did with her daughter, although I was deeply charmed by it. I mean, who can't be charmed by a mother daughter conversation like that? It's just so beautiful. But you get the picture that Tammy's doing okay and has been restored to a degree of normalcy in her life. But Jordan, it's an uphill battle. Get up and I can barely stand up and I go have a sauna for an hour and often sleep during that period of time. And then at the same time I cook breakfast, I use an air cooker and then I go walk for anywhere between seven and 10 miles. And even though I can, by the time I get out of the house, I'm dizzy as can be and it's difficult to stand up. But after about a mile or two, I get my legs under me to some degree. Just get the picture of this. Oh my goodness. Just really hard. And then by two o'clock, I'm kind of functional and although extremely anxious. And then I'm able to do a little bit of work and often to sit down at four o'clock. My mind seems sharp enough, although my memory isn't good. I can't bring things to mind like I used to, which is quite distressing. And I have very little emotional resilience and I'm worried for that reason about the release of this book. You know, the guy just works. And you know, he's right to be worried about the release of this book because what we've already seen is Jordan is just a magnet for contention. I mean, I just did a Times interview, London Times interview that was really difficult. Yeah, we followed that. I'd say it's that frustrating. I mean, it's funny because, you know, again, it was like the same stories are playing out again. This person goes after you and then it just turns against that person and it's just she's exposed for the fraud that she was being in during that interview. And so, you know, I think in the end, it's so strange that it keeps happening. You know, again, I get back to what one person in our local meetup said. Jordan just keeps needing to get into fights. Why would he want that? Well, he obviously doesn't want that, but it's this dynamic. And actually, this person's brother just Sunday, we were talking about it in the parking lot. And, you know, he said it's sort of the dynamic of truth. It's sort of the prologue of John that you hate the truth and so you buck up against it, but the truth endures. That's just what truth is. But over and over again, this person goes after you and then it just turns against that person. And it's just she's exposed for the fraud that she was being in during that interview. And so, you know, I think in the end, it's so strange that it keeps happening over and over. I mean, I really decided not to do mainstream interviews now for a good while because I've agreed. Don't talk to mainstream interviews because it's it seems to me that I've gone to the well of public sympathy, so to speak, enough times and that if this happens to me two or three more times, let's say people are going to rightly say, you know, how many times does it take for Peterson to learn? But again, I mean, this kind of self-critique and So I don't want that to happen. I mean, I've been, you know, I feel an obligation to my publishers, obviously, to talk about the book. Although that interview had virtually nothing to do with the book. We hoped that I would be able to discuss my health issues with someone who would And I just saw that something just dropped on Dave Rubin. So he did that, obviously, with Dave Rubin. Part of the problem here is that there's no right way to do anything. And yeah, treat them squarely and then I could ignore them from then on in. But that isn't what happened. Well, it's been it's a sign of the politicized discourse. It's a sign of the breakdown that we're going through that we see this capacity to have so entrenched aside that Now Jonathan's choice of words breakdown, I think it's helpful. And the relationship between politics is now religion is always Increasing politicization is, I think, a sign of the crumbling of the substructures beneath politics that allow politics to be peaceful. And, you know, Peugeot has been sort of a dark prophet in this. And, you know, I fear he's right. People are can't doesn't doesn't matter what they do. It doesn't matter what they say. They don't feel like they're responsible because in a way you're the enemy. And, you know, and it's not just you. It's other other it's between different groups. But if you're the enemy, then everything is justified. And so, well, I think a huge part of this is driven by the desire to have an enemy. Yeah. And I think that's yeah, that's a great point. You need an enemy because why isn't this this gets into what I talked about a little bit. And when I was talking about the tweet, this gets into well, why isn't the world better? Well, it must be someone's fault. Well, whose fault is it? Well, and then you go around and you look for an enemy. And generally speaking, seeking you shall find for good or for bad with a whole lot of things. And so people need an enemy. They want an enemy because the if you have an enemy, then you're not to blame. Now, part of the video I was thinking about making today was just reflecting on the sermon I preached in the beginning of Luke 13, where, you know, Jesus is on his way down to Jerusalem. And what people really want from Jesus when he gets to Jerusalem is to attack the Romans and to overthrow the their puppet regime in Jerusalem and to begin a great campaign of retaking the nation of making Israel great again. And Jesus won't do it. And so some people burst in and they they tell a story about pilots spilling the blood of some Galileans while they were while they were conducting their sacrifice. And if you read biblical commentators on this, there's a lot of question as to whether or not this is fake news. Now, the fact that I have a language to appropriate that and you all can understand it just by saying fake news. Well, and then, of course, I read Kenneth Bailey's, you can look at the rough draft, sermon changed maybe 70% between the rough draft and Sunday this week. The sermon is up on the church website or not on the church website, but the church YouTube page. I really have to catch up on the website. But the they wanted to they really wanted to corner Jesus into being their hero. And he would not be cornered. And this is part of the reason everyone could agree on his death. Otherwise, those who were hoping for a restoration of of Judean nationalism in the first century would have, you know, would it would have protected him. But they at that point had given up on him. And I think in many ways, my scenario, at least everybody's got their ideas about why Judas did what he did. My scenario was that Judas finally gave up on him and he could see that he could make some money. And so he sold him out. But then he had second thoughts. You know, there's it's it's very difficult to feel. It's an easy route to self-righteousness to have an enemy. And again, if you look at the sermon, that's that's what Kenneth Bailey says. Kenneth Bailey lived in the 70s during the Lebanese Civil War. And he watched all of these dynamics and he wrote about them in his commentary on Luke's parables. Exactly. And it's a great place to put all evil. Yeah. And because you attract so much attention, you're an easy you're definitely an easy target. Well, that's the theory. It seems not to turn out that way. Yeah. But it's also was that. Well, it seems not turn out that way because Jordan keeps winning. Timing, you know, the way when you kind of came up in the public sphere, there was a massive shift happening in culture. And I think that's one of the things you could feel. And that was happening around us. And to some extent, you know, Donald Trump had something to do with that as well, in the sense that it was this malaise that was there and this kind of is jostling in this this. And this is what led to all that kind of discourse. And so I think that you were identified, you became identified almost mythologically, I guess, as as a character. And and people, you know, have. And I think that's an outstanding observation by Jonathan that he becomes a character. And again, I've talked a lot about at least I did in the question and answer Friday mornings. I do a question and answer Friday morning, specific time. The bridge is meaning discord. And we talk about stuff. But, you know, we project onto the world. And Peterson talked about this a lot with his Roger Scrutin conversation, which I thought was an excellent conversation. It's one of it's one of his best where where we see, as Peterson said, sort of these low resolution cartoons. And that's the projection that we're doing. And so now now many. OK, why hasn't why hasn't utopia emerged? Well, it's because of the enemy. Well, who is the enemy? And the enemy may be people on the right or the enemy may be people on the left. But you have to you you create characters in your narrative. And that's that's how we participate. That's how we become personally involved. I treat you that way. And they act with you that way in many of discourse. And so does and to some extent, you know, Donald Trump had something to do with that as well in the sense that it was this malaise that was there and this kind of this jostling in this this. And this is what led to all that kind of discourse. And so I think that you were identified, you became identified almost mythologically, I guess, as as a character. And and people, you know, have treat you that way. And they act with you that way in many respects. Yes, it becomes very difficult to to understand. It's become very difficult for me to understand what character I am. This is one of the more interesting parts of this, what character I am, because we know who we are by the people around us. I mean, we're always doing this orientation with others. And of course, this is part of the reason I think Jordan approaches his work life now sort of as Peterson Family, Inc., because you have to keep people before the before the disorientation. And so Peugeot is on that list. Peugeot was a friend that he knew before this wave. And so he can trust Peugeot because he knows Peugeot isn't to serve Peterson for for Peugeot's own interests. And so there's a degree of trust there. And you have that with people early on. So but Jordan has to figure out who he is based on all of the other people around him. You know, you know, have treat you that way. And they act with you that way in many respects. Yes, it becomes very difficult to to understand. It's become very difficult for me to understand what character I am. You know, so much has changed in my life over the last five years. I've been on leave from the university, so that's very destabilizing. I don't have my clinical practice anymore. And so I was, you know, seeing 20 people a week. So that's a huge transformation in my life. My house has been completely renovated. It was renovated while my wife was ill. And so we didn't. Well, the renovation went on in our absence. And so I'm a foreigner in my own house, which is which is although I'm starting to become accustomed to it. And there's some things I like about the new house, but I don't feel at home in it, I wouldn't say. And I've only been here for two months in the last three years because I was on the road. And then, well, all this and so that and everything that's happened has been very disruptive for my family. And of course, Tammy got so unbelievably sick and with something. And, you know, both of his children in this time span have gotten married and have children of their own. Again, you think about I don't, you know, despite the fact of his status, Raqqa and his wealth, I don't wish what happened to Jordan on anyone. It's just it's just chaos. And it was supposed to be fatal and recovered more or less miraculously. And then I've been so unbelievably ill or still am. And I have just I just don't know where to put any of this. Yeah, I can't think about the past at all, because so much of it is incomprehensible, especially over the last five years. I can't think about the present because I'm in so much pain. And I can't think about the future because I don't know what I'm going to do. And I have no idea how long this pain is going to last. It's been I've been in pain, really severe pain for two years now. And yeah, and that's. That's astounding. It's a strange thing, because in this book, one of the chapters, the last chapter is called Be Grateful in Spite of Your Suffering. I think he's talking about Beyond Order. You know, and I went every through every sentence in that chapter, a very large. That makes me nervous for the book. Which number of times, because much of the time while I was rewriting it, particularly, I was in a lot of pain and like it's. I'm very interested to see how this book reads as a book. Now, I assume he had he never talks about his editor. I assume, you know, a major publishing house is going to demand that he have an editor. And the relationship between the author and the editor is always an interesting one, because the editor sort of takes the book out of the author's hands to a degree. And, you know, it's a subtle interplay. And if it, you know, I doubt Jordan had an edit. I don't know if Jordan had an editor for Maps of Meaning. But we'll you know, this is going to impact this book, whatever he writes is going to sell. I mean, that's what that's what Penguin Publishing certainly knows, a la McLean's thing that I thought that I thought I'd be making a video about that. It's it's it's a pain level that's hard to fathom in some sense, because I would say every single day I have now is worse than any day I ever had in my life before. Every single day I have now is worse, you know, than any single day I had in my life before now. Or I got ill. So and then I know very well that adding bitterness to your malaise is a very bad idea. You know, it doesn't help. But that that I can certainly see the attraction in that I feel like shaking my fist at the sky and complaining bitterly. And but it doesn't help. But but there doesn't seem to be any relief either. And so that's it's so it's so. And, you know, I really appreciate what he said about bitterness, both in the recording that he released with the Times and what he says here, because the instinctive thing is to shake your fist at the sky. And it doesn't help like you want it to. And I just again read the book of Job. Oh, perverse. It's shaken my faith, I suppose. It's the second time he says that. I I'm in this perverse position where my work has in principle helped so many people. And yet I don't seem to be able to dig myself out of my current circumstances. Physician, heal yourself. That's, you know, I know a lot of pastors. I know some individuals with. And again, this is going to lose some of you, but I can't help that. I know some individuals that have astounding gifts of. Of healing miraculous healing. And prayer, which means that when they pray. There's power there and things happen. But I've also noticed that. Many times in their lives. They can heal others. They can't heal themselves. It's part of that dynamic. C.S. Lewis is an interesting case, because with Joy Davidman. He prayed for her and I've seen this with others, too. Her pain transferred onto him and he bore her pain for her for a while. Because she was fighting cancer, the four did the two of them. A real respite of joy. And so there's a there's a. There's an interesting substitutionary quality. Perhaps going on with Jordan and his audience. That's, you know, I think that's a very interesting. Well, or even to make sense of them. Yeah. I think that I think that the role that you've. You played is a is a kind of a transition role. And that transition manifested in the way that you played. And I think that's a very interesting. I think that's a very interesting. Role and that transition manifests itself to you as a. As a. Trying to have your feet on two sides of rifting of an eye to islands that are floating away from each other. Now, again, if you listen to Peugeot, talk to rationality rules and others. We're always using these spatial metaphors. And I think, again, I think Peugeot, he's an artist. He deals in physicality more than I do as a pastor. You know, I'm a gospel word, word gardener of the age to come. But but Peugeot deals in matter more than I do. And I think I think what Peugeot said is that is there and modernity, you know, modernity is receding. Now I get, you know, comments on Twitter and in the comments section on this. And I fully understand that modernity is a continent. OK. And and aspects recede while others aspects endure. You see this in Christianity. The Orthodox are still around. And then the Roman Catholic, you know, the Latin and then the medieval. And then the Protestant. I mean, there's layers here like sedimentation. And so the layers don't necessarily go away. They just they get subsumed. I mean, that's that's part of what happens in here. But I think Peugeot is right. And, you know, on the tweak on the tweet of the. Of the let's see. My channel. Hi, this is Paul. Yeah. And on this on the video that I made on the tweet, you know, I think it is very important. I wouldn't be spending all this time doing it. I wouldn't have devoted so much of my time to it if I didn't believe that what's happening with Jordan and Jonathan and others is, in fact, the cutting edge of one area of evolution in the culture and the church right now. I think I think Peugeot is right. And you you're trying to hold on. You're trying to kind of help people focus on the middle and help people avoid radicalization and avoid falling into camps in a manner that will lead to God knows what. Well, look, you hear the video dropped. Whoo, whoo. We can do commentary with video now. Wow. Rifting of an eye to islands that are floating away from each other. I thought that I thought recently the person who nailed the dynamic here that Peugeot talks about the two different islands moving away from each other's was was rationality rules in this video right here. I listened to YouTube videos, and in this specific case, I listened to Destiny. And interestingly, he essentially voiced the criticism of Jordan Jesus smuggling, but in reference to politics. The problem with what Jordan Peterson does is Jordan Peterson makes a lot of descriptive claims, but he never makes any normative claims. So Jordan Peterson will say things like, women are not as happy today as they used to be. Women and men don't get along in the office. Men tend to be better at this thing. It's a little ironic for the rationality science camp to have a problem with descriptive claims, and that Peterson keeps very being very careful with his language, keeps to his descriptive claims. It doesn't keep sinking down into normative claims when they're really upset with the fact that, well, normative claims, but others are jumping to the normative claims conclusion, which is exactly their point right here. And then that's all he ever says. He never goes. He never takes a step further to make a prescriptive claim to say, like, what should we do about something? And the problem is a lot of people will take the things that he says, and then they like jump to very bad places. Kind of obviously, it's where you would expect someone to go based on what he said. But very bad places, of course, own your own value judgment. But then he never takes responsibility for any of the kind of normative leaps people make off of his descriptive ones. And that's kind of the why should he take responsibility for the other, the normative leaps other people make off of his descriptive ones? That's like saying science should take responsibility for what people do with the science. And again, if you're in sort of this world of objects frame, how can you blame science? It just is. It's not an agent by virtue of covering one eye. So annoying thing with dealing with Jordan Peterson. And here, destiny is, as he often is, bang on the money. Jordan doesn't necessarily smuggle bad ideas himself, but he facilitates an environment that makes it incredibly easy for others to do so. He offers the facts that let other people jump to the conclusions that these people don't like. He doesn't say that women should fulfil the role of looking after children, but he does clear the path for those who do. Given this, the question is… Which again, the irony is that, well, we're all about facts. Well, here's the facts. Women are not necessarily fulfilled by their career. This shouldn't come to a surprise to many men, because many men I know aren't terribly fulfilled by their careers either. Careers may not be terribly fulfilling. Don't let anybody know. Then we'll stop keeping their nose to the grindstone with all of the invisible chains that we have for them. How responsible is Jordan for the damage done by his rhetoric? How much responsibility is on the cross on his back? Truth be told, I don't know. I'd like to know your thoughts. So you can let me… And, you know, in a sense, it's the Charles Murray thing too. You know, Charles Murray keeps asking inconvenient questions. But if you're really down for science, the whole point of science is inconvenient questions. Again, this has sort of become a go-to video for understanding exactly how Jordan is playing here. And so now here, Jonathan says, part of your… And I think Peugeot is exactly right here. Part of your tension right here is because you've got to let go of one of the sides. But part of the function that Jordan is playing is that he's being a bridge for people to go over, which is exactly the critique that he's getting from rationality rules and destiny. Every now and then with my new process, I… Just making my video, commenting on, and I didn't hit record. And just 20 minutes of commentary I didn't get. So sorry, that's not a first draft on this. It'll be a little bit of a second draft when we start talking about Jordan Peterson and the conscience and part of why I never preach the same sermon twice as I get bored hearing myself say the same thing over and over again. And so I'm not exactly sure what I'm going to be giving you. It is really a sad moment when I realize I just made 20 minutes of video without recording it. So I just took a little break, got up, walked around, read the comments from the little beginning of this video that I placed. So now you'll get second thoughts, not exactly the first thoughts. So again, Peugeot… See, now I don't exactly know what I said before. So pardon me if I repeat. Peugeot is rightly noting, and Peugeot has noted this more than just about anybody else, that we are in a major transition point. And modernity is going away. And Peterson is a transitional figure. And as Destiny and Rationality Rules noted, Peterson is sort of laying down and everyone is walking on his back over the bridge. And as the lands get further and further away, Peterson's going to get stretched and stretched and stretched, and people are going to keep walking on his back. That's sort of the image of how this is going. As trying to have your feet on two sides of rifting of two islands that are floating away from each other, and you're trying to hold on. You're trying to kind of help… And Peterson, again, I don't know if I said this in the part that I didn't record. This is why I think Peterson is used by God. In this. And this is part of the reason I don't know if or when Peterson himself will migrate. And if he migrates, he'll have to do in his actions. He will have to, in a sense, make the leap of faith. He will have to leap from one island to the next. But, well, I don't know, maybe via YouTube it'll be documented. Part of the reason, sometimes when I think about my videos from two, three years ago, I want to take them down. I'm not going to take them down because I want to offer the markers on the trail that I took. And so if someone looks back two, three years… I mean, biographies do this all the time. Two, three years ago, Paul VanderKlay was here. Now Paul VanderKlay is there. And now some of you might notice, well, he's still at Living Stones. He's still a CRC minister. I, in fact, the beliefs to which I subscribe, the fundamental ones, I guess I'm a fundamentalist now, the beliefs to which I subscribe, I am more convinced of, including the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ. If there's anything that this journey along the… This is what I did say and what I didn't. If there's anything along this journey that has convinced me, and Peugeot hits this hard in this conversation, it's the necessity of the physicality of Jesus Christ and the physicality of his resurrection because somebody's coming in at two and someone drove up from Southern California yesterday and wanted to meet with me and I was… Sunday's not a good day necessarily to meet with me because I've got Sunday. Sunday's a big day for a pastor. We only work one day a week after all. Anyway, I should stop distracting myself. Peterson, what did he write about in Maps of Meaning? You have to locate yourself. The whole point of doing what is meaningful and not what's expedient is that you have to locate yourself right there on the border of order and chaos. That's the optimal place. Peterson for decades has been trying to locate himself at the optimal place and now he's there and it's costing him everything. That is the story of Christ. He goes to the optimal place. He waits until he's 30. 30 basically is the age at which in first century Judaism you could start your priesthood. Why does Jesus wait till 30? Because Ezekiel had the same passage. Ezekiel gets taken into captivity and then hits his 30th birthday when he's in captivity and he can't fulfill his priestly duties to the temple. That's Ezekiel. Christ turns 30 and now he's optimally at that point to have this happen. What it means is his crucifixion. Jordan, all of this stuff about orienting yourself in order and chaos, you're doing it and now in a sense, this is where it's going to get in later in the video, now in the sense, did you think it was just going to make you happy? If Jesus is in fact the ideal man and he's crucified, there in the story it tells you what will happen to the ideal and Jesus says that to his disciples. They will hate you like they hated me and Jesus gets hated by all sides. People focus on the middle and help people avoid radicalization and avoid falling into camps in a manner that will lead to God knows what and so I think that that's the role that you played and it's been like I've seen for example people transition through your work, transition from worlds moving. Why do I do randos conversations? This is why I do it. Worlds, that's really what I've seen happen. It's more than just changing the way, changing your opinion or changing your mind about something. It really is about changing the world you inhabit and so that's a and that's key with Peugeot's attentionality in terms of how Peugeot sees the world in terms of consciousness and you know what a chair is which you'll go into quite a bit later. That's a crazy, that's a crazy role to play and especially because like I said you have your foot, it's like you kind of have your one foot or one eye let's say looking towards I would call religion or looking towards Christianity or something like that and then you have another eye which is still very much immersed in a kind of secular humanism and you have one leg that is you know you understand people that are more left-leaning, you understand people that are more right-leaning, you have this capacity to kind of understand everybody but you're yeah it's a that means that you make enemies on on all sides too. And again back to the story of Christ, my sermon on Sunday. I know most of you, I put my rough drafts on this channel, I don't put my sermons on this channel for a whole variety of reasons but this is exactly the story of Christ and so Peterson, well here's the ideal man. Well this ideal has been transmitted to you through western civilization, read Dominion. I should probably get a hard copy of Dominion just to put on my shelf here. Come on Tom, mail me one. Who's the American publisher? I should just buy one, like I buy all these books. You know Penguin, you know Penguin never sent me an advanced copy of Beyond Order. Who's gonna talk about this book more than me? You know come on publishers, what's with you? At least the little the little Christian publishers know who I am. Anyway stop distracting yourself Andrew Clay. Jordan's whole thing, chaos and order, orient yourself optimally right there at the frontier between them. Jordan, this is how I want to organize my life. Boom boom boom boom boom. Now you're there. Okay it's hurting like hell and it's killing you. And a little bit later Peugeot's gonna say well you don't have a community and it's not just in and your fan base isn't really enough of a community and it's not even that it's and it's not enough of a community, it's that you don't have a pastor, you're not, you don't have the practices, you don't have all of what it takes to be in the middle of a community that is actually doing this together. I mean all these things come up in this video and it's, the guy's coming at two o'clock and it's 10 minutes to 12 and so I know I'm not going to get through this but that's the point of this that Jordan has sort of done this by himself and put himself right there. He's seen enough of the way the world is via natural revelation. He has figured out this puzzle. He has figured it out to an amazing extent via natural revelation and taking a look at special revelation. I'm using these theological categories from my own theological tradition and he has figured this stuff out. He says this is where to live optimally but he is not living in the church both in terms of the the network of relationships that you have in a church or the practices that you develop in a church and so in that sense he doesn't have the covering and so he has, I mentioned in, I think it's in, it's in Infinity Wars where there's this really interesting scene that really popped in my head when Thor is making the new weapon and it's like the full force of a son has to go through Thor, he has to hold these two sides together. I'm just getting my little window here, I gotta hold the two sides together. In a sense, Peterson puts himself right there and yeah it's killing you Jordan. Why? Well because you're not, the dwarf hasn't locked you in the thing. You're just floating out there in space and the gravity of the sun and that the chaos of the open sea rather than an estuary is just gonna, the currents are just gonna throw you around. I mean a lot of what, I mean again it's easy to hear Peugeot and to think oh he wants to make him a Christian because this is a tribal thing. Okay fair enough, all those things are true but you can make a pretty good argument that Jordan out at sea, this is killing him. It's killing him because he doesn't have the practices of the tradition, he doesn't have the covering of the tradition and you know I think about because there's a certain, certain people in this corner of YouTube are always concerned that they're gonna take away his channel and you know maybe they'll take away Jordan's channel at some point, that all could happen but I'm in a church, I'm in that community and in a sense you know Weinstein is looking for fu money and enough of a platform, he doesn't have anywhere near as much of either as Jordan does and Jordan can still get rolled but in a sense what you have when you're in the church is now you're in the body of Christ. This is something that the world has to contend with and Jordan is just out there going it alone. Okay because I just watched all this 20 minutes ago, I know what's coming pretty easily, we're about to talk about conscience and conscience can be mapped onto psychologically, mapped onto developmentally, mapped onto from below let's say but this is where I get into my God number one and my resistance to sort of this Cartesian spiritual substantiality, substantism and conscience is experienced psychologically of course and psychologically it has everything to do with the first draft mapped on into us from our parents and our community and conscience is what guides us within the community and so let's just play the darn thing. Well you know the overwhelming response that I've got publicly has been I would say traumatically positive. Yeah and when I heard that on the podcast I didn't was it traumatically or dramatically and at least now here with the video I can read his lips, it's traumatically positive and that's right so your fandom is around you and that maybe keeps you from getting rolled but not like not throughout history. And you wouldn't think that that would be possible really but I find it that way I mean partly it's overwhelming to have people constantly tell me in person their responses to what I've been doing, it's very emotional and I get caught up in that quite quickly and of course on YouTube and the social media platforms, YouTube particularly the bulk of the comments about me are very very positive. It's 99 to 1 often in terms of likes and dislikes it's yeah and and it's too much well I don't know how to I don't know how to. Well and this is where he's lacking you know to use Peugeot. Pentecostals and Jonathan Peugeot both use this language of covering which is very interesting because again he's George is sort of out there in a boat on his own and he doesn't have the buffer of a church around him. I mean for me instinctively to have a meetup group to you know connect myself quite deeply with Bridges of Meaning discord server and that community and an estuary I know from the practice of the church you need a harbor and that harbor that harbor is made up by people around you and and part of what you know it's very interesting because Jordan has even seemed lately to sort of double down on Peterson Inc and now did I say this in the part of the video I recorded or I hate sorry if I repeat him I'm repeating myself but he doesn't have that community around him and so he has to default to his personal relationships and his familial relationships because he doesn't have that other that other layer that myself as a pastor that I have you know to a degree he had the academy but the academy was pointing in another direction so he lost that he doesn't have the the practice of a clinical psychologist anymore that's been destroyed and so again in some ways Jordan has been sort of this this navigator out there who doesn't go with a fleet I don't know what category to put it in I don't know how to conceptualize it I mean part of part of me the practical part of course says well I just happened to adopt a new technology at a time when it started to boom and fill the kind of niche that was empty in that technology at that time but in some that's not exactly true he's a little late to the YouTube game YouTube had boomed before I think he showed at least he showed me a different way of using it in a sense that that doesn't really cut it you know because it doesn't have anything to do with the content and then I think while I have been dealing with these well borderline religious issues well certainly not just borderline there's lots of religious people who seem to think that I'm dealing with religious issues and well and that's really what I wanted to talk to you about tonight so this book I mentioned 18 and a half minutes we're still in the introduction gotta love it earlier to talked about disagreements with my conceptualization of Christ let's say and which and I'm not sure what that conceptualization is by the way exactly it's a mystery to me but but I can say some some concrete things about it I mean I certainly I understand and appreciate the symbolic significance of the ideal human being and that finds its embodiment and I took these ideas in large part from Jung and Eric Neumann that that Christ is a represent Christ is at least a representation of the ideal man whatever that is and we we all interestingly enough we all seem to have an ideal now again so Peterson in a sense the Jordan Peterson story is a quite remarkable story of someone who seeks to go it alone now I've been doing a lot of pondering lately on the institutionality of of the of of western civilization and the church because in many ways the church what what happens in the Protestant Reformation and especially what happens in the 19th and 20th century especially in the 20th century is the church sort of busts out of its walls and you know Peugeot points out that you know religiosity is going to happen and so people are going to do it in the wake of George Floyd and they're going to do it on the steps of the Capitol because it's it's busted out of the church and and and part of that is because the church hasn't done well the church hasn't done as it should as it's supposed to and so Peterson is is sort of you know this lone wolf out there doing it on his own and okay embracing embracing Christ as the ideal man and trying to embody him without the church now that is deeply I don't know if it's Canadian or not it certainly is American we we've we saw that in many of the 19th century uh millenarian movements the rise of the Jehovah's Witnesses the rise of the Seventh-day Adventists the rise of the Latter-day Saints and this happened in in New York State's Burned Over District and and so in a sense you know Peterson is doing this and to go back to Dauphet's conversation with Tara Burton and Stephen Smith that video that I played quite a while ago if what was that woman's name who who ran for president for a while for the Democrats you know they made the observation that if if she were alive in the 19th century she would have started a church and Jordan started his own little church so he could marry people and he wanted to buy a church building but now instead of a church building you have YouTube and that that rings home and connects with me because of course I'm right at that cusp and again one of the videos that isn't going to get made today I got some sermon evaluation from a member of the congregation which happens remarkably little I get much more I get much more feedback on my rough drafts than I ever do in church that says something about the dysfunctionality of the church and and I was thinking to what degree is YouTube and the Discord server and all of these conversations that I'm having these other instruments that are just sort of in the twilight of institutionality look at this with word on fire let's say and and these this book that Peterson is thinking about is from these people from word on fire now word on fire is within the Roman Catholic Church and the Roman Catholic Church with the Conventicles and the you know the Knights of Columbus and the the Roman Catholic Church has managed to have all of these tiny little the the the orders all of these things sort of within the massive tent that is the church Protestantism of course has done it lots of different ways Protestantism is just some some sort of massive experiment in the west and and then how orthodoxy will enter into this very dynamic context is going to be something interesting to watch but then here's Peterson and he again via sort of natural revelation figures out kind of the optimal place to be and he uses it's interesting too this is all just thinking a lot obviously that's what my channel is so you've got the academy which of course is a daughter of the church you've got therapy which is of course at least next door to the church I had that question Friday about it from James and did some reflecting on my channel and then now you've got YouTube which is very Protestant Churchness Peterson has in some ways replicated a church in a deeply Protestant way and I've mentioned this back in videos a while ago before his hiatus there was something deeply Protestant about Jordan and you know a little bit later towards the end of the video he and Peugeot will talk about Peugeot is one of the few people that has seen Jordan in church and this came up Tammy's mentioned it before too where he can't sit still and I get that I I think that's the thing about the church but I am the son of a Christian Reformed minister and I had a Frisian mother sitting next to me enforcing us sitting still in the pew at Northside Chapel in Patterson check that off your bingo card you know under threat of corporal punishment every Sunday so I was trained to sit still in church and maybe the reason I preach and Rick always complains because I dance on stage I don't really dance but I don't stay in the little box Rick's is trying to stream me out to the world and is because I got up on stage because that's the one place in church I didn't have to sit still they say Paul you're going to the wrong church go to the black church go to a Pentecostal church go to a holy roller church there's other parts of me too but Jordan has in some ways in a very Protestant way created church and if you again if you think about it in terms of what he's been able to figure out via psychology natural revelation understanding the Bible boy I'm really gonna have to think about that