https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GvISR3ybsOU

 Hi, this is Paul. There's a really good section in the conversation between Jordan Peterson and Lawrence Krause. Now, if you didn't catch the audio only version of not the Krause episode, but the week before where he talked to the historian, you might have missed that. Michaela made the announcement that they're going to do these one a week because of some health reasons for Jordan. And I think that those of you who are Christians, I think it's appropriate to pray for Jordan's health. Michaela said it's not a big deal, but he's been continuing to struggle with some health issues. So that's important. So we're going to be having one of these a week, it seems. That's going to be the pacing that they're going to have. And overall, I found this to be a fun conversation. I'd never seen Krause in conversation. I like his shirt with the horses on it. But this section, the video really got interesting at this point. To talk about all that, but it's really irrelevant because actually, I first realized it due to a colleague of mine at Harvard who was really the smartest person there in the physics department. He's now dead. Sidney Coleman. He said the proper thing to talk about is not the interpretation of quantum mechanics. It's the interpretation of classical mechanics. Because the real world is quantum mechanical. Any classical picture we impose on it is going to be crazy. Okay. Now watch his language very carefully. The real world is quantum mechanical. What does he mean by real? Because real is going to come up a little bit later in the conversation. I think he wants to say the physical world, but he keeps using this word real. And we're going to have the same issues with the word objective. And this is where this gets interesting. But you don't have to think of it as real. They're all just different approximations to a reality, an underlying reality. Notice how this definition of the word real keeps flipping around. And if he'd be a little bit more precise in his language, maybe talk about the physical world. And they says, well, even quantum mechanics is a model that attempts to approximate the physical world. But even quantum mechanics can only be an approximation. Can't be described by any classical picture. So that's why all these classical pictures seem crazy, because none of them is complete. Well, if you look at this psychologically, I'm going to refer to Piaget again. I mean, Piaget pointed out that we derive our concepts from our practical manipulations of things. So for example, you might ask why is this one thing? I could say, well, it's five things. This is Peterson and Peugeot keeps making the same argument too. The question is, well, what's a thing? Look, it moves as a unit. Therefore, it's a thing. So that's one. Well, it could be five if I broke it apart. Now it's two. But the concept itself is predicated on our interactions at this scale. And so we're going to derive our sense of reality from our practical interactions at this scale. And you're claim. And then suddenly our sense of reality. Well, what do we mean by reality? We mean this interoperable world that defines our will that we have in common with others that is productive. We'll use a vervekey word. It's transjective. That's this reality. And that's why I say, well, is Uncle Sam real? Well, real enough to get you to pay your taxes, real enough to get you to drive the speed Real enough to get you to value your passport. Real enough. We don't mean is Uncle Sam physical. Well, what are the physical manifestations of Uncle Sam? Well, the Washington Monument, the temples in Washington, D.C. that are to Uncle Sam. So this word real is very slippery. But watch how often people will use it interchangeably with physical. And they should use physical. But they won't. And the claim of the quantum mechanics in general is that that doesn't apply at the micro scale. So our intuitions are gone because our intuitions are predicated on our embodiment at this level of analysis. Absolutely. In fact, the purpose of the greatest story we've told so far, that particular book, is to say something remarkable. The world of our experience is an illusion. I know I hate to say it. OK, now we're getting into Wilfred Seller's Two Eyes, right? The world of experience. It's the manifest image. It's an illusion. He's going to backpedal from that word. Then he's going to want to talk about the scientific image. And Peterson's going to go right at this here. Because it breeds all sorts of mumbo jumbo and people start doing. But at a fundamental scale, at the small scales, every... OK, at a fundamental scale, what do you mean by that word? At a... Now, here, this is an emergent property. We're talking about what? A physical level. And it emerges up from there. Everything that defines our universe, including matter... Defines our universe? I mean, all of these words. A lot of fudge in this. A lot of fudge in a lot of those words. And everything that defines our universe, including matter. And... See, now he's sort of taking matter out of the real... He's swimming in a world of fudge here. And mass. Really the things that make the universe the universe we experience are really accidents of our circumstances. What does he mean by accidents? Or is he talking accidents as opposed to essences or substances? What does he mean? Well, he's going to tell us. Rather than fundamental properties of the universe. So our universe... Fundamental properties. And where he's going to go is he's going to say, well, fundamental properties are things that don't end. They're constant. What's really interesting is though, even though he makes an impassioned plea for the Big Bang, he almost wants... He almost implies that his vision of the world is a constant state universe. And anything that is not constant is in some ways delegitimized and pushed to the side. Something... That's something I would like... And we can do this again when we talk again, because I'm always curious about that leap into purposelessness. And one of the things I would like to ask you just briefly on that subject is as the universe cools, we do see a gradual increase in at least one sort of important complexity. Now this reminds me of Sam's argument with John Vervecky with respect to Telos and evolution. And John seems to be making a similar argument to what Sam made. Right. And that's the building of, let's say, the building of the periodic table. And so atoms become more and more complex and sophisticated as the universe cools. That seems like a kind of directionality that's built into the structure itself. And it isn't... Now built into the structure itself. I think he's... Again, we're using these words, but I think he wants to talk about physical development in the universe. That initially there are these very... There's hydrogen, there's helium, but later on as time moves on, you get to the development of other elements and metals and these kinds of things. And so Peterson is looking at that. Is there in fact some directionality? Is there... Don't forget Jordan Peterson's thing is he's always trying to reconstitute the foundations of Christendom upon a Darwinian... Upon our Darwinian basis and to see just how far he can get with it. Do you think that's... Is that necessarily discontinuous with the radical increase in complexity that you start to see 3.5 billion years ago when life emerges? So you've got sort of the complexity that you see as the periodic table unfolds in the physical development of the universe and then you find life as sort of maybe a next level up. You see Peterson is sort of working on a hierarchy of being as it were. If gold is more complex than helium or hydrogen and life is more complex than gold, if life is sort of anti-entropic and I still haven't watched Harold Bloom's talk on the stoa that my friend Rod and others have looked at. So don't you get to really talk about that. So we're dealing with Krauss here. And this is a very interesting argument that Peterson is putting together. Or is that the same process of complexification? Well you know, okay, it's a good question. And the answer is it's all momentary. Oh, so all that counts is timelessness. Boy, that's awfully close to eternity in religious terms. It's a momentary accident. It is true that the... So if that's an accident, please tell me what in the universe is the substance or the essence? He starts with the Big Bang smaller than an atom and this enormous... And he's skeptical about multiverses and these kinds of things. So basically it's the vision in your head of between a certain period after the Big Bang and then before the end. I mean, where is this timelessness if it's not simply the monarchical vision that modernity attempts to create in order to see the world through? And he's saying, well, Peterson's challenging him on this and saying, well, when? Stars as individual stars evolve, they build up heavier and heavier elements. They do it at the expense of their surroundings by increasing the disorder in their surroundings. They're emitting energy. Right, right. Okay, so there's localized increase in complexity like us. But it's almost... Okay. So now we're dealing with time space in a sense. Momentary. Okay, there's localized increase in complexity like us. Yeah, but it's all momentary. So in other words, you want to stop it and then is that... Well, it sounds a lot like the end of the age and the life of the age to come. It sounds a lot like this fundamental realm he's imagining that is not like any realm he can point to, but it's just living in his head is sort of heaven. If you follow it long enough, the heavy elements are going to disappear, matter is going to disappear, and the long term, the universe will look, will just be pure radiation again. So we are... So this... So what really counts, fundamental, the fundamental essence of the universe is nothing. The buildup of complexity, which you're absolutely sure is not a direction of the universe. It's a momentary but fortunate imbalance. We're just riding the imbalance, baby. That will exist for a while until the universe catches up with it. And so the universe is basically nothing. That seems to be what he's saying. There's no tell-offs. There's no endpoint. It's sort of we're a blip and then we're gone. Ooh, I feel a meeting crisis coming on. Yeah, well, that's now that's a real problem in discussing concepts, isn't it? Because you can take a time scale and change the time scale and all of a sudden the phenomena changes completely. And that's what people do to themselves often when they think about the meaninglessness of their life. It's like a meeting crisis. Well, wait a second. I could make the case. I've made this with my clients, approximately, is if you're thinking on a time scale that makes your life irrelevant, that's the wrong time scale for the problem. That's the end. The hopelessness is an indication that you're using the wrong frame. Now what's interesting is that implicit in his argument with his clients is that there's a goal because hopefulness is better than hopelessness. And this is what he's trying to move his clients towards. But is that fundamental or is it, to go back to the other word, illusory? And if it's illusory, it's arbitrary. And in other words, there's there's there's no pattern that's here. Now, now what this sort of reminded me of is the video that I I posted today, which was John Verbeckis talk about nominalism, which is a deeply entrenched nominalism. Nominalism is the idea. I'm trying not to use too much. But nominalism is the idea coming from Duns Scotus and Atem. I talked about this a bit in my series. And this is where Jonathan is more radical than people realize. Jonathan Fajot. The nominalism claims basically there are no real patterns. There are no real patterns. The patterns are only patterns in our mind. Now where are these patterns that Lawrence Krauss is looking at? Well, they're all these patterns are momentary. In fact, you can look at everything that he studies his entire physics and you say, well, but it's all just going to be radiation at some point. So these patterns have to live somewhere. Where where are these patterns? Our mind is what links things together and makes the patterns. All that's out there are raw, absurd individuals, absurd in the very technical sense of absurd. Like they have ultimately in themselves, they have no categorical meaning. There are no universals, all that kind of stuff. And you might imagine that if you apply what John had just said to Lawrence Krauss's momentary blip that we are right now, that's that's all we are. And see, once you think that then you put in this very weird position where all that the patterns are just in your mind and then you just have to get them to rationally go here with each other. The mind, somehow the patterns are real in your mind and the mind knows them directly. But there's no patterns in the world and the mind doesn't know them. And so a powerful dualism opens up between the mind and the world. You're going to get Descartes and Kant. Now, this doesn't exactly map on to Krauss's dualism, but, you know, wait and see what Krauss is going to answer next, because Peterson kind of throws him a bone here, says, yeah, you know, when my clients come in and say, well, nothing really matters because and they don't use Krauss's, you know, more elegant words to say, when it's all just done, there's just be radiation left. I mean, my kid, my job, my life, my goals, my ambitions, my dreams, desires, it's just going to be radiation. Absolutely. And you'd say, well, what's the proof of that? And I would say, well, the hopelessness is the proof of that. Now, you might know. And that's a really interesting turn with Peterson. Well, the hopelessness is the proof of that because the hopelessness is negative unless, of course, but the hopelessness and the hopefulness. Well, what's the difference between those things? Well, we call one positive because biologically it feels better for us and we tend to thrive. But again, all that thriving is going to get dumped into the same radiation death as as everything else. So and, you know, John Vervecky talks about this this time aspect, too. And, you know, this whole finite thing, I don't really buy because someone says, well, let's see, you're you've been kidnapped by terrorists and you're you're you're strapped to a chair and they're going to use dental instruments on you to extract information from you because somehow they had you confused with some important government official and they want to get information out of you and you don't have it. And so they're going to torture you until you die and say, well, at least it's doesn't the finitude of it make it better? Well, sort of maybe torture me until I die. And this finitude argument doesn't really cut it for me. Not regard that as proof, but it's a point that's at least worth considering, you know, because you could say, well, what good is a Beethoven symphony across the span of a trillion years? It's like, well, none. But yeah, why? What good is posing that question? Exactly. Well, I. Got. Psychologically, when we enjoy something. Do we enjoy the Beethoven symphony if we're told when you're done with the symphony, you'll never hear it again. Or do you enjoy it more when you hear and say, wow, that was good. And then someone says, would you like to hear it again? Or maybe would you like to hear it not in a recording on YouTube music, but how about in a concert hall with a full symphony around you? I'd rather hear that than, oh, this is more meaningful because you'll never hear it again. I don't buy that argument. I couldn't agree with you more. The fact that that we have there's no obvious purpose in the universe. The fact that we and everything we've created will long be gone. That may that can depress you. But the the opposite. So into the coin, it seems to me, if I were a clinician that I would try to argue to my clients is that it makes every moment of that accident of your own existence special. And this is exactly the argument at the end of The Good Place that this all has meaning. And in fact, if you watch videos of the philosopher that helped put the show together, this is exactly the argument he has. It's it's it's meaningful because it's finite. OK, so let me ask you this question. You've given birth or your spouse has just given birth to a child. And you say it's more meaningful if the child dies right now. No. It's more meaningful if the doctor says the child is healthy and you immediately begin to build in your imagination a life with this child, a life where the child goes from an infant to, you know, just something that cries and keeps you up at night. And six months from now, the child will start looking at you and your eyes and you get the child to smile. And then the child will start to walk and then start. Child will start to talk and name you by name and discover its world. It will go to school and it will. It will. It will go to college and I'll have a career and it'll marry and it will reproduce. And. No, it's more meaningful if the child dies. No, there's there's Peterson's earlier. There's something I've been thinking about this for a while, actually. There's a natural telos in us that that builds to things. It seems like every conversation in some ways invites the hope of a friendship and every friendship in some ways invites the hope to a deeper friendship and every conversation in some ways invites the hope for deeper and better conversations and perhaps a a romantic look invites it, you know, sort of increases the desire for an embrace and. On and on and on and on. There is a there is when we begin many things, there is sort of an anticipation. Now, not everything goes to its end, but. That seems to me to be far more satisfying and joyful and meaningful. And I think that's something deep with respect to meaning. Now, Peterson's going to challenge him here. And every instant is more special because it's finite because it's so. So the birth of your child is more special if the child dies. Or it's more special because your child will someday die. Oh, it's special because the hope of the child is a relationship and fatherhood and grandparenthood and a future. And and that's built into us. Because it's it's so unique and therefore you're right, there may be no cosmic purpose to your existence, but you create your own purpose. I know you write about meaning your whole book about meaning, but. And that's where this seems to sort of map onto this nominalism. Well, there is no. Cosmic purpose. What do you mean that that there's and what really surprises me about this line from this particular tribe of people is these are the ones that want to hawk rationality. And what is rationality? Now, again, I've got Verveckis. I think Verveckis is right that rationality is not just this this simple correspondence, but rationality is seeing the child and. And beginning to set up a life for that child. We're going to get the room ready and we've painted it blue because it's a boy and women seem to like that. I don't care. I don't care what color it is, but blue because it's a boy. And then we're going to buy clothing and we're going to bring the child to the grandparents and we're going to bring the child to church and have the child baptized and the entire community around us is going to celebrate. And then we're going to, you know, as the child grows, we're going to bring toys into its life and fulfill. I mean, there's this entire thing. And rationality is all about. Looking at it, looking at a distance and seeking a goal, because in some ways, well, hydrogen is cool and helium is cool, but gold is cool and coal is cool and the accumulation of those atoms. And then if you if you put the if you put the. The carbon together and then maybe you can build something out of the carbon and you can add iron and you can make steel and you can. I mean, that's what rationality is about. Rationality is about the. I mean, that's what rationality is about. Rationality is the purposeful, intensive thing in the universe. And what all what implicit, I think, in his argument is that rationality is just another blip. And he goes on in this video to laud science and well, your science is just a blip, too. And OK, it's cool. It's fireworks. It's gone. I don't buy it. But I would argue there's no objective meaning to the universe. We make our own meaning. OK, objective. Peterson is going to call him on this. And to the extent we make our own meaning, our lives are more or less valuable to us. Sort of trapped in our head, though, isn't it? It's sort of a nominalism. There's nothing out there. It's just in here. It's just whatever I project onto the universe. The other problem that you're that gets pointed out all the time with these is morality, because and Lewis points this out because if if meaning is not the same, meaning is this is where sort of meaning and morality are are are similar, because if meaning is just a projection of our mind onto the universe, then morality is too. And those who want to construct an objective morality. Well, you know, even rationality rules accepts that we have to sneak in a telos. You have to sneak sneak in some kind of goal. Well, rationality, that's that's part of this whole blip, too. And so if you find it meaningful because it's just a prisoner of your head or maybe you have a group around you who find something, some heinous thing to do meaningful upon, what will you construct your your your moral argument against people who are doing things that are against it? Morality seems to be part of that same meaningful universe and to others around us. And so I would say, see, I would I would quibble with that. And maybe it's not just a quibble because I don't think meaning is something we create. I think it's something that manifests itself to us. Now, see, and this is where he's sort of connecting with. Now we've got emanation. So when he says it manifests itself, that's the language he always uses for an idea comes in, an insight comes in, something comes into our mind. It manifests itself. Well, what is that? It's it's meaning again. This is back to C.S. Lewis, the abolition of man. Collarage is waterfall. That meaning is something out there that we connect to. It's something the objective and Peterson's going to say, that's really the wrong word. Look, I know. I know it's not that simple because we do make decisions, but it's very frequently the case. And you know this, you know, this is a scientist, for example, you may have a moment of insight into some phenomena. So that's deeply meaningful. But it isn't so much that that is something you create, although you can seek it out. It's more like that's something that bursts on you from above. Yeah, yeah, OK. Well, I it'll be interesting question to see if we're debating semantics here or not. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, you mean just a misunderstanding? No, I don't think so. Unless you just say that the insight is also locked in your own head, too. And part of that non fundamental universe and your science is going with that as well. Right. Right. Right. And well, I mean, I know I don't think that's the reason I could go back to that. I guess I guess at a fundamental scale, and maybe we can follow this up in our in. There's that word again. Fundamental. And when we talk in my podcast, but I I tend not to think that there's an objective meaning to the universe. There it is again. There's no objective. What do you mean no objective? Well, you can't. You know, OK, so if you go all the way back to where he's talking about the singularity and the Big Bang and the laws of physics don't apply until after the Big Bang. So are they arbitrary? Are they? You know, time wasn't yet. This stuff just doesn't cohere. Well, it may be that objective and meaning aren't well suited for one another. Right. Because you could also make the case that the objective viewpoint precludes meaning as part of its operation. And I think I mean, you can make a strong case that the scientific method is designed to exclude subjective meaning. That's actually and that's actually one of its remarkable strengths. But it has a cost. The cost is, well, what do you do with the phenomena of meaning? Well, it doesn't exist scientifically. Well, that is something we could talk about for a long time because that'll pull us into the question of whether what's constituted conceptualized as objective reality is a sufficiently sophisticated conception of reality itself. Back to maps of meaning. And again, often they want the word physical. Again. Because objective means public. Construe the world as a world of objects. And it isn't obvious to me that it is because it does have this tendency to include to exclude the subjective by its by its method. OK, that's good because I yeah. And now we're getting into the end of modernity. I would say it's for me it's perfectly fine. The fact that exclusive reactive is its strength, not its weakness in my opinion. It is one of its strengths. There's no doubt about that. But you've just you've just covered one eye and said made an evaluation, made it a value judgment, which you can't do with science. There's no value judgments here. Say the strength of covering my other eye is that there are no value judgments. Because the subject because by excluding the subjective, you can discover what's transpersonally universal. But but that also may mean that there are things you would. What's transpersonally universal? That's the goal. And in some ways, again, we're back to a monarchical vision. We're back to we want to get a picture, a still of what's fundamental in the universe without all of these accidents like the things on the periodic table or life or what have you left in your fundamental picture? Exclude that are real, that that are necessary. You know, you well teach it necessary. Yeah, that's what you're you're looking for. You're looking for a foundation. You're looking for something fundamental to you know, I used to read. Well, there's a I like Oliver Sacks. So I used to read a lot. And one of his last books before he died was on hallucinations. And one of the things that we at the beginning of his book that really hit me and it was relevant to something I was working on at the time and I honestly forget it. But is his point that to people who are experiencing hallucinations, they're real. And yeah, yeah, well, that's the thing about real real is real. There is objectively real. Let's make a mistake about that. And objectively real is power. OK, what do you mean by objectively real? I mean, objectively has become an intensifier for like really real or and again, I think I think we got to clean up our language because do you mean physical? Do you mean it governs? What do I mean governs? Well, do you mean it shapes minds and people and behaviors? Then we're sort of using the word spiritual. But it isn't obvious to me that objective and real are synonymous when it comes to our own our own psyche. I couldn't agree with you more, which is why I tell people, by the way, when I was a kid, I wanted to be what I would have if my my neither my parents with university. So I didn't know the term neuroscience. I want to be a brain surgeon. My mother wanted me to be a doctor, a nice Jewish boy. And and and I wanted to be and what interested me most was the brain. And I thought, well, neurosurgery must be the way to do it. I didn't realize it wasn't. But but the reason I one of the reasons I do physics is it's so much damn easier. It's just so much easier than psychology or neuroscience. This is fascinating because he's right, of course, and he sees it that and this is a point that Peterson made. It's a debatable point in some ways that human beings are more complex than the rest of the universe, at least the universe that we know. Physics. Well, why? Well, what's he doing with physics? Well, he's trying to take a snapshot of the world and describe it. And the problem with people and meaning and purpose and all of this is that it's it's just it's much more of a moving target. Physics is the study of death. And human beings. It's life. Because because of these complexities of of psyche. And so I do go back to this reason as a slave of passion. I mean, the fact that we that are that our our whole understanding of our own existence is not really based on reason. I try as a scientist, but it's certainly not based on our capacity to to what would you say, to conceptualize objective reality? That isn't how people think. We thought like that for 500 years. Yeah, that's really powerful. But yeah, but we've only pretended with each other and made it a social status marker for 500 years. We tried some of this, but we had the lab leak. And now we don't know that we're take your hand off your eye. My hand isn't on my eye. I'm seeing the world objectively. It's not the way we naturally and that's also something that's mysterious to me. Well, it's not the way we naturally. Oh, boy, there's a word that snuck in. Well, you know, but it's that's what's so wonderful about science to me is it is a recognition that scientists are people, which is a secret that most people don't realize. And and therefore they're subjective. They're subject to all of the the whims and slings and arrows of fortune. And so the scientific method is developed to realize that scientists are bound to make mistakes. And who developed the scientific method? Did it did you find it looking through a telescope? Did you dig it up in some mysterious place in the world? Or was that also a function of this? And be human and the scientific method is to catch those mistakes. I argued recently, in fact, at Oxford Union, and they didn't get the point because they're all woke. But the students but but there were you know, there was a that Jordan is like, Happy birthday to me. Terrible. That's a terrible thing. I know that's the case. It's so terrible. You'll be surprised. There was a debate on the question was, we are all religious. And I asked to speak on the pro side. My colleagues, my atheist colleagues, who people you know, were on the anti side and they were shocked that I wanted to pick up on the pro side. And my argument was quite simple. If we weren't all religious, we wouldn't need science. If we didn't all want to believe. Right. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. So we agree. They didn't get the point. And I get the point. Now all three of us are in agreement. The question is your science, because now again, this is this is a powerful tool to tell us to help air correct between each other about significant things in the physical universe. And we can we can sometimes go beyond that. But you get much beyond it physically. And you just can't help but cover up the uncover the other eye. Yeah, well, that was part of what I was trying to point out to Sam Harris is that and this is something I learned at least in part from reading Jung and his claim was that alchemy, the ideas of alchemy grew out of a religious foundation and then science emerged out of alchemy. It's like it's nested. Science is nested inside an alchemical fantasy that's nested inside a religious fantasy. Well, I wouldn't say nested. I would say grew out of. Grew out of? No. He just he just he basically said it's still nested. So he basically said with all scientists are religious out of it. Like I, I, I was born from my mother and father who, you know, and I like to think that I grew that a lot of what I am is that but I grew out of it. Here's what I don't know what space he's growing out of it into. I think it has to be nested still now and this is something we could talk about a lot. The objects that draw a scientist's attention aren't determined by scientific processes. You're the phantasm. You see what I mean? The objects aren't drawing them. The scientist is and that this is this is this is his talk with Sam Harris. You don't you and it's it's for vacuums relevance realization. Mean is that like you get interested in some things and you pursue those now that's informed by your scientific knowledge. But it's it's so Jung's point, for example, was that. Science was a materialist redemptive myth that grew up as a counter position to the spiritualist redemptive myth. Right. So you should pause that. And again, I don't I don't know where in Jung that is treated. But let's think about I mean, he's he's sort of you're looking at Newton and, you know, the strange stuff that Newton is. Again, I'll go back to my phrasing of this. These were Christians who wanted to know God better. And one way to know God was to live in the monastery and pray and to be in church. Another way was to watch the ball drop and to measure it. This was this was pursuit of the knowledge of God. Number one, because this is how God spoke through history, through time, through events. So if you want to, in that sense, know God, study the world, general revelation. Imagine there was an idea which was that we could redeem our inadequacy through spirit. Now, redeem our inadequacy. Or. Again, I was. Read, read Lewis when he talks about science and magic or. Build a tower to the heavens and bring on the kingdom of God. With science. And again, I'm not saying that's necessarily by any means an adulterous prospect or an idolatrous prospect. But I think you Jung's insight is very interesting. Again, Peterson makes this point repeatedly. Ritual discipline. OK, we tried that for a long time. It wasn't enough. People were still suffering from leprosy. OK, so there's a fantasy emerges over thousands of years. Maybe we should investigate the transformations of matter. There's redemptive information residing in the transformations of matter. We could investigate that, and that would make life better. And so the motive. And again, once you say better. You're into the manifest image. The national goal behind science is the expansion of human competence. And that's not a scientific goal. That's that's a motivational goal. Yeah, I agree with you. But where I guess that we disagree and we could have this discussion is that I think you're right. And that's what I said before. Scientists are people. So they're motivated by all. They're motivated by greed, by fame, by jealousy, as well as by. By awe, by awe, by awe. On wonder. I mean, I would point out, I mean, we're all you know, that's why I'm a scientist. I'm a scientist. I'm a scientist. People find scientific pursuits meaningful. And fascinating. But but I'm also the questions I ask are detartedly determined by the time in which I live. So but I don't want to be postmodern because the point is that what's great. So that's all true from a psychological perspective. So you may say that the motivations of science are kind of a personal fantasy. But what's great is the science. What's great. Try saying this without a value judgment. Please go ahead. Give it a shot. I dare you. It can't be done. Overcomes that so that you're right there. And in fact, if you in my book, in the in the book you read, The Greatest Trevor Told So Far, I make a big point of saying scientists were all. Scientists were all moving in this direction and it was the wrong direction. Wait, but the science. The science doesn't overcome the motivation. It doesn't overcome the motivation. No, it doesn't. It overcomes the contamination of the theory by the motivational impulse. But the motivation changes because the results force it upon you. Scientists are forced kicking and screaming to change their minds. They don't want to. With respect to what kind of truth? Propositional. You know, part of the we've talked a lot about propositional truth and the way that propositional truth sort of takes over religion in the modern period and Protestantism. Absolutely. But the kind of error correction he's looking for is propositional error correction because your procedural, your perspectival, your participatory are much more products are much more in the quest of the manifest image. And so your your science, your world of objects, your your your your bucket of facts, it's propositional. And well, he thought he finds he creates the value judgment that that propositional bucket is beautiful. And he's going to talk about that later. Beautiful, beautiful. Is a fact beautiful or does it just is in your scientific vision? Want to. But that motivation of the kind of questions you ask come and that's the greatness of science because it's empirical because it's not. The motivation isn't empirical. Peterson. Peterson's right. Based on just what I want. But what nature tells me is the case. And so eventually nature tells you why do you have to work so hard for it? It's almost like you're you're you're the prophets of bail on Mount Carmel and you're you know, oh, God of science, deliver the facts to us. All the scientists who want this center and no doubt were driven in that direction because they wanted that. Find out that that one is wrong and they have to go over here. And that's the I mean, my proposition is corrected. You do science. It's that nature determines what's beautiful. Ultimately, you know. You know. Nature determines the value judgments, huh? You know, I there was a while when string theorists talked about the elegant universe and all that elegant and beauty don't matter. Nature determines it, not scientists. Which nature the nature in you, the nature that is built in you to like symmetrical faces, the nature that's built into the baby to like faces and for a while. And the you know, the 90s, we put up all these little faces in front of our babies because it was supposed to make them smarter. And eventually we get drawn until we eventually come to a picture where we think it's beautiful. But it was nature. You know, but I wait, wait, I thought all that all this stuff was just the accidents, you know. And again, I just think about Lewis and in the abolition of man. Well, then then he suddenly stands up and speaks like a man with a chest. You know, something that was incredibly ugly in the beginning that we thought was ugly ends up being beautiful because we force our picture to understand that that's the way it really is. And then we that's the way it really is. I mean, what what what blows me away is there's all this denying of this entire world and then you stand up and speak like, you know, see us. Lewis compares about complaints about H.G. Wells and others that on one hand, they're telling me that all of this is is nothing. And then suddenly they stand up and they they proclaim like a preacher. We develop an understanding of it. But so that's the beauty. It's that I guess I I don't think of it as a fantasy in that sense. Maybe the motivation is fantastic fantastical. And even the process of some level, there's a proposition, right, which which I think be. Look, let me let me give you another example of this and you tell me what you think. OK, OK, so I'll try to formulate this properly. No, I won't was was the wave. Number one. Number two is let me tell you about this and tell me what you think. Although I may not be able to do it. We have a hypothesis that it's a fantasy, I would say that the increase of knowledge through technical means will be of benefit to. Now, what does it mean by fantasy? It means a desirous mental image. Us as individuals and as a species. OK, that is a that is a fantasy. Now, it may be accurate. It's the fantasy that we've staked ourselves on. But there's it's not provable. And we're actually ambivalent about it because we generate apocalyptic nightmares all the time. And we know that our technological prowess has a Frankenstein element. So it's not like we're 100 percent convinced that this nonstop onslaught of knowledge generation is necessarily in our best interest. And you could also make a case, an evolutionary case, that most species are stunningly conservative. If something works, man, they do not deviate from. Whereas we're just transforming like mad. And so we do have this fantasy, which is we can escape our static destiny by the acquisition of knowledge, by going out into the unknown. That's Star Trek. Right. You wrote books on the physics of Star Trek to go boldly where no one has gone beyond before. And that that will be of net benefit to us. And that's the fantasy which with which this is nested. I don't think that does change. What benefit? I mean, it's all that's all manifest image stuff. You know, I mean, I understand your point. The within that there's transformations constantly. I think but I think it wouldn't. Well, look, I agree with you to the most part. And in fact, regarding the the apocalyptic things, you must one of the things you didn't mention is that I was chairman of the board of sponsors of the Bolton Atomic Scientists for a dozen years that sets the doomsday clock. So every year I'd have to stare apocalypse right in the in the face. But now, didn't that finitude of impending nuclear war just make everything beautiful? I can't you know, I hear this stuff and I think this is madness. I think the reason that fantasy has persisted, I would argue, is that it like many fantasies is that it has an evolutionary success. And the reason I agree. And the reason that it persists is that we have found that, yeah, when we develop antibiotics, we can live longer. I mean, so there's a hope and you're right. And so that sounds a lot like reason and meaning and finding meaning by by imagining a future and working towards that future and developing antibiotics and progress and making life better. I mean, again, just when I started this video, that's just all goes away with a hand wave. And now it's church comes back to what I said before. Reason is a slave of passion. I recognize that when I think I'm being driven by pure rationality, I have to recognize that there's that there's passion. And yet, well, that's it. This is so OK. And I think part of that, again, this is something I tried to draw my conversations with with Harris is what we are evolved biological creatures. We're motivationally driven like we and we have a pattern. We are not rational. That's wrong. Now we can learn and that meaning. I mean, why do we strive to live longer? Why is that so meaningful? Be rational with great difficulty. Yeah, but fundamentally, and maybe that's a tool, but there is underneath this. You said it was an instinct. So we could take that apart a little bit. So the prefrontal cortex grew out of the motor cortex. So the motor cortex enables you to engage in voluntary activity. The prefrontal cortex enables you to abstractly represent motor activity, play it out in an avatar like universe and kill off stupid ideas and make you feel like you're in a real world. You can kill off stupid ideas before they kill you. So we we've evolved to produce hypotheses and we find this to be astoundingly meaningful. And. You know, and again, this this idea of, well, it's finitude and that gives us joy and it's sort of like Sophie's Choice. Well, at least she has a choice. And it's like, no, no, Sophie's Choice is a choice that no one wants to make. We can test them through through dialectic often and dispense with those that don't work. And so we've we've staked ourselves on that attempt and we've evolved to be able to do that. And science, I believe, is the extension of that, the practical. And what drives so much of it is meaning. And meaning is in many ways the fuel of that engine. Extension of that. The most successful extension. Yes, it's well, so successful so far. Right. So far we have the time frame problem. Yeah, exactly. On the apocalyptic end, let me ask you what you think of this. So. We have a particular view of a hydrogen atom. Now it's very reductionistic. Right. And you can see the power of that because we understand hydrogen atoms well enough to make them to turn them into bombs. Yeah. But you you could. Some of you might remember my Tiger Bombs video. Also argue that. It's because of that. It's because of the limitations of that form of knowledge that we were inclined to turn them into bombs, that we separated the hydrogen atom from its context, its broad, broad, broad context. It enabled us to manipulate a tiny fragment of reality to exclude the rest of reality from that consideration that bestowed upon us a tremendous power. But look what it produced. And that I would agree. I think Peterson is making his point that this this one eyed manipulation of the hydrogen atom was driven by the other eye. That this is what we're going to make so we can be safe from our enemies, the Ruskies. The hydrogen bomb. And you know, that could be evidence that the theory, however practically useful for producing deadly machinery, was not useful at all at a larger scale of analysis. And that's the that's the paradox, I guess, of the reductionistic approach. Yeah, I think. Well, you know, it's kind of like reminds me of the of the Sorcerer's Apprentice, a movie with Mickey Mouse or whatever it was. Mickey Mouse. Yeah. And is the sense that it's it is a remarkable. Well, maybe maybe I should do Spider-Man with great power comes great responsibility. But but which may be a summary of your book. But anyway, responsibility and morality are in bed together there. The. We have this weird I can't agree with you more. We have this weird dichotomy. We've discovered science. The scientific method was a. We've discovered it or we've developed it. Discovery. It took a while to discover it when the Greeks didn't have it. They did a lot. But if they'd been able to know about empirical evidence, they would have done a lot more. So where does this where did we discover it? Where was it lying? Where we found it? Or did we develop it? And so it was a discovery. And it's a discovery that was incredibly powerful that works. Because it's funny, because before. You know, meaning is something that, well, we don't discover it. It doesn't appear down into what we make it. But science comes from above. But we humans, you know, didn't evolve and didn't evolve to discover the scientific method. I mean, we had the capability and therefore we. Because there's no purpose in the universe, so it wasn't we it wasn't there was no purpose in us discovering it. There's no providence. It's just we walked along one day and science there was of all sorts of evolutionary baggage that makes us human. And so we're on the one hand have this incredible power by using the scientific method. But on the other hand, have the fact that we are human and we have all the slings and arrows that came with being human. All of the evolutionary, evolutionary positive and negative features of having developed the psyche as you described it. One with you know, I had a podcast with Joseph Ladeau. I don't know if you know him. We talked a great deal about fear and the amygdala and how those things play out. But so we have we have this we have the people that are manipulating the scientific method who are who are subject to all of the concerns that may. People who are manipulating the scientific method. Oh, like you manipulate your neighbor or people who are employing the scientific method in order to what? I don't know. Maybe maybe that's enough. Maybe that's enough. Maybe that's enough. But I I just don't buy any of this. I I don't know what kind of a physicist he is, but when it comes to these kinds of questions, he's just all over the place. Leave a comment. Tell me what you know.