https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=l7Ta24QUcoo

 Hi, this is Paul. I've got a couple of announcements to make. On May 2 the Independent Institute is hosting an event with Jordan Peterson in San Francisco. It's at the Marines Memorial Club and Theater and we will be doing a, I am going and good number of people from my meetup are going and good number of people from the Fresno meetup are going and so the good people at the Independent Institute have given us a room to do a meetup in from 4 to 6 before the event and so if you're interested in coming to that meetup and you'll be in the area sign up very quickly because the slots are filling up soon, are filling up quickly. I do have some special price tickets and so if you're interested in that and going to the meetup send me an email and my email is just my name at gmail.com and but it'll have to be if you're not sending it today, which is Thursday that probably won't be there. So but if you if there is space at the meetup and you do want to meet with us as we have our meetup before the meetup before the Peterson event sign up on the on the meetup.com page, I'll put the link below and even if you can't make the meetup, but you want to come to the event the event is at the Marine Memorial Club to go to the event because it is a private event first you have to join the Independent Institute which has a minimum donation of $25 regular tickets are $75 and there are special $300 tickets for the event plus a VIP reception afterwards and I'm told by the event organizers this isn't like the other VIP the the other VIP receptions afterwards. This one has wine and hors d'oeuvres and it's meant to be a much more relaxed communal event. So those tickets are $300 regular tickets are $75 you have to pay $25 to join the Independent Institute to be able to attend this. You can do all of that on the website and so I'll have the link to the website below and if you're going to the event and you want to meet with our you want to participate in our meetup go to the meetup.com website and I'll put the link of put that link below as well and you can join us before the event in the library at the Marines Memorial Club and theater where we'll have a meetup from 4 to 6. Also the people that organize the Independent Institute are also involved with the C.S. Lewis Society of California and in June I will be hosting a discussion of 12 rules for life as part of the C.S. Lewis Society and for my contribution I'll probably emphasize some of the relationships between C.S. Lewis and Jordan Peterson some of which I've talked about in my videos so that will be the book club and this is held in Oakland and I'll put the link to the book club in the in the notes below and that will be on June 5 and June 19 it's at 730 at night in Oakland, California and the address is here. I don't think there's really a sign up for that. There's no cost to it just letting you know that that's going to happen and if you're interested in the C.S. Lewis Society of California I'll include the website below. So yeah, those are a couple upcoming events. If you're in the Bay Area and you want to meet up with us hope to see you.