https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TA30OhJTLPQ

 Hi, this is Paul. Over the weekend there's another Jordan Peterson-Russell Brand conversation. Now just today dropped the Jordan Peterson-Bishop Aaron conversation, but I've been having conversations all day so I haven't had a chance to watch that one yet. I saw about a quarter of it and there are certainly some things I'm going to want to point out in that conversation. But over the weekend someone sent me this conversation with Russell Brand and again I thought it was excellent. Now I know that Russell Brand even admits it later in this conversation, as does Jordan Peterson. A lot of people don't have a lot of respect for Russell Brand. I just sort of knew him as some comedian clown who had marital and drug problems until he had those conversations with Jordan Peterson during the first wave. But Russell Brand seems to bring out a lot of the topics with Jordan Peterson that I'm interested in. I don't pay a lot of attention to how I dress for these things. I guess Russell Brand really doesn't. But I again found this to be a really cool conversation. I was a little disappointed there's a part two to it which isn't in the public domain. Not that I don't mind paying a little bit of money to listen to things. I don't think there's any problem with paying for content. But I can't really do a commentary on something that isn't in sort of out there available like this without violating the paywall that he has set up. So unless he releases the second part outside the paywall this will be the only part that I do any commentary on with the recording. If I actually go to listen to it then I can make comments on it without the recording. That's certainly not running afoul of the rules. But again I found this to be I find Russell Brand tends to get Jordan Peterson talking about the kinds of things I think Jordan Peterson is helpful to listen to. So let's jump in. You spoke on your daughter's podcast and Michaela's podcast which is on YouTube. You talked about gratitude and now you're you know what I was interested to hear you describe your state as somewhat uncertain and fearful in particular because I feel that many of the people that have criticized you and many of the people that adore you attracted were attracted to at least this perception of strident certainty ethical and moral certainty, intellectual rigor. Is there anything that you would alter about the kind of your position as a public figure prior to these series of crises? Do you see it as sort of a necessary and... If he would have his be able to describe this as first and second wave it would actually be a little bit easier but Russell hasn't quite got there in terms of understanding that Jordan Peterson waves. Just the kind of evolutions that narrative produces all the time or would you say there's anything that you would now withdraw or reframe? Well I would say that whatever transformations might be occurring with me I would say occur. And again Jordan's use of these word transformations is very interesting. I just did a video last week on noting how he was using that term with Brett Weinstein. Have occurred in the realm of ideas. The new book that I've written Beyond Order is more communitarian. It's more liberal than the first book technically speaking. It's also because it concentrates on the dangers of order rather than the dangers of chaos. And so that's a nice balance to the first book and that was part of the plan the vision from the beginning. You know Jordan Peterson always gets this take as some at least by his critics on the left as some ardent right-wing neo-fascist conservative Nazi but there's just no evidence for that. And again this I haven't started reading his second book yet. I share my Amazon credentials with my son and he was reading it so I've got lots of other books to read on Audible or to listen to on Audible so I've held back and I think my son's done now so I'll probably start digging into it. But what I heard about the second book in this video made me more excited to read it than anything else I've seen so far. You know people who are concerned with an excess of chaos tend to be more conservative and people who are concerned with an excess of order tend to be more liberal all things considered. And I started with a book about chaos for and concluded at least this two book series with a book on the dangers of order. But it's also the second book is also more communitarian in nature so I've stressed for example the importance of community and relationship in the maintenance of sanity. Like we outsource the problem of maintaining our own sanity to the people around us and then all we have to do is pay attention to their cues. And I think this is I was really happy to hear him talk about this because I think from the first book it was it was overly emphasized and in the first wave overall the individualism, the individuality. Yet again part of why I started doing what I was doing with the work that Jordan Peterson was putting out there in public is the fact that what he said just here in terms of we not only outsource our sanity we outsource our cognition to a large degree to the communities that we participate in. And again this can be I've been talking about platforms lately. There might be a particular author that you read often. It might be a particular news source. This gets into the rebel wisdom sense making thing. But the communities that we participate in, whether these are virtual communities which we're now using these electronic platforms to sort of relate to or whether they're the family that we're in, the church community we belong to, a civic community, our workplace. These are all tremendously determinative of so much of the trajectory of where our life goes and what we do. But that and some of that's derived from what's happened to me. I mean what I've observed over the last two years has been an unbelievable outpouring of support. Now a little bit earlier in the video he talked about the fact that with all of his medical problems he was and it's a grim startling picture. You know when I was setting up the conversation with Andrea and Jonathan Bichot, Andrea asked you know well why don't you talk to Jonathan right away about his conversation with Jordan? I said well I don't you know don't necessarily feel the need to talk to Jordan right away about things. He's putting plenty of things out there in public and these are the things in the public that he wants there to be out there or he wouldn't be putting them out there and so there's plenty of things for me to work with. But if there's one thing I thought of this this morning if there's one thing I would love to talk to him about it would be his prayer life. What do you mean by that? Does he pray? Well does he pray? His wife prays in at least her own form. She's praying with the rosary but I do know that myself having been someone who's been a Christian all my life when I am in pain and I'm not going to pretend that I've ever suffered anything like what Jordan Peterson has suffered but when I suffer I prayer is a is a nearly instinctive reaction to this and and that doesn't mean that prayer is like Tylenol that you take and your your pain or your problems go away but you sort of wrestle through things with prayer and and he talked about a little bit earlier about he was wondering is he lost his clinical practice. It's questionable whether he could actually ever go and once again be a university professor in the way that he was and he very much enjoyed that occupation as he said and he was a terrific lecturer that was obvious. He loved working with graduate students. He said that before. There have been many other details of this and what has happened to him in his life has completely disrupted his life. Now he's talking about community and again part of I think one of the weaknesses of Jordan's book is that or not this book because I haven't read this book yet but of Jordan's work is that like many he has paid insufficient attention to these mediating institutions. Now this is not uncommon for someone who hasn't really paid much attention to church because for people who are serious members of church, church is a significant mediating institution and it provides a community to maintain sanity and a community for sensemaking and a community for a great many other things and if you don't have a church in your life you don't have that and so then what are those communities that are doing that. Now family is obviously a very big community and I'll actually talk about his father and his family to a degree in this but part of what's been in but work for many people, a work cohort for many people is a significant community but one of the things that we've noticed with Jordan is that it's sort of his family and his work community they've all sort of become one thing. Now there's nothing wrong with that, I've known plenty of people in family businesses but it's a little narrow and so you really want it broad. Now he talks about the friend that he walks with and so I really hope that he does have friends but I know he does have friends but Eddie has friends with which he uses to do this and he's going to talk about you talked about that with Brett Weinstein, we'll talk about that a little bit here but one of the things about a self-selected community, part of the weaknesses of a self-selected community is that there's too much you in it and again part of what's good about a church is that it isn't self-selected it's more of an estuary there's there's inflow and outflow and it's not really a community that you have much control over especially if you're not the pastor so but again his focus on community is I think a very welcome development in in his body of work over the last three years. For my wife and my family and me with punctuated exceptions obviously but broadly speaking my family has come through, my family and my wife's family have been so supportive of us it exceeds any expectations I would have had to begin with people went out of their way so much to come live with us for weeks at a time and take care of either her or me or both of us and that was family and friends and so I have a friend right now who walks with me every day, a friend from college and you know I have a really close friendship with him that's really been cemented hard again over the last six months but he came to visit me in Russia you know I had lots of people who went way out of their way and it was life-saving for both of us and then I got a tremendous amount of support from my viewers and listeners and readers and you know they sent when Tammy was in the hospital they sent. This gets into where he talked with Jonathan Peugeot about is your fan, are your fans, to what degree are your fans community? That's when I compare let's say my relationship with my fans if we would call them that and there are I suppose are a few and my relationship with let's say my congregation in church is a very different relationship. My fans are far more deferential than the people in church, the people in church are far more likely to tell me exactly what they think, my people in church are far more likely to angry with me and disagree with me and their loyalty is not primarily to me but it's to the church which becomes sort of a third thing. That's a really helpful thing in the context of a relationship because what it means is that a different community dynamic happens in the church even with me as pastor and in the Christian Reformed Church traditionally pastors didn't have sort of the same relationship with a local church let's say the way an evangelical pastor might have with a local church because pastors sort of came and went and the church as a community has such sort of stayed together and again it's those dynamics that are not centered around me that are so important within a church because I can get better feedback from others in terms of well am I doing right am I doing wrong, correction, people in church are far more likely to tell me exactly what they think about me or what I'm doing. Hundreds of letters talking about praying for us you know my sister printed a lot of those out and put them up on the hospital wall in bright colors and you know it was really helpful and so you know I'd realized. And that's just classic church stuff because if you're at least in a medium or small size church and you're ill there's usually some support that comes from the church. You can think about this in some sense I think about it in ways as an elaboration of the hero mythology which I'm very interested in you know the the archetypal hero goes into the unknown and gains something of value or sometimes fights a tyrant and and and reconstitutes the kingdom but I will leave that part of it out for now. You go out into the unknown and find something of value and bring it back but then it's shared and distributed that's the second part of that story the communicative aspect of it. And I think right now after as Jordan Peterson is emerging from the underworld I hope that is what happens with him because many of us who followed him closely in the first wave felt his absence and he comes back. We want to hear from the underworld we really do and and I know he's you know he doesn't want to have his body of work be be focused on that which I which I completely understand. It is a part of this story and that's partly I mean I'm very interested in communicative technology but but it's also the case that an element of that is that that's something that it's like King Arthur and the round table. King Arthur's the king and the knights are you know in some sense subordinate to him but not really. It's a round table and every knight enters the forest at the place that looks darkest to him but there's a group effort there and the redemptive process let's say that which is what hero mythology concentrates on in the final analysis is something that is everyone's responsibility but that we all need help with. It's so interesting because it's your problem but you can have help it's okay that you have help that everyone is on board and so I think that I understand that more deeply what that means now and and hopefully I'm expressing that in my last book and well in you know. At that point that it's your process but everyone can help again when I listen to this and I think about community as the church should be as sometimes it is often it fails to be but that that is sort of what happens in a church context because in a church context there is sort of one mission that everyone is a part of so you can have help and I thought he said that really really well here. All these YouTube interviews that I'm doing not on other people's shows like I am with you right now but I'm trying to let other people speak I mean I interrupt a lot and I talk a lot but I you know I'm trying to highlight the accomplishments of other people as much as I possibly can and I'm really happy about that and I'm really happy about that and it's really necessary there's there's no that it's good negative to it at all. This um journeying into darkness and returning with the bounty or boon in order that it may be communally shared is yes like an important and powerful narrative. Do you think that we are somewhat politically bereft when in the narrow spectrum of countries such as the United States there is a heavy focus on individualism wherever you might fall in that admittedly narrow spectrum? It is a little funny that of course Russell Brand I assume he's living in the U.S. now but he's a he's a native of the UK Jordan Peterson's a Canadian. I don't know but I mean there's just always this this this focus on American politics maybe maybe because I live in the United States but when I lived in the Dominican Republic during the 90s I almost forgot about American politics I missed a lot of the Clinton administration because I was living out of the country but it just just fascinates me again how much attention to American politics. Now individualism of course is a big deal in the West and it's a big deal in Peterson's work. I.e. liberalism for want of a better word is it seems to me to be focused very much on the individual the rights of the individual the role of the individual and traditionally the pursuit of the American dream and individualism has been sort of perhaps is the backbone of I mean political conservatism in America. Do you think this kind of dearth of real communal values is a strong or even governing factor in this kind of political nadir America in particular but the world seems to be experiencing? It's a good question I mean I do think in the West that if we go back to that fundamental hero mythology the hero story is that the romantic emphasis is often placed on the journey outward and the heroic encounter and not so much on the return home and the distribution. Now his point there about the romantic emphasis will be really important because one of the things that I was thinking about when I first listened to this video was how Russell Brand will always bring things back to what he'll think of as spirituality and I think Peterson rightly understands this as a function of romanticism. Okay what do we mean by romanticism? Romanticism is this movement this cultural movement in the West obviously Rousseau has a great deal to do with it but it's this cultural movement in the West where objectivity becomes such a central focus that the individual is lost and the romantic or romanticism tends to be this you know pulling things back to subjectivity and it's an assertion of the primacy of subjectivity. Now that's a really big deal because when you look at let's say all of the discussions of wokeism and the rise of the woke there's a lot of romanticism in that sort of this standpoint epistemology is all about the assertion of the primacy of the subjective individual and the claim that all of society must bow their knee to that and so later I mean part of what was interesting about this video is sort of this tug of war between Peterson and his scientific approach which is modernistic scientific approach and Russell Brand keep wanting to pull back to all of this sort of new age language about spirituality and consciousness and Peterson keeps interjecting about the romanticism in there and the romantic and I think that's quite right and then Peterson is going to equate and this happens in the Bishop Barron video at least the part that I've watched so far religious with the value and that's true too but yet the domains are completely identical and each of those are equally important and the heroic encounter and not so much on the return home and the distribution and each of those are equally important clearly I mean if you find something valuable and then you can share it with other people obviously that multiplies the value and I do think that you're right that the the liberal message has emphasized the individual element of that and comparatively de-emphasized the other element but I don't see anything really nefarious in that fundamentally I think it's it isn't obvious that we know how to do that I can give you an example okay so well I've been talking to people like Bjorn Lomborg and Matt Ridley and and Michael Shermer and and who else would fit in that category Steven Pinker these irrational optimist types materialist atheists fundamentally and that that's not a criticism enlightenment types and they keep hammering home the message that if you look at the data a man Marion Toopey has written a beautiful coffee table book showing this it's 10 trends that every educated person should be aware of and then a bunch of micro trends if you look at major economic trends globally so many things are getting better so quickly although still incrementally that it's really it's unparalleled in human history and it's accelerating but it isn't obvious how to make that romantic and and and so it's it's a problem with storytelling to some degree it's like well what do you say to young if black lives matter or antifa or or or right wing groups that have a conspiratorial element call to a romantic element in young people they they offer them an adventure and that's really important but an adventure the adventure of incremental rational progress isn't an adventure right it's almost the opposite of that it's slow and incremental and and diffuse and now i'm anticipating a conversation between Jordan Peterson and John Verveke and it's right at this point where that conversation is going to get interesting because of course John Verveke has been less sanguine on the hero's journey and and i think so i i had i recently had a conversation with raf kelly just today i had another conversation with raf kelly and john verveke both were outstanding conversations now rafes release of videos is slower than mine and i don't want to you know i want to let him release those videos when he's ready to and then once he releases them for his channel i'll put copies on my channel but this this question of the individual of narrative of a hero's journey all of those come in and they are enormously powerful things partly because almost every human being is equipped to handle those things as sort of their primary frame of reference and that makes them just in terms of the populace so powerful whereas a lot of the abstraction i just looked up her book as he was talking a lot of these other things require sort of this abstract perspective on the world which science sort of affords via statistics and theoretical thought but that's not the native language it's it's sort of like speaking phd level math well you can do it with enormous precision and a group of people will know a lot of what you're talking about but the vast majority of the population will not and and i think that's part of what jordan's getting into here with this it's hard to make that into an adventure and so the communitarian element is it's not easy to transform into a motivating message and i and and again one of the things that you see in in movies is that if something happens historically and they make a movie about it well they'll often do a lot of damage to the facts of the case let's call it in order to make a compelling movie and you know to what degree have they actually just made a different story but you know the point that jordan makes there is really an important point and i mean that's i was trying to do that to some degree in in in beyond order you know that trying to make that into a into a and i think you know part of the reason c.s lewis abandoned straightforward apologetics non-fiction intervention wrote eventually wrote the chronicles of narnia and till we have faces i think is exactly because of this now whether or not lewis was successful Tolkien certainly was a message that was of mode trying to make that into a into a message that was of motivational significance and that's really it you have to do that if you you know because look there's there's nothing that's not within our grasp now russell as a as a as a species that's a big statement i'm dubious we can do whatever we want now we have to figure out what we should do and then we have to figure out how to communicate that in a way that's motivating to everyone so everyone's on board that's the problem that faces us i've become concerned by these this idea of progressivism i feel that it's sometimes used to underwrite a kind of uh intransigence around power and i think it's used as a panacea to dissolve the voices of discontented people brand is really interesting because on what sometimes he can sound just like i mean if you listen to what he just said there he both deconstructed progressivism and in a sense supported it all in one sentence and i've got a you know i've got sympathy for that there there is a there is a real case to be made that many of those who are on the front lines of the sort of progressivist world view with their projects yeah if if people buy into their projects they will continue to have a more enhanced status and more wealth and more power and control so brand is an interesting critter but the point he's making is not without its truth the idea of looking at like look you can see that the average like a hundred years ago there was people who have had rickets in victoria in england i feel that the challenge is that for me what that does spiritually is it denies okay spiritually what do you mean by that word and i think peterson is right to tag romanticism here because what he's elevating is his subjective experience and in a sense claiming a degree of religious ontological authority to that individual subjective romantic experience and so when i listen to brand a lot of what i'm listening to okay he's using this word spiritually he's going to use it a lot and what do you mean by that let's let's up the resolution on that and that's what i think he means something that i can plainly see before my eyes that something that is subjective that's what you're looking for something that's emotive and peterson just acknowledged that he said well this needs to be we need to figure out how to communicate it in a motivational way so peterson's just using different pulling his words from a different vocabulary big corporations and state power are collaborating in order to conserve power and to i think people are becoming less and less able to exercise agency in ordinary life i'm talking about countries like like you know anglophonic countries in particular i think the pandemic is you know uh whether you know most people would say this again is where brent because okay are you a conspiracy theorist that might we might imagine way over on the far right are you or maybe he's just so far right and far left at the same time the circles kind of come together in sort of a weird place he necessarily has bought about a lot of legislation that's not been through due democratic process i feel that it's allowed big tech to have more access to people's data and i personally query the objectives of uh like some of these it always uses pulses query the objectives strange way of talking almost insurmountably large corporations particularly when they have uh governments that quick to placate them and operate primarily in this service you put your finger on a fundamental problem i mean imagine so for the incremental progressivists they look at the average right and and what jordan really does here was a nice master way of retranslating brand the average and if you look for example at the average number of calories that someone in sub-saharan africa has access to now it's like it's they have access to as many calories per day as the typical person in portugal did in 1960 so it's a walloping transformation they've passed uh satiety so what will happen now is that the next problem on the consumption side that faces sub-saharan africans on average will be a rise in obesity but the problem with the with statistics or even ideas that concentrate on the average is you you don't take into account the distribution and so just because the average has improved massively doesn't mean that there's not problems of unequal distribution severe problems of unequal distribution so imagine we have two these are existential problems though in some sense they're not political problems they're deeper than political problems you have the problem of absolute privation and and that's the that's the normal state of affairs you're born with nothing in some sense right it left to your own devices you just starve and die so that's that's the susceptibility to absolute privation and then the second problem is the susceptibility to relative privation and those are both big problems you know and so the optimists say well look we're really really uh solving the problem of absolute privation and they say well every day 200 000 people in the world are lifted out of the un's definition of abject poverty so maybe they slide from a dollar 90 a day to two dollars and ten cents a day and that's to be celebrated but then at the same time you can say well yeah but they're still living on two dollars and ten cents a day and both of those are right simultaneously like it is something worth celebrating but it's also it doesn't there's still the lingering problem of relative deprivation and when you hear everybody rattling about inequality that's why and it's valid it's not like there's not a valid point there i would also query that was excellent those metrics somewhat in the the the lens through which we're regarding the problem is discounting i think a large part of what it is to be human i just spent sort of an hour talking to vandana shiva again whose experience of being human the indian academic ecologist and like she's a very powerful woman incredibly anti-establishment challenging the sort of the influence of bill gates the the um the patenting of seeds over there in india the negative impact of big tech on their agricultural industry and what she clearly regards as yes malfeasance and the deliberate um disruption of the indian way of life and like to speak when i speak i wish i knew more about it i don't know if i'm gonna have the patience to watch that conversation but the indian way of life which indian way of life and and this what you find with national narratives we've got this in the united states of course i'm sure canada has it where i imagine what like the family farm and but when i imagine the family farm i imagine it with vaccinations and hospitals nearby that can do expensive and extensive treatment on people so that life is life expectancy because this this idealized version of the past oh you mean you want an infant mortality rate of india in the 1950s or the 1920s or the 1870s which which idealized india do you want to go to and it's always part of the problem of these anti-establishment narratives when how tyrannical has the indian establishment been since the end of the raj i don't know i really don't know the most i've read is a very interesting dual biography of churchill and gandhi which which went through some of that history but so so you're complaining about who come and comparing india to what indian golden age with somebody like that like these i feel that that kind of data and you know i think i've spoken to some of the people you know harari people i sort of admire and respect to tell good stories i feel that those stories are promoted because they can be used to underwrite the myth of progressivism because materially scientifically medically there's doubtlessly been so many incredible advances and i think what we neglect is something that seems to me you're very interested in our spiritual evolution our okay what do you mean by spiritual there personal awakening and like as you said what do you mean by awakening there i mean all of these things i love this one it feels a conversation between glenn laury and john mcwarter john mcwarter says something in that like you know you can imagine a soundtrack in other words again we're so deep in movies that you imagine this this this movie soundtrack of everything going great and these these images i mean it looks like a it looks like a drug commercial for erectile dysfunction drugs it's you know you can imagine a soundtrack but but but really what are you talking about and and this is i thought peterson's being very patient he obviously likes russell brand but i think this is really part of the reason this pairing of conversations is very strong because i think part of what peterson part of the contribution that peterson made was he could take a lot of this romanticist spiritualish conversation and translate it into things that were at least accessible to people who weren't just looking for a movie soundtrack in their lives said a moment ago jordan the fact is is we could imagine and dream and create all manner of systems into being and what we are prohibited from imagining what we're prohibited from creating frustrates me but both from this okay so we could think about that technically in some sense again so now we could say there's three problems there's an absolute privation problem there's a relative privation problem and now there's also the problem of rank ordering values and i would say that's the spiritual problem the spirit there you go he just he basically redefined spirituality as rank ordering values now i don't think that exhausts it by any means but it certainly illuminates and i think to a degree deconstructs what what russell brand is pushing here spiritual problem is something like well what is most important and vital and how do we know that that's what we're pursuing and that's the fundamental religious question which is what is it that is of most value now yes and this actually comes up in the bishop baron conversation too that is certainly one aspect of religion is the value hierarchy but again i would assert and maybe he would agree with me i don't know that that certainly doesn't exhaust it but but it is an incredibly important one what what should orient in the final analysis what should orient us so you see that expressed in stories like the pinocchio story for example which i use consistently because well it's a work of just defined it as a religious and then he didn't use a religious story he's been was the pinocchio religious story well certainly but it's not a story found in and what we in a secular society would regard as a religious text genius and and millions of people have watched it and found it compelling and so it's a cultural phenomenon so it's worthy of inquiry but so geppetto orients himself to a star and that's what and so he's properly oriented right he lifts his eyes above the horizon to something glittering and bright in the darkness he's properly oriented and that's why he can raise pinocchio to be something other than a puppet right he can raise him up to be a fully developed human being it's a religious issue and the question is well what is the star that should guide us and well that's something we have to talk about an awful lot i mean i'm interested in hero mythology primarily because the stories we tell one another and have told one another from time immemorial constitute our attempts to orient ourselves properly in life towards whatever the highest value might be and it's part that's really helpful and important now again vervecky's going to push him on if they go here with their conversation and it'll be probably between one and two hours and i would love to see i would love to see much more extensive conversations between john and jordan it's a shame that they had had a conversation that john told me about previously which wasn't recorded which john thought was actually the better of the conversations of the two the second one you can find on youtube which i think is also a good conversation but this is this is let's listen to this again part of an or from time the stories we tell one another and have told one another from time immemorial constitute our attempts to orient ourselves properly in life towards whatever the highest value might be and it's part of an ongoing discussion that the whole human race participates in that that that's part that's part of the process by which we we we identify and rank order and communally celebrate let's say and pursue our values now that does get into the platforms conversation because whereas we might imagine that this was hosted in synagogues and monasteries and places places of that nature today where is it hosted the universities the magazines movie theaters governments the arts and it's of crucial importance to do that ritually and dramatically and also explicitly and philosophically so and it's a it's also a problem it is a problem when i when i've talked to bjorn lomborg and matt ridley and and marian tupi for that matter about their work i mean one of the things they're perfectly aware of this that there's something lacking in the story of progress against absolute deprivation it's not enough that's that's part of what makes it lack its compelling nature apart from the criticism that you raised which is well what about relative privation which is a perfectly relative relevant criticism but you have to have both of those like just because there's still relative poverty doesn't mean that victory over absolute poverty isn't worth celebrating it it certainly is no so okay so we have to orient ourselves spiritually absolutely i agree with that there's no doubt about that my sense is now what exactly jordan means by spiritually there um that's very interesting to me that this um you know um vanquishing of absolute poverty poverty is an inadvertent side effect of different objectives that are to do with the conservation and perpetuation of the abiding machinery of commerce capitalism and consumerism maybe an inadvertent consequence like fruits wow that's a deeply cynical view that's a deeply cynical view for example when you don't you sometimes when you think of like slavery and the abolition of slavery that that slavery was maintained for as long as possible then there comes a point where it's like god we can't get away with slavery anymore but we can why not why not you can't get away with it anymore because yeah that's a deeply cynical view we will we will rescind our right to have slaves but we will keep an economic class primarily made up of people you know in say the case of the united states of america made up from that same kind of background you know that these kind of and like that can then be rightly labeled progress but in terms of a kind of a an epiphany a cultural and social social epiphany now i know he really needs to do more reading of the abolition movement just even you know i read a book couple of years ago on john brown you know on on the i visited harriet beecher stowe's house in new england and you know the you know what uncle tom's cabin did you know we can bring up romanticism here too but but this ability to for people to imaginatively enter into into figuring out what it'd be like to be a slave there was that that uk that bbc people often pointed to me series civilization i think it was episode 13 he talked about dickens and you know what dickens did in western culture and to uk society was via the arts via literature expose and and and this this this relies on romanticism because you take this image and and this is what's this is what has in some ways been behind most of the liberationist movements in the last 150 years or so i should probably re-watch that and take a look at that again because that that ability and i think it's it's dependent upon mass media that ability to project a mindset of injustice and suffering at a scale which especially in a democratic society moves people has has done a lot for the people movements that we've seen in the last 150 years i have a phone call to make and so i have to pause this here and hopefully after that i'll be able to come back to it suppose i'm suggesting there are universals that there is an absolute north star that we can all refer to but isn't any religious man making that claim that there is i think it's too i think it's too one-sided russell because i mean there's no doubt that that corruption exists and that hierarchies can degenerate into power structures and become tyrannical and counterproductive but that's what happens when they degenerate it's it's that isn't how a properly functioned human hierarchy works and they're not very stable if they degenerate in that manner let me give you an example you can tell me what you think about this and and then i'll talk about slavery particularly because it wasn't just an economic calculation to get rid of slavery i mean there is britain the movement to abolish slavery was was driven by truly believing christians they had a walloping effect over a number of decades in eradicating slavery it was a moral move and you know it was replaced in some sense by another kind of slavery but one thing that happened in some sense is that as modern the modern economic system displaced the slave system which had existed forever we all became our own slaves right now before we go there and and the history of slavery in america i mean certainly part of it was this moral movement by christians and abolitionists talked about harry beecher stowe little uncle toms cabin you know another part of it in let's say it's in california folks from the south came over with their slaves northerners came over and they they resented the they resented the slavery california was a free state i mean the the history the the history of of the end of slavery in the uk and the united states is extremely well documented people pay very little attention to it because most people enslave themselves for eight hours a day and then they can be free men the other 16 and so we've substituted our own slavery and the slavery of machines for the slavery of others that wasn't only technical it was also a moral decision and i i don't think you should discount the moral striving that went into that because it's an important part of the historical record and you don't want to you don't want to ignore the contribution of moral people in the past to our progress right because it gives you a very dim view of humanity lots of people knew slavery was undesirable and wrong and and risked a tremendous amount to to to move beyond it actually so i wouldn't discount that moral contribution you know with regard to any of the great cultural conversations and conflicts but what i feel is that the inverted commas the system is most adept at absorbing what is required and repackaging for example now again it's very interesting because the system is is identified now with russell brand and so someone for whom and this is a common thing that you see often people are very quick to dismiss dismiss corporate agencies let's say in some regards and but somehow they take on evil and it's you know here's this here's this corporate agency that is evil but they're skeptical about all kinds of other evil it's very interesting the way these biases work out in us when um like you know when british colonization of india ended there we sort of soon see the establishment of economic entities that are in this the ending of of the raj in india is itself an enormous an enormous um Remus the interesting history and then the division of india from pakistan bangladesh enable a continuum of comparable relationships so ordinary life for many people in that region doesn't significantly improve i feel that most power that is conceded is conceded under the condition that it doesn't affect the interests of the powerful significantly that there are is a rarefied strata of society now again this is a very subtle right here and right there notices criticism which is absolutely appropriate most power that's conceded it they're not looking to take a big hit and okay who does take a big hit for the welfare of others who does say your well-being at my expense you know christian morality is deeply underneath this and the idea that the whole the whole narrative that one of absolute power should empty himself and become a slave well philippians chapter 2 it's right there now he's not thinking about christ he's not thinking about that but that has become in many ways the de facto definition of what someone with great power does and now he kind of you know takes a swipe at bill gates after a conversation with someone else bill gates and the gates foundation in a very serious way i mean bill gates bill and melinda gates their goal is not to inherit their enorm not to not to basically give their children their absolutely enormous wealth i mean if you're if you're looking around for baddies who preserve their privilege uh bill gates probably not on that list which is i would say somewhat immobile although you guys suppose we could argue that the emergence of these new the barons that have replaced oil and steel barons in the tech world you know that that is different there's some sort of fluidity there is you know that i'm not arguing against that but what i'm saying is is that if we have a goal and i'm not i'm not talking about old you know like marxism socialism the left in those terms i'm actually talking about i'm talking about the realization of god's kingdom on earth like you know bam the realization of god's kingdom on earth and and what's again what's so interesting about brand so he's got his chakras down one he's got a crucifix here he's got ganache there um okay and now you're sort of playing in my ballpark what would the realization of god's kingdom look like on earth sit down and seriously think about that and not just some moment poignant moment in a movie with a soundtrack look at the good place or upload or i mean look what you what you bump into very quickly is wow how would that work i have no idea when you talk about in a personal way jordan the idea that there may be someone that would look benevolently upon you if they knew that you were living your life trying to be beautiful oh that wouldn't would it be benevolence then or would it just simply be earned because and and again okay so how does how does this scale then out to the rest of the world what type of world what type of communities what type of systems what type of democracies might we favor if um if this became our shared collective and and individual priorities and that's what we're trying to figure out russell that's why and i think this is a great answer you know again back to those of you who've been listening to not just the videos with jordan peterson and them but the other videos too you get into this and this is deeply within christianity okay so jesus comes i'm a christian minister so this is what i talk about jesus comes at least according to the story he's the perfect man what happens to him in the world the world to what degree can the age of decay support the utopia that you imagine can you imagine a utopia why we're having this conversation and that's what we're trying to figure out russell that's why we're having this conversation yes that's what we're trying to figure out if it fundamentally i believe that that's that's that's the purpose of real discussion and i think one of the reasons that youtube conversations like this have become so powerful is because you can actually have those discussions you know it's so what we're doing is so different than network tv it's it's so different it's so revolutionary like i was talking to a wall street journal an interesting change of subject uh uh reporter i don't mean that dismissively i mean that's the way these conversations go but here we're beginning to focus on and then we're over to network tv today and and i said well why do you like youtube and he said well the the conversations just follow this unpredictable thread forward and it's so interesting to watch them i said well that's the logos in action that's what you're seeing there's nothing more compelling than that so think about what he just said it's pretty remarkable the assertion he just made we're doing and it's so interesting to watch them i said well that's the logos in action let's think in what he just said that's what you're seeing there's nothing more compelling than that so if we're doing this right look the last conversations we've had including the very last one have been received very positively and i believe the reason for that is i think that to the best of our mutual abilities we're trying to get smarter than we were before the conversation and i'd say not just get smarter but we're trying to we're seeking the kingdom of god in russell brand's own words isn't that really what we're trying to do and now we're seeking it in the flesh we're seeking it with each other we're seeking the good now we might not even be knowing we are trying to do that but you know i made my point in my sunday sermon that every video game producer the goal is to in a sense captivate 100 of the people 100 of the time every novelist every movie maker now now that has a particularly skewed image of what the realization of the kingdom is and you know i was talking about that with john verveke and jp marsau in our conversation because we're not happy with people looking at a computer screen or looking at a book or looking at screens in the home or in the movie theater we want to see this realization in the physical world and we want to see it permanent and and that's that's the kingdom of god and we we very quickly realized those who tried to tell stories about it that even with the amazing power that we have at cinema or literature that we really are bad at it we're not very good at it so it's it's not just the certainly getting smarter is is is a is a step on the way but this is what we're all pointing to because of the we're trying to get smarter than we were before the conversation because of the conversation yes and people respond extremely positively to that and isn't that wonderful that that's the case and so we we we are trying to figure this out and i would also say don't assume malevolence where ignorance is sufficient you know when you look at how a large system operates nice little wisdom you don't want to forget that part of the reason it's not doing so well is because people actually don't know how to do it better it's not the only reason malevolence exists for sure but you know and then what do you do well you try to dispel the ignorance your own ignorance what you and i are trying to do right now hopefully is to dispel our own ignorance and to share that process with the people who are watching and listening i believe that the reason that you had such a profound impact in your sort of um roaring campaign through identity politics through maleness is because to me at least it seemed as an observer it's underwritten by years of clinical practice a deep understanding of young and we and you were genuinely uh orate in on conquering unconscious territories of awakening out of the unconsciousness and like when you there's a lot of i mean i i could sit down and understand what he's saying but it is amazing and the bishop erin video starts this way too what on earth is happening i mean jordan peterson one of the question and answer quite a while ago you know basically said i played that for one of my clips that i played in australia for that conference you say that now you know don't assume malevolence when ignorance will suffice you know they they know not what they do most people are unconscious our systems are unconscious but for me there is a what's interesting about this is they're unconscious okay our systems are unconscious but you've just made the argument that the point of privilege and power and wealth is they don't seed power quickly and fair enough that's right but you can't just say well they're they're not seeding it unconsciously well that's part of the argument but you know a corporation is is there to do so and you know russell you've got status you've got money um that's part of you know the the the woman who's way up in black lives matter i mean vegumin voice is black lives manner it's just too funny it's is it's it's utterly remarkable very seldom will someone give their life for a good man but while we are still sinners christ died for us i mean that's that's the reason the story is as powerful as it is reason that mainstream media prohibits and precludes certain types of discourse favors other types of discourse and this for me is because okay and and but again i said russell braddon say okay russell as a preacher you know i i so often when people talk to preachers they think well pastor we need more sermons on that and part of me wants to say do you really think that would do any good do you really know how the human heart is organized i myself preach these sermons it's not a question of me not knowing the good or the right even the good or the right the doctor says take your medicine you don't take it the doctor says eat better and exercise and we don't do that the doctor says quit smoking you don't quit smoking people are not direct and so now we're going to scale it up to you know these systems don't have consciousness well you complain when they do have consciousness because you hold them guilty for for for for corrupting and and and destroying the world and you say well they don't have consciousness they're doing it blithely or unconsciously i mean it's it's you're sort of throwing things at the wall here to see what sticks there is let's let's take it apart for a minute let's take it apart because and again this is where i mean peterson is so good because brand comes at him with all of these new age-ish feel good-ish romantic romantic cliches and peterson really does a good job of sort of taking these things apart and saying okay well let's let's be more helpful and so yeah it's clinical practice but also you know the other knowledge that he has about this stuff it's really very impressive we'll start with the ignorance before malevolence issue and so we'll look for non-moral reasons first and then go to moral reasons and i think that's a that's a safe approach because you don't cast stones any more than necessary that way well there are massive technological differences between youtube and network tv despite the fact that they're both video the first is there's no bandwidth restriction bandwidth is now free you and i can talk for as long as we want and essentially no one has to pay for it except with their except with advertising attention and so and so and then it's permanent whereas with network tv it was evanescent it evaporated as soon as it was spoken well now this conversation will be around for probably longer than either of us would want it to be it's as permanent as a book and and that what that means too is that i don't have to assume that my audience has a limited attention span or no memory anymore because they can go i know that they can go out and find out things on their own yes we can and so when i go to do a network tv interview now it feels like i've transported myself back in time to 1950 and the person i'm talking to when i'm sitting in the green room before the interview they're a person and we have a conversation but as soon as the cameras go on they're no longer a person they're a puppet of a of a machine and i'm not saying that critically i'm saying because the bandwidth was so incredibly expensive the the there wasn't time for experimentation it was too expensive and so everything the interviewer did was scripted well then it was scripted according to essentially the dictates and interests of the corporation obviously and so then what you end up on with network tv is a discussion with a talking head representing that monolithic organization not just the monolithic organization but in fact a principality in fact i mean now let's bring the spiritual world back in in fact because what we see right now is people talk about the mainstream media i prefer talking about the mass media because it it sort of sidetracks that that political that political moniker but all of and to russell brand's credit here the the machine itself doesn't just represent the corporation it represents principalities and powers that go up from there that get manifest in there so i mean peterson is dead on right here but it's even bigger than what peterson is noting you're not talking to another person and if you were that person would get fired right because they would now be an individual instead of this immense machine that was necessary because the communication technology was so expensive look at david fuller's interview with trigonometry that he recently did it was an excellent interview and he talks about cathy newman and um but see there's also principalities and powers at work here too because you could say okay that whole corporate that whole corporate thing wouldn't let jordan peterson back on bbc channel four i think it was to redo the interview with cathy newman but cathy newman won't come on jordan peterson's channel either why you've got status you've got reputation you've got um it mean i was just i exactly i was even talking today and um someone i was talking to was in another place and you know paul vanderkley no we got to be really careful very careful around paul vanderby because jordan peterson and this person just kind of chuckled inside and thought you don't even know paul vanderkley but that's how this thing works so cathy newman's not coming on jordan's channel so you start with that and then you might say well and furthermore it was warped by the fact that the corporations of a certain size are protecting their existence which of course they are and so are the people within the corporation of course they are just like we would fight for our hierarchical position of course so yes but all that's gone now and and and now we have this and now we're figuring out what to do with it now what you said there about the sort of the position of the journalist in the chair and how they become an automaton because their role is so prescriptive within that corporation that's no different to something that you know chomsky would have said 30 40 years ago no different you wouldn't be in that chair if you didn't share the beliefs of the corporation right and that's where you get into your broader principalities and powers this is for me of course yes of course this chimes with something janis varoufakis the few former chancellor of greece under saritsa in that brief moment after the economic crash when there was a surge of leftist populism in greece said he said that when he met with the eu he realized even when talking to the most powerful minister over economics with whom they were arguing about their sanctions he recognized that that chancellor he was someone like a german chancellor or whatever said that he only had the power and this is in some ways plainly obvious he only had the power afforded to him by his role that suggests to me a kind of intransigence and like when you talk about that's that's basically how platforms work you fulfill an office you're not talking to this person because they're they were born to a certain father and mother you're talking to them because they fulfill an office if you talk to donald trump today well he's still a very significant person but he's not the same person he was before the inauguration of joe biden if you talk to joe biden today he's not the same person he was last december that's what office is and and the whole ambiguity of office is not a room office is a position you fulfill within a system within a disembodied uh what did vervecky call it in my convo the oh yeah the hyper object about like sort of people in a mainstream media outlet that they're a representative of a certain set of ideals well the same becomes true in a political establishment now we know that there are relationships between obviously we've known for a long time their relationships between media and government that involves lobbying commerce shared interest now i know like when you talk about it from a sort of an anthropological perspective you say of course we would all protect our positions in a hierarchy and this returns me to the point jordan where it requires of us as individuals a kind of personal awakening um that perhaps that okay awakening or a personal sacrifice because for kathy newman to you know sit down after her conversation with jordan peterson and say boy and and jordan's talked about this before you know in the green room we'd have a perfectly lovely conversation then the camera comes up and she's performing jordan's like to take off the mask and sit down well that costs you something one has to undergo a kind of neck here am i saying that right the kind of journey into darkness that you know that you have recently experienced and i'm sure most of us have our own version of and and to come out the other side of that with a conclusion not being how do i achieve more as an individual but how do i convey love how do i convey christ consciousness how do i let's start well let's start with that then so so so first of all you know everyone is now a tv producer and a radio host if they want to be if you if you have a voice you can you can communicate with you have the technology to communicate with as many people as you want so then the next question is potentially whether anybody cares to listen it's all another question do you have the will the ability the desire and all of that but you certainly have the the technological means so it isn't that people have been rendered voiceless they have in certain regards but in other ways they're so powerful that it's absolutely beyond comprehension and so and then and i would say well i am definitely of the mind that it's best for it would be best for everyone to orient themselves and i've tried to figure out what that orientation would mean and it's some of it is and and i've used history as my guide as much as i've been able to philosophy and religious ideas all of that trying to puzzle this out it's like well the love part is okay you have to decide you serve someone that's an old idea it's christ or satan fundamentally that's an archetypal reality and what that means in some sense is that you're either working for the betterment of things because you're in favor of being and it's flourishing and perhaps even it's playful and beautiful flourishing you've decided that despite the horrors of existence so kingdom of god despite the horrors of existence that would drive you to resentment and bitterness and hatred and the desire to destroy you've decided no i'm going to aim up and that's love it's like i'm going to aim up and i'm going to bring it and that's and i think he's right but it's also sort of disembodied and because he's sort of speaking in a platonic sense but it's also an aristotelian sense but it's because it's always i'm going to love this person i'm going to love this thing i'm going to love everything i can with me okay then the next thing is truth in service of that and one thing i learned i think is that i tweeted something out the other day and like i see people all the time and they have something they want and then they use their language to get it okay that's not that's not that's not how to use language that's wrong and the reason it's wrong is because why do you think that your theory about what you want is right if if i can only get jonathan peugeot to take it to jordan peterson it's wrong then you're saying things that are wrong and so i would say instead try this say what you believe to be true and accept what happens and that's an adventure man you do that you do that for 10 years and your life will be so different that you won't be able to believe it it's unbelievably adventurous to only say what you think is true in right there and then to be in that moment and to have decided that there's no agenda i'm just going to say what i think regardless of the consequences and i don't mean carelessly i really do not mean that the absolute opposite of careless you pay attention to every word and the consequences are miraculous this is a kind of mysticism i think that you are describing firstly the ability to remain entirely present secondly the idea that you can respond authentically without an interesting that he calls this mysticism gender for of personal advancement this requires i think a kind of transcendent is certainly from the my understanding would require again and this is sort of where brand goes with this stuff okay so peterson of course digs in with this you know very powerful message and and this i find you know with religious people too it's probably also characteristic of me well now we're sort of going to translate this into this mode of talking and so brand now goes to oh the mysticism and the transcendence and the spirituality and and then the romanticism and kind of ego death the sort of energies that compete in me and energies into the tension seems to be between this sort of a very vivid sense of uh love and awakening and service and sort of values of which i'm quite proud and and and still you know i would say i don't know if i want to call them atavistic but quite quite primordial sometimes unformed certainly libidious concupiscence of rushes it's quite good with language no like that i'm i love the idea of living authentically and truthfully in a moment and how sort of potent radical punk and effective divine that could be mischievous tricksterish it's almost like a beat poet here almost and the you know right yeah that's got the romantic element there because it's unpredictable it's absolutely unpredictable you just don't know what's going to happen you know but if you like let's say you have faith let's say you have faith so let's let's figure out here what we mean by faith so we're going to say um i have faith that if i act out the proposition that being should flourish and i should aid that i'm using faith synonymously with let's say confidence i'm going to risk my life on that proposition that's that's going to orient me i could be wrong but that i'm gonna that's going to be the direction of my life and then i'm going to tell the truth in service of that well it's very interesting this is sort of jordan peterson's secular gospel right there he's just laid it out twice um what one is a a confidence that he didn't use this word but he's used it plenty in the past a confidence that sacrifice for the sake of being he sort of gets heideggeri in there sacrifice for the sake of being will not be fruitless so that's that's your first that's your first step you got a 12-step programmer your first step the second step is then truth the faith the faith then is the acting out of that is that is the actual uttering of the words and and and and the willingness to willingness to observe what emerges as a consequence and you think well do you believe that love and truth prevails do you believe that if you believe it acted out well then you act it out and it's very unpredictable and and you do have to watch for the emergence of these counter positions that you describe you believe it so you act it out you observe what happens and you accept that as as you accept that as as regardless of the consequences in some sense by presuming from to begin with that if it's emerges as a consequence of the actions of love and truth and it is by definition good regardless of what you think at that moment it is by definition good but it's interesting it's a little tricky i mean because you have to put your faith somewhere right like because you don't know everything you're stuck with it so you got a better do you have a better theory than that i don't i can't find a better theory than that no there i think it's a little desperate because again as a christian i would say you actually have reasons to believe that and and as a christian you say well you've got the resurrection of christ the resurrection of christ sort of stands at the center of this because christ then is the one who does exactly what russell brand has defined as the great moral act and he sacrifices on behalf of those who are undeserving again it's an archetypal story talked about that in the jonathan peugeot andrea with the banks conversation and then the resurrection now is the vindication that says yes but it's not that vindication is in anticipation of a final resurrection at the end so again jordan's a little truncated but but it's sort of got a pattern like the pattern of the christian gospel like the requirement for faith is pretty clear the limitations our the the limits of our capacity for knowledge the limitations of the senses the abiding mystery these seem to be perennial they don't seem like now now this is sort of a faithless backtracking on brand's part they're going to be surmounted anytime soon i recognize now who's asking for certainty i am drawn to ask you like when you went into this terrible crisis of health with yourself and tammy your wife and that it was all consumed by this great suffering you just like you disappear into this you know from the external perspective for several years and during this time there's this incredible ongoing cultural war sort of peeking out that again sort of dissolves into you know the end of trump's presidency and the emergence of joe biden and this kind of global pandemic the world shifts seminally during this period how do you feel that how do you adjust to that being for having been through what you've been through personally which we've touched there's a pretty big change of subject now and again a little disappointed by that because i thought they were on an interesting role just one and i've you know we've talked about previously how do you feel about what's changed culturally how and and how do you line these ideas up now well i would say i'm i'm still puzzling that out to some degree and like everyone partly because i'm faced with as we are or with this unbelievable technological revolution i mean i think why what do i that's such a complicated question i'm i'm doing more of what i was doing before i suppose i still believe that at least in so far as i'm concerned that there isn't anything better than i can be that i can be doing than continuing to encourage people and that's what how i see my role is that you know i'm i'm i'm trying to let me tell you a story okay just a quick story and he tells another story of encouragement and rewarding that it's it's almost too much that's the problem with it it's it's too much and part of i think why i've been sick is because of that too much you know that was an interesting statement and brings me back to his conversation with pageau partly from observing how much lack of encouragement there has been for people and how many people are starving spillies he's and and this is this is where peterson in many ways is most compelling because on one hand he articulates a confidence that sacrifice given for the benefit of the world will be fruitful and he at the same time and this is what happens in christianity at the same time he recognizes the the great depth of need in the world spiritually and psychologically because of that i saw that on such a massive scale but also to just see the consequences of having that addressed to the limited degree i've been able to address it like it happens all the time and it i had this guy i it's so strange this guy walked by this guy the other day on blur again and he was kind of a street looking guy kind of rough you know and bent over about 45 50 but looking older than that and and he had a mask on and he wasn't looking so good and he he took his mask off and he came over to me i had no idea what he said i love you i thought jesus my friend was walking with me the guy told me about i we walked away i said what do you make of that and he you know he just shook his head he said you sure have a lot of people men coming up on the street saying that they love you it's like tail of a thing russell a couple of thoughts on one hand i don't want to like spanish words flood into my mind when i think about this concept because english doesn't quite work but i don't want to minimize what he just said right there what happened what are the platforms through which that happened youtube podcasts publishing books but we started this conversation talking about community now as a pastor now i and again i'm not saying any of this to to to reduce the appreciation for jordan's work if i didn't have great appreciation for jordan's work i wouldn't be making all of these videos here three years later i'm still on the dude i'm a bit of a rottweiler when it comes to things but you know still still but to me this sort of gets back to the jonathan peugeot fan comment because in a community i mean right now they're the only way they can touch jordan jordan is sort of high and lifted up on you know he's untouchable in many ways because there are millions of people who would love to be his friend millions of people would love to get their idea to him through jonathan peugeot or some way millions of people want to get a piece of him millions of people who adore him fair enough it's overwhelming i can understand completely his emotional reaction to that now let's pause and ask well what about the people you actually live with your family well they don't feel quite the same way about him because well who knows him better and again i'm not saying any of this to do away with him because i have the same dynamic i mean my wife and my wife doesn't listen to my videos if i would sit down and say honey you really got to start listening to my video she'd be like why would i do that um but in community where and this is where i go back to the billy graham illustration billy graham comes into town he's a rock star he's got status the lights are on um he's a being of light all of this stuff happens but in a local church the gods come down and have clay feet but in the process there important things happen you recognize that this person who has helped you in that moment in a powerful way is a sinner too and and that changes the transformation slightly and someone might come to you and say wow your book really changed my life well that's great well how did it change it well it's sort of in a russell baran type way well i felt the transformation inside of me and maybe they put the transformation into place and he talked about that and you know this guy in the story that he told this guy went to i think it went to law school and was going to get a job in new york he's going to make the world better and that's absolutely great i'm not taking anything away from jordan peterson with this but to actually live in community with people in this transformation it's different and and actually again part of the part of the weirdness of this again is the is the change in platforms so jordan peterson or paul vanderclay or you know augustin or someone can change people's lives but it happens now with social media with the internet it's all peer-to-peer it's happening in different ways and generally speaking i mean again part of the reason and you know i'm i'm watching the churn i talked about this in my last video about about burning through transformations and we were talking earlier about okay what about the kingdom of god how can we get there well certainly these kind of tools that we have that sort of peak transformation in people they have to be followed up with living together and you know the monastics the puritans um people who work in spiritual transformation and when i say spiritual transformation i don't mean that in a romanticist sort of way i mean that in a daily devotion incremental change i mean it in the likes of a of an a sponsor that picks up the phone call i mean it in the way that jordan was talking about his family and a friend who flew to russia it's this patient walking with so you can have the incredible moment of gosh he's got three and a half million youtube subscribers and a multi-million dollar selling book and his face is famous and he goes down the street and you know someone finds him a little different from let's say justin bieber or kind of the hollywood thing where even more people know you and so then you sort of have to hide from them and in jordan's case probably people who don't like him for whatever political reason probably just look at him and they don't care enough about him to throw a tomato at him or something like that but the fans will the fans will come and and express their appreciation and that's all good again i i don't i'm not saying this to take anything away from that but just to contextualize it contextualize it and what i know about life change in community over years of living together and there are moments of there are those kairos moments of transformation but in my experience the long transformation is that walking together is a hell of a thing russell do you and god how could you want something more how could you possibly ask for something more than that i think you can i think you can ask that i think you can praise god for this and because if you five ten fifteen years from now again part of the reason i started this channel was i knew that people would i knew that people would have this moment this kairos moment of transformation and it would pass there would be churn and someone say yeah but paul you haven't had anything like jordan's transformative impact in the world absolutely and people have churned through my channel at least as fast as with jordan absolutely i'm not taking anything away from him but for people and jordan knows this he's a clinical psychologist they need a track to walk on and so how can you ask for anything more yeah i can ask for something more i can ask for the kingdom of god i can ask for the world transformed i can ask for a reality in which i see suffering is such a difficult thing because if there was no suffering at least for us in this dispensation in this age of decay we wouldn't be spurred on sometimes to the to the transformative aspect suffering itself is itself not the enemy but sometimes part of the process how could anything that was narrowly selfish let's say in the sort of grasping capitalist mode you know to use the cynical left-wing caricature and and and it's not like there's never truth in that but we're all grasping that's for sure how could anything that could possibly produce even in theory compete with that right and and that's when when people tell me peterson's a grifter i just think you don't know anything because peterson's right i've seen this transformation in a number of people i've walked with people it'll be interesting when we start up the meetup again to hear stories after covid and how many come back because again i know churches people can come into a church and they'll be like pastor that sermon changed my life as a pastor i kind of sit back and say well thank you changed your life three years from now ask me that question because that's how people are they're not even in the same universe i completely i understand what you're saying and i'm thinking about it it's because you have this very particular background in clinical psychology and academia as a teacher and the edification and raising up and teaching of people is plainly so important to you and it seems now more than ever and i feel how open-hearted you are and perhaps have always been and i am i wonder if there's something this um the question continually asked of you of why do you feel like you resonate with males it seems to me i wonder is this a wound in your maleness or a wound in your adolescence is there something in you that is open do you feel that has made this connection possible because it can't simply be the translation of these theories i think some of it's actually the doing of my father i think i had a good father and and i think this is one of the most beautiful part of this interview because again is there one moment in his father's life that changed his life no it's the and he encouraged me like my dad instilled within me his faith in me fundamentally like we had our set to's you know it's not like our relationship was without conflict but i knew i had something that none of my friends had or virtually none of them which is i knew that my dad fundamentally believed in me right fundamentally regardless of anything and what what he he and that wasn't some moment in a movie with a soundtrack that said son i believe in you that's what a movie can convey it's the it's always being there thought that fundamentally i suppose that it was a good thing that i was around or that i was a good thing something like that but it was deep and that gave me a sort of it confidence i suppose or faith both of those both of those i suppose it's it's it he encouraged me i had that i had that encouragement and and i think so you asked me a specific question i i'm encouraging young men why because i i think i believe this it's like god only knows what you could do and we need it like you you're a good example i mean look at you christ you're unbelievably creative you're so smart you jump from idea to idea you're very charismatic you know and you have this immense talent and that led you into wastelands of all sorts you know because you didn't know how to control it or you know you weren't oriented properly god only knows why but you're trying to gather that all up and to figure out what to do with it it's like great who knows what who knows what piece of the puzzle you would contribute if you got your act together and contributed everything you can and i mean it's clear that you're trying to figure that out otherwise people wouldn't be responding to you that so many so many of the comments were you know i my opinion of russell was you know neutral or negative or whatever but i watched this and like he's really doing his best obviously and that really impressed me so it's so nice to see that kind of judgment hey it's like well i can see that he's trying and so now i'm on his side and so you can it looks like you can kind of trust people to respond positively to that and that's so nice isn't it that that's actually the case that is you can let yourself out yes yes yes yes i i can begin to i get the idea that sort of again looking at it as best as i can interpret from a union perspective that some of these unformed primordial forces that found expression in some ways that were unhealthy for me and probably for others are now aligning they're becoming sort of i don't want to use the word colonized because it's so many negative connotations but you haven't read c.s louis's miracles you could use the word it's a it's an important word it has a meaning you don't have to don't don't let the baddies steal good words to vated towards positivity integrated integrated yeah because you don't want to suppress them or repress them you want to bring them on board yes absolutely and and that's you know and that's the other thing i'm telling young men too and and and because i certainly believe this to be true all that aggression that capacity for aggression and violence that physical strength that dangerousness those are unbelievably useful once integrated admirable you know i talked to jockel willink the other day and and the guy's a monster you know he's two feet thick and he's a warrior from the age of three that's the kind of person he is he goes to naval seal training and what do they teach him you have your friends back you subordinate all that anti-social aggressiveness that dominance striving that power that physical strength that desire to destroy even all of that you take that you control it you you you you you serve other people with it you have their back and he says very straightforwardly you know that um he's an effective leader to the degree that he's been an effective leader it's because he takes care of the people around him and that's a great clip right there that's it so he integrates all that what could otherwise be you know catastrophic criminal or genocidal horror he's trying to integrate that into into into whoever it is that he can be if he's everything that he can be you know he told me about his he got a literature degree after he had had gone through the naval seals and i just kind of skipped over that um i don't really know why and he called my attention to it and then we had a 20-minute conversation about the vital importance of literacy and it was so interesting that this character you know who's got all these other attributes would then say yeah but you know i got literate i became literate i learned to communicate and that made me that multiplied my ability manifold and so don't don't hesitate to develop your he didn't say it in these terms but your logos it's like absolutely absolutely and men are turning to him young men in particular because he's such a good role model he's written these books for little kids about how they can you know fortify themselves and it's not no competitive games let's raise little boys like little girls it's not that it's all at all it's like stand up man man up monster up get it together and then go past that right then subordinate that to truth and love and the ability to communicate then you're something but that way the vices can be virtues right you don't have to say well we'll just eradicate aggression well yeah sure it's like cutting off your arm you're going to get rid of that motive force that'd be like getting rid of sexuality you don't want to get rid of that you want to integrate it jordan's coming back baby this is this is this is good this is good this is this is what he does well yeah it ain't easy i mean what i want to like and i i loathe being asked questions like this because it's sort of but like because it's you'll see why when i ask it like i create there's people that have a very negative response to me there all sort of always has been ever since even when i was famous for frivolity there were people that and with you you found yourself sort of very quickly at the heart of a cultural war for some reasons that were i suppose obvious because of the nature of your emergence into sort of public life and the very you know the specifics of that but what i think when i see you talking when i listen to you talking and you are an open-hearted man you have these sort of plainly your relationships with females define you how do what do you think is the energy behind the specifically gendered aspect of like the the public discourse prior to you know the couple of years you took off of health reasons what what's you know if we can say like you know in your analysis which i i would still query about like you know the the attraction of men is because you encourage and you give them confidence i i feel that somehow pain the wound has to be the point of connection but that's probably me bringing my own stuff um and then for females i know that's that's a point that brand is making it's really important no no i don't think it's just that i mean what's being activated there's something there's something about that that's right i mean i i well that's a good good question it's not like i i understand why the the people that i'm talking to are disaffected the men i'm talking to are disaffected i understand that that's the shared pain i suppose i understand why they're doubtful and about putting forward their best i i i'm not i'm not contemptuous of that even i i see that it's a deep wound in a sense and no wonder and and it is something that i understand and it is something that we all share but but you can just admit that and then figure out what to do about it that's the next thing despite all that you say yes really really that's the case it's despite the patriarchal tyranny despite the malevolence of our ancestors despite the holocaust despite the catastrophe of human history and you know the inadequacy of your own ability and and the blackness of your heart it's like none of that's justification for not moving forward in properly so then what do you feel like um you know and it's a question i ask again of myself it must be interesting i imagine for someone to be literally an analyst and then be the subject of so much cultural attention that is um you know polarizing uh so we've sort of discussed a little what what we you know you feel that is that you know that speaks so deeply to men and i'm getting a clearer idea of it but like the the it seems pretty clear inverse of that the sort of the famous youtube you know let's call them the youtube great east hits that channel four news interview the gq one what what do you think was being driven out there i understand that you know like sort of because i've watched them and i know them that sort of it's on that no you're not paying attention to gender inequality pay gaps etc and and i'm familiar with your arguments like which are obviously again underwritten by data but what do you think is the emotion the feeling why is it why again back for brand that's that's where he's at this academic at this point in history well why well i would say well some of it's okay so some of it is that females are rising up to challenge the patriarchy they are doing that and and they're more powerful than they ever were like women have always pushed and tested men well why well that's the apple it's a great place to stop if you're russell brand and you want to have the rest beyond a paywall but i wanted to get that last bit in because again so often i hear people they just complain well it's the custodian of the patriarchy and jordan peterson and i think no he he it's not that he doesn't understand these he just you know there's opponent processing at work yes women are rising up to test men and men rise up to the challenge and we go back and forth and we actually all grow stronger as iron sharpens iron and so you don't and this is part of my i'm annoyed with the woke and i'm annoyed with the anti-woke because hey there's there's real things there's legitimate things in history that that people look at and say that's been enormously costly and it's been enormously bad and the the patterns are set in and those patterns perpetuate that's true but it's not just that i mean that's the problem with the woke it's not just that is that is there cause there absolutely and so well don't just repeat it be against because then you're then you're parasitic against the parasite you don't want to be parasitic against the parasite you want to be standing on your own so anyway i thought this was a good conversation i haven't i was planning on figuring out what i'd have to do to listen to the second half of the conversation obvious i can't do the same kind of commentary on that part of the conversation that i could do on this but then the bishop barron conversation just dropped and it's like there's a status hierarchy here so gotta gotta do the baron conversation because already in the first 20 minutes of the baron conversation i thought we're back into the protestant reformation so that's coming up next and again thanks for listening um um i appreciate the comments i try to read as many as i can and some of you leave really really meaty comments and i learn from your comments and so sometimes i make videos from your comments too because i learn but i've gotta gotta wrap this up and call it a night so thanks for watching