https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Htv9i-0E0gA

 Nothing. I heard Tom Waits say that so that's what I say now. Still living in Hawaii? Yeah, still living here surviving. Okay. How'd you do with the hurricane that went through a while, a while ago? Well, we got some good waves to surf on so tremendous disaster for us. It was just a lot of fun. Well, you've got big waves anyway so even bigger. Yeah. That's big stuff. So what's on your mind? You saw Peterson? You wanted to talk through some things? Yeah, we went and saw him in Honolulu which is an island over from us and my wife really wanted to go see him. Really? Yeah, I was like, okay, sure. Happily, I'll go. Really didn't know what to expect. Tried to not expect too much but I was looking forward to it and it was fun. It was interesting. It was kind of strange. It was the day before Thanksgiving and so there was an attempt to try to tie in that theme or actually it was to try to make it that theme and so it was his usual extemporaneous sort of trying to speak about something and yeah, it wasn't the most impassioned and thrilling lecture I've ever heard from him but yeah, it was fun. We had made a fun sort of vacation out of it so yeah, plenty of other fun things we got to go do. Did you think there was much original content in it or mostly repeating a lot of the stuff he's been saying? Yeah, it was mostly repeating and trying to like draw out the theme of Thanksgiving as a courageous act so there were some themes from like the other rules that he had written and other rules he had planned to write of I'm trying to think of which rule it was that he sort of made it an analogy to, an analog, but yeah, it was trying to encourage people to be thankful and not so much in a sense of you're gonna feel thankful but being thankful is actually a courageous thing to do. What did your wife think? She liked it. She was hopeful to meet him which we didn't get to. How many people were there? A couple of thousand? Yeah, maybe a thousand. It was surprising to see how many people there were there being in Hawaii. I had no clue. I thought maybe there would be no one. I really had no idea but yeah, there was plenty of people there. It was kind of neat. I was surprised. You know, it was in Sacramento. I think the theater holds 2,500, 3,000 people and you know, it was a sellout crowd and again, I have these meetups in Sacramento and so it's kind of like where are all these Jordan Peterson people coming from and they're out there. So how many people are regularly coming to the meetups now? We have, I never have less than a dozen and sometimes up towards 30 depending on the time and the weekend such and I just posted on meetup. There's a group of regulars and then there's some semi-regulars and then there's some people who've come by once and there's always a mix of all of those. So it's hard to get a sense of the impact. The meetup people tend to be pretty hardcore and then those that just begin to really love the group and like each other and so then they keep meeting. I wonder how many of those things are going on and elsewhere, you know. There's a fair number of them to the, you know, from what I can tell, you know, over a dozen. My guess would be 20 or 30 consistent meetups at least in the states from what I hear but very different. Like I have friends that try to get to them and then report back to me on what they find. Some, it's very inconsistent. I think it's part of the difficulty. Yeah, that's very strange. Sorry, I'm making my coffee here. Nectar of life. That's right. Well, usually I'm talking to people who are, you know, I'm on the west coast so it's usually they're later than I am in the day but you're early so. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I'm early. I haven't even gone to work yet so. Are there any meetups near you at all? Any advertised? No, but I haven't looked really so no, I'm pretty anti-social out here. Mostly my socialization is now in the confines of this screen here. That's cool. It's new for me. You know, we've been here for almost a year now and it is kind of isolating but well compared to where we're from, Oklahoma, which everything there is your friends and community so this has been a good contrast. Oh, I can believe it. So yeah. You know, people have, you know, I was just out east and people always have this image of California. Well, people in California have this image of Hawaii and, you know, the weather's always glorious and the island's always beautiful but life is made up of a lot more than the scenery. Yeah, yeah, it is. It really is. The scenery is pretty good though. I lived in the Caribbean for a while and so I know what living with beautiful scenery is like. It's really nice but as one missionary used to say, you can't eat the scenery. That's true. So you lived in the Caribbean. I lived in the Dominican Republic. I was a missionary there. Haiti or Dominican Republic. Okay, do you miss that? No, I've been doing this for 21 years. This is probably a better fit for me. Living in the Caribbean was fun and exotic in some ways but it's a very poor country and there are a lot of, there was a lot of corruption and a lot of hassles that went on with that too so it's, you know, every place has its ups and downs. I've had friends who've lived in Hawaii and they begin to gripe about the cost of food and I mean it's an expensive place to live. Oh yeah, it's ridiculous sometimes. We're constantly complaining about it, about the food here. Yeah. Prices and yeah, if I didn't like being out in the water so much, there's no way I would be here but yeah, I like, I'm a water sports type of person and that kind of, if I didn't have that, I would probably go insane. If I didn't have some type of activity to get my stimulation. Yeah, no, I totally believe that. I totally believe that you need something. Yeah. Well, you don't have any kids, correct? No kids, yeah. Kids will keep you crazy busy. I mean it's just the nature of them. Yeah, we will, my wife and I would like to have kids and hopefully someday we'll be blessed with them and as naive as that sounds. No, they are a blessing. They are and almost every real blessing in this life comes with its challenges and even heartbreaks. That's the nature of this world. So yeah and same with kids. I've got five and yeah, there's ups and downs with it and with every period of it but it's also nothing you would, you never wish any of your kids weren't born. At least I don't. I love them all and that's good. That's good odds. That's I mean yeah. Well don't raise kids you don't like. I don't know if I could do that. I can do that for myself. Well, Merry Christmas. Are you celebrating the holidays in a special way or? No, well I was just out east because my sister passed and so the kids are all coming back here for Christmas. My kids are there. I've only got one living at home now. He's after college and he's probably going to move out at some point soon. The other, the rest are either living across the country or going to college so it's fun to have them all back for holidays. That's good. I listened to your eulogy. Oh thank you. I was crying. Yeah I was crying too. Yeah I can tell. It's now it's part of life too here. It's just you know and the world is full of tragedies. It really is. Yeah I I'm a weird person. I haven't dealt with a lot of tragedy so I tend to like keep my mind there because I'm afraid that it's going to surprise me. So I've been watching these documentaries about the euthanasia in Belgium. Have you seen any of those? No. I wouldn't recommend it. It's pretty depressing. Now I'm interested. Yeah you're like me. Unfortunately I'm sorry to say. Yeah there's a few documentaries I've seen in the past week and there's so Belgium has the most liberal euthanasia laws and I'm going to roughly state the statistics. I think over the I think they have 2,000 per year now. Really? Those if I'm not mistaken are largely because of psychological diseases. So it's people who just want to die. It's not it's non-terminal illnesses. Wow. And there's I mean it's just it's just disturbingly fascinating to watch people drink potions handed to them by a doctor and lie down and die. You know again as a pastor you're with people when they die sometimes and it's you know it's sometimes so the last person I was with when they died the there was a there was a nurse not a nurse but kind of a care worker that was sitting there reading her Kindle and I to me it was like someone is about to breathe their last breath and you're just scarfing down some pulp fiction. What else are you going to do? I guess what what else is there to do? Wow and then to think yeah handing someone a wow oh wow yeah you know I'm going to look this up man. But it just really it just really makes you think. It does and I don't know if you've heard the statistics of the the US has in the past year I think ticked downwards and life expectancy possibly because of suicides. Yeah yeah. Well at least here we have the enough balls to do it ourselves. That's kind of my take on it. It's like if you really want to do it yourself. It's so terrible to say to hear myself say it. If you want to do it, do it yourself. But it's so strange to have it assist have people assisted by I guess it's the state that's like allowing this kind of thing and I understand why. I mean that's the thing like I totally see why people want to die. You know like sometimes it might be that people aren't helping you do it is the only thing that's keeping it from happening. So yeah well it regularly you know I regularly minister to people who are near the end of life. They don't have much quality of life. They're Christians so they're not going to end their life but then they linger and live with the question why hasn't God taken me yet? And you know it's I appreciate their questions. I often and we you know these aren't questions we can answer but it's I don't know. So to go the other way and say okay well let's take this into our own hands. You know part of the difficulty is that we're actually we're talking about this on one of our meetups. If you you know the Golden Gate Bridge is a place that people often go to to take their life and amazingly enough some people survive the jump and what those who survive the jump mostly say is the moment after they jump they have this incredible sense of regret. Why have I done this? What how stupid was this? Why am I throwing away this gift of life when just a moment before they had enough despair to to throw themselves off the bridge? So we're we're not we're not terribly wise creatures. We really we're really not fit to manage ourselves. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well you wrote me and you said you had some you had some thoughts you wanted to you wanted to work through. What were you what were you thinking about? Um yeah I think about a lot of things. I don't know I you know I've been keeping up with your channel and which also kind of directs me to the note in the network guy who I keep up with sometimes and it's just also weird you know the the Peterson phenomenon doing all of this kind of thing where I'm like watching these boutique channels and ostensibly for just entertainment value. I maybe it's more than that maybe I'm maybe it's connecting maybe it's I don't know what it is but I really appreciate you guys doing these kinds of things. You know I know it's work and well I mean I I like the I don't I guess his name is I guess he's I don't know what's his name Mr. Node. That's what I I don't even know his name. I don't even I don't even know his real name and he Facebook friended me early on and wanted to know the software I was using and but you know I don't even know his name. He chooses to stay anonymous so I just call him Node. Node Mr. Node okay well you know I love all of the references you know William Blake, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche all of those things like that's what kind of drew me into Peterson and sort of his philosophical undertones of all the things that he did which you know has since gone you know yeah much further than that but I've well this has really brought me back into Kierkegaard and studying him which I was doing for a long time even before Peterson came about and that guy just he boggles me so I still think of myself as a Christian because of him and yeah if I ever you know if someone ever asked me if someone ever asked me if I'm believing God or if I'm a Christian I would always have to say it's a Christian existentialist as Kierkegaard would say and you know I'm just going to put words into his mouth because I don't know if this is what he meant when he was calling himself Christian but we just live in absurdity sometimes and don't know why not just pick the most absurd thing which is to be a Christian so so what drew you to Kierkegaard uh just the aesthetic he's just a weird philosopher that no one understood so I was like well at least gets me as well tackle this and you know I didn't understand I still don't understand most of it and but sometimes it will like just set a bomb in your head and yeah yeah have you read there was a biography that came out a few years ago of Kierkegaard um just opening up my Kindle app here um I think it was Kierkegaard a life and I really enjoyed um a single life a single life a single life yeah I can see if I can pull up the cover here um share the screen uh okay share yeah this is this is the that's what the okay Stephen Backhouse Stephen Backhouse and it was a it was a it's also an audio book it was a it was a lovely book and really helped me get a much better sense of the man and his times he was a he was a he was interesting but strange guy tortured yeah you know he he falls in love with this um with this beautiful young woman and you know she had she cares for him but you know almost in a Don Quixote way he he loves her always and and leaves his leaves his estate mostly to her and just uh you know everybody and you know and he was such a people Danish society just had no idea what to do with him they loved reading him but they loved hating him oh yeah and most of his writings are in response to Hegel and most of them are humorous yeah you always have to read anything he writes as if it was with sarcasm to it so yeah yeah it actually is pretty funny once you start to understand that he's just trying to kind of he's trying to respond to Hegel in a humorous way that makes Hegel sound stupid well and and and such a you know I was so I did that video yesterday on on the three craters and then Rachel Fulton Brown yeah watch some of it yeah and she you know she's a she's a huge I mean she loves Milo and and so then somebody in the comment section directed me to another the Patrick Coffin video on Milo and I you know I watch a little bit of that and I just don't there's there's in a sense that Kierkegaard was a Milo figure but Milo just has no I've just got no he doesn't fascinate me at all he kind of bores me yeah okay Kierkegaard was just off the charts brilliant and insightful and yeah he was in a sense the the jester figure yeah in the courtyard yeah and he's responding to to also the Danish Christendom and his question is well if everyone's a Christian what does it mean to be a Christian yeah yeah and well I've had to ask myself that coming from the Midwest and the Bible Belt you know what does it mean that we live in a Christian society and you know we you know we don't have to live in a Christian society you know we take that we could we can take that for granted but what does it yeah what does it mean for an individual to be a Christian if that's the the water you're swimming in yeah yeah and and Kierkegaard's passionate distaste and revulsion for that type of communal conformity Christianity which it's funny because there are places that where that is still strong even though in many many places it has receded you know dramatically oh yeah and that's the strange thing yeah we live in both of those worlds kind of at the same time somehow yeah and I'm not sure yeah neither one of them is correct I see why people are drawn to both of them I don't know what to do about it no no and and I've often noted that sometimes people in church people most deeply in church get they romanticize the out you know what's out from church and so oh it's all my unbelieving friends and the freedom that they enjoy and you know I love when I'm with my unbelieving friends because I don't have to play this Christian game but then you go out in that world and and then suddenly you have you realize the the the restraints and and binds in that world that people leave that world and then come into the church for that other kind of right right right yeah well and Kierkegaard you know he could see I mean he clearly saw the the duplicity and the corruption of the church and Christendom and but then also had a sense of okay what if what there what if there is nothing around you that then suddenly it's your own passions inside that you know if you're if you're the if you're a prisoner of your own passions instead of the communal restraints well where then do you go for freedom so no he's he's a he's a gift but a but a gift that is that that requires a lot of us to read and benefit from right a gift that you may not have wanted that you kept asking for but yeah yeah he was in a sense you know probably the cause of post-modernism and you know he was trying to answer those those those questions before they were even around but you know I can't help but think sometimes that it went from from his him answer him asking those questions those very difficult questions of you know what are we here to live for and it and if we don't have an answer to that why are we living you know if we think about it in a philosophical historical progression Camus was the one who asked the only question is the one of suicide and you know well here we are and you know where suicide is causing our life expectancy to go down so it's it's kind of yeah catch 22 that's not a good way to put it but well you know one of the things I often think about is that you know when I lived in the Dominican Republic and worked with the Haitians I can't recall ever hearing of a suicide among them and these were people who were very poor they had very hard lives and and many of them you know they struggled every day yeah I mean there's they have enough enemies to deal with other than themselves that's right and and then you come to North America and people who have they've got economic security they've got food security they've got amazing freedoms in terms of they do what they want with their career with their sexuality with whatever and they look at it all and say I can't go on and this was another one of Kierkegaard's conclusions was that once we have all of these things what we will want is want itself and we will want to make life more difficult yeah yeah yeah yeah and and it's amazing that that he saw that in the time that he did I mean we in modernity was you know was was was getting up a good head of steam then but they didn't have everything that we have now in terms of at least if you live in prosperous America yeah I mean I keep trying to even I I still have to remember remind myself when I'm reading this is before World War I yeah yeah yeah yeah this is this is so so far removed from where I am yet still addressing timeless questions I guess yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah no it's I there's a one of one of the guys Julian who you'll see him in the comment section all the time had a conversation with him he's a hudderite who you know works a blue collar job but also reads a ton of philosophy and now as a blog I mean he's always sending me Kierkegaard stuff and says you know if you want to understand Peterson you've you've got to keep reading Kierkegaard I just I just can't keep up with everyone I want to read more of you gotta read Jung you gotta read Kierkegaard you gotta read keep up with your Dostoevsky you got you know it's oh man you've got some tall tasks ahead of you well I can only do what I do so I don't I don't get anxious about it I'm a pretty non-anxious person well that's good you you've got the personality for it but Julian Julian really enjoys Kierkegaard Kierkegaard no I I think he has a lot to say to this moment yeah yeah I've always felt that way even you know even before you know the even before Trump even before you know the Peterson phenomenon so in some way now you were pretty early on in Peterson I mean you you got in early and you know you've had a couple of conversations with with him what what's your take on why you know what moment did this man meet I mean why the sudden I mean he had all this stuff before and it's like whoosh why did he take off in your opinion why did he take off yeah well I don't have a direct answer for that but I'll just kind of give you my narrative of the experience you know I remember looking at his YouTube channel when there were like a few thousand followers thinking something's wrong here there's an imbalance and it's about to shift you know what the what this guy is saying um I think a lot of people are going to need to hear it and not want to hear it and that's pretty much what happened um and I didn't expect how many people weren't going to want to hear it and I think you know both of those things are kind of maybe what propelled him um that along with you know the cultural shift of of uh I don't know what it is it was personal for me uh because of the election I protested Donald Trump and was you know I felt the derangement syndrome that people had I felt that I you know the next morning I woke up depressed because I went to a route I know I went and protested one of his uh his rallies and my brother actually was there to support him so it was really strange I was like what you know what is going on the world's falling apart and uh so I had to come to terms with a lot of things and had some you know my you know my family's conservative so they were you know as obvious choice was was Trump and um my sister lives in deep or she's on the east coast she lived in DC she's you know I'm with her and the obvious choice was Hillary so this is causing like a feud in my family but um I don't know like I don't know how I would have made sense out of so much of this without um the Peterson lectures so it was really helpful for me in that way that's interesting and I often often reflect on you know the Peterson moment and how whether or not it relates to Trump and what brought his moment on That's really interesting. Yeah I'm not sure how you know it relates a lot of people want to bring those two things together in a in a way that's like well I don't know if I agree with that but it it did help me make sense out of it um so yeah I mean yeah That's interesting because you know for me too it was I I never related the two for me my interest in Peterson was oh it was much more the religious side I I saw someone who had the temerity to challenge the pronoun thing which yeah was you know I I always thought there was there I knew people can't just self-define it's not how identity works and and so Peterson was talking about this and and not backing down which I had seen most people just kind of now they grumble about it but they'd follow the convention just to you know why why why make a big deal out of a small thing but then he stops and then and then I watched his biblical lectures and it was like there's something else going on here and then I saw all of the there's something else going on here and then I saw all of the interest in him and I thought now that's really interesting and then listening to people who suddenly had new interest in Christianity and that really puzzled me and I wanted to know what's going on there so yeah okay yeah well I mean I think I said I said the Trump thing but I think what I meant was just conservatism okay that came from you know conservative world yeah and I just didn't like it because it's not my personality yeah um but I I didn't I didn't ever have an appreciation for it even though it's still like it's it's in me so deeply that I just can't see it and that the description that Peterson gives of of um well just the observation that most cultures and societies are just really conservative um you know we don't want to admit that yeah we don't we want to progress you know we don't want to look at our conservative nature and think and and reflect upon it but um he helps people do that and you have to do that you can't just deny it yeah otherwise you're missing a huge problem um and you're you know you're not you're not admitting that you would have been um part of the third rike or whatever you know yeah yeah well and I think you know he and people sometimes like to paint Peterson as a conservative I I don't see that in him but what he what he seemed to be able to do is is integrate conservatism in his broader perspective and and and you know basically figure out a way to say okay we've got all these new ideas and we're careening towards the future but at some point we should probably look to the past for some orientation if we don't want to just you know run blindly into the darkness which seems to be what some people the I think I think for me he he publicly was able to recognize that there are dangers in this world that we should consider and deal responsibly with rather than a Pollyannaish view that we can just change everything and it'll always be great and I think where do you live yeah yeah um I think there's yeah there's always that danger and you know I am the first one to admit that I have those tendencies to just barrel into you know in the situations I know nothing about and yeah I think we need to do our history I think that's where a lot of uh the societal problems you know start to boil up is that we just don't even look backwards and well even if we do we can only we still have to live our life forwards which is a cure-all thing you know it's and we can't really it's hard so hard for us to make sense out of the history and you know there's definitely a specific uh momentum that Peterson is trying to interpret all of history through and you know it's kind of you know people well conservative people want to accuse him of like universalism and saying that all religions are uh you know just essentially the same thing which he's not saying at all but you know you can see why they would come to that or why that would be their complaint because they want to say I am in this religion and everyone else is outside of it and you know that's fine but you know there's a there's a grander narrative going on here that I think Christianity was the first one to attempt to try to deal with and that's what Peterson I think is slowly trying to figure out the words for that you know I don't have the words for it but we don't know looking looking at Christian looking at the historical progression of Christianity um you know is it universalism what do you think I I well universalism always has the difficulty of the Bible that the Bible doesn't seem to be a very good universalist text well it's also a historical text too so yeah no that's that's right a war with one another which yeah universalism I'll kill you yeah universalism always has the there's a weird sense in which and I think CS Lewis brought this out quite well there's a weird sense in which choice necessitates objection and rebellion and and universalism seems to imply a denial of that choice and so at some point either you want to live with God or you don't and universalism ironically kind of says no you don't get to not live with God well you know I always people people people look at hell from a secular perspective and they think well hell is Santa Barbara or Hawaii and or heaven is Santa Barbara or Hawaii and hell is Detroit or Stockton or Newark and you know it's it's much different than that if if if you love God then heaven is with him if you hate God then hell is being near him because his glory is just too you can't shut your eyes to it so there's a there's a there's a nature there's a sense in which so then some people said pivot and they'll say okay universal reconciliation that's a better idea than the other but I it's it's I don't know I don't know I I leave these things up I leave these things up to God and Jesus talks about shut doors and outer darkness where there's gnashing of teeth more than anyone else in the Bible does so to me that's a probably a sign of something yeah well personally I could never be a universalist because there's existentially there are too many people I want to strangle so I fall into that category I put myself yeah I just think of the universalist as like the call onto the individual to I yeah I don't know exactly how I want to phrase that Well we've got a few more minutes anything you wanted to get to that we haven't touched on well no I just know I'm just rambling and it's been great talking to you thanks for taking your time to do this well I appreciate it and I still you know I still deeply appreciate I still deeply appreciate you know the gift that you gave me of the the patreon talk with Peterson that was that was a ton of fun I wish we had had a better internet connection to have a better recording but it was I did want to say though stop thanking me for that and want to confess something in our little confessional booth here because okay so the patreon deal was that you give the money then you get a free 30 minute talk or whatever right the link that they put into my email inbox was a non-terminable link so I had a few conversations with him actually I only published one of them and then I thought well god I'm you know of all the things tell the truth right I've got to share this gift and and so I stole from Dr. Peterson and I'm knowingly you did too you don't have to thank me for that anymore because it was I I'm still appreciative I'm still appreciative yeah no problem well take care Josh and I hope you enjoy your glorious weather and your beautiful blue clear water and you know you can thank God for those beautiful gifts you thank God for the hurricanes that's right that's right all right Paul all right Josh take care bye bye bye