https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wfmNQ_TKey8

 Hi, this is Paul and I do what I do. History and mythology as I'm continuing to dig deeper into the Jordan Peterson phenomenon, trying to deconstruct it, dissect it, understand it, figure out what has happened in the Western world, why the Western world is split the way it is. What I keep bumping up against is history and mythology. How many ways do we divide the world that's going to come up? NT Wright talks about how, in a sense, what we've done is we've divorced ourselves from history. And I'm going to bring up Bishop Barron's video today about Lessing's golf, as Bishop Barron calls it, NT Wright calls it Lessing's ditch. That is foundational in terms of understanding the character of skepticism in the contemporary world about elements that churches and believers to the right of Lessing's ditch assume about history and promote about history versus the left. And one of the nice things about NT Wright's lectures and the Gifford lectures is he maps a bunch of this out in terms of the biases and priority of the answers given in the West with respect to history, given in specifically the English Britain and the Americas about history and scripture. And the German, I'm going to use German pretty broadly here to include the Swiss, no offense to the Swiss because we know they're not part of Germany, but the intellectuals end of the 19th, early of the 20th century cluster of them all together and how they impact our reading of the text and how Jordan Peterson comes into this. All right, so I'm going to weave a bunch of voices in today into this conversation, but we want to get at history and mythology. How many ways do we divide the world? Cyclical fascination with mythology. Mythology has come around and around again, especially in places like Germany. All right. How do mythology and symbolism relate? That really deserves its own video. And I, my videos are all out of sync in some ways because I did two conversations this morning, both of which will likely be posted, one with my friend Luke from Twitter and another friend Eric from Twitter. And both of them then bleed into this video, but you're going to find them after this video. So I know what those conversations are going to be about because I've already had them, but they're not going to be posted on my channel for a little bit because I try to put out. I've learned watching the YouTube about one video a day is about the right pace. And some of you always squeal if I put out too much content at once. So I'm going to dribble out one video a day. And when I have time to make these videos, I put these out. And when I don't, I usually put out the conversations. I've got a little stack of conversations and next week I'll be doing some traveling. I'll be in Southern California for the meetup for the next for the next couple of weeks. And that takes time. There's travel time. There's work time. There's a lot of stuff going on. And those days I'm not going to have as much time to make videos. So those of you who are pretty much just watching these kinds of videos, you'll get a little relaxation. Those of you are keeping up with all the conversations, those will be dribbling out. And it gets a little difficult because in the process of the conversations, I said in the video I made today, but what today was it when I made the videos? Mythology and symbolism. Jordan Peterson and Rudolf Boltmann we're going to get into. And Bishop Baron talks about Peterson and Kant and we'll dig into that a little bit. And right after we're going to go into Paul Maxwell again. Paul Maxwell talks about Peterson and Kant and then he talks about Peterson and Boltmann. And I've already done some videos about Peterson and Kant. So we're going to just get a little refresher from Bishop Baron. And then we're going to go into Boltmann, who's a contemporary of Jung. Okay. And they're all coming. Jung, Boltmann, Barth, they're all coming out of Germany, Switzerland, these Protestant churches. And so they're all responding to the same intellectual, philosophical, theological trends. Except Jung is a psychologist. Boltmann is a New Testament scholar. Karl Barth is a systematics. Karl Barth is reformed. Jung's father was a reformed minister. Boltmann comes out of the Lutheran tradition. And those differences, I think, will tell. What is history, historicism, progressivism? Well, let's jump in. So there was a really good video released on Bishop Baron's stream, Jordan Peterson's Next Step. It was kind of in a podcast format, so there was a little bit of question and answer. I'm just going to play a little bit of it. I think probably the key parts of it from Bishop Baron. And again, Bishop Baron is a wonderfully educated man, well-spoken, really does the Church a service and does the Roman Catholic Church a service and what he does, greatly appreciate his work. And so he was apparently home and got a chance to watch some of the Petersons. Sam Harris debates. So let's see what he thought. Well, he talked about that a little bit before. I'm just for the sake of brevity jumping in the middle. It's not a very long video, only 26 minutes. You can watch the whole thing. If I remember, I'll put the link in the notes. First, though, Brandon, because what Peterson does is he does it very consistently is he will say the great narratives, let's say of the biblical tradition, which he knows the best, the great narratives of the biblical tradition is the great narratives of the biblical tradition. Contain within themselves certain moral forms and principles. And these principles are, and I think he's right about this, are best exemplified in narrative form. So you can state a moral principle abstractly or you can tell a story that exemplifies it. This gets a little bit into the ongoing conversation I've been having with Adam about objective morality. And again, when he often defines, he talked to the distributists today. When he defines morality, he likes to use rules. And Bishop Aaron is right. I think Peterson is right. Story better communicates morality than rules. Rules have their place. They're helpful. They give good guidelines. They're clear. But story tends to communicate more of the world, the context and nuance, and therefore teaches better. Everyone is better. Everyone agrees the story is better, right? Which is why the Bible has the form that it has. So in the stories of the Garden of Eden and the Tower of Babel and the flood of Noah and the call of Abraham, et cetera, Cain and Abel, in all these great stories, there are, I call them moral and psychological principles that are so fundamental and so ancient and so archetypal that they remain of extraordinary significance to this day. That we can't really live our moral lives outside of this kind of narrative illumination, this narrative display of the fundamentals of the moral life. That's as I take Jordan Peterson as he reads and very effectively. I think he reads with penetrating insight a lot of these biblical stories. Now, that approach is kind of Jungian. I've used the word archetypal, and that's a Jungian term, right? And so, the archetypes of the collective unconscious are these great patterns of meaning that are often embedded in the rituals and narratives of the great traditions. Come right up to Star Wars. So George Lucas, influenced by Joseph Campbell, who himself was a Jungian like Jordan Peterson. And you see in the Star Wars narrative, right? Which, again, beautiful. Every kid in the world knows and loves that narrative. Now, why? Because it embodies certain psychological and moral structures that make our lives possible. So that's, I think, the space that Jordan Peterson likes to explore. We've done a couple episodes on the podcast in the past about Jordan Peterson and these Jungian archetypes. So if you missed that, if all of these names and terms are a little hazy, go back and listen to those. I think it'll fill in some of the gaps. I need a shirt. I need a shirt. I guess I need my name on it. But just watching him thinking, oh man, he's got a shirt. I'm a Bishop Baron. He's got his collar. And maybe I should wear a clerical collar. I don't know. Put it in this comment section. Should I wear a clerical collar? What you point out here in this latest commentary is that he seems to admire the moral principles and the moral framework of the Bible. But he seems somewhat ambivalent toward the historicity or the existence of metaphysical things like God or objective morality. Talk a little bit about that. Okay, we got the objective morality in there. Brandon, you've been watching our Twitter stream. But here again, okay, so you've got the archetypes. You've got the mythology. You've got the patterns. We've got Peterson reading that. We've got him getting a lot of that from Jung. And now, of course, what naturally comes, at least with confessional Christians, with people identifying, go to the church, this sneaking suspicion and this concern about history. What about the history? Is that there? Let me back it up to get the question, and then we'll let the good bishop answer. What ambivalent toward the historicity or the existence of metaphysical things like God or objective morality? Talk a little bit about that. Well, right. And that's where I see the Kantian connection. So God and people have pressed Jordan Peterson again and again on the question. Do you believe in God? And I understand his reticence about giving to some one univocal answer because people take the term in such a multivalent way. See, the dude just does words good. You know, he's got words. He's got words. I really admire him for that. Anyway, I'll back up so you can hear his beautiful words. I get it. So God and people have pressed Jordan Peterson again and again on the question. Do you believe in God? And I understand his reticence about giving to some one univocal answer because people take the term in such a multivalent way. I get that. But what he tends to do is to bracket, as you say, the grand metaphysical questions, you know, cosmological arguments. Is there in fact the first metaphysical principle that lies behind the contingency of the world? Is there in fact a great intelligent source behind the intelligibility of the world? And, you know, these classical cosmological arguments, he tends not so much to refute them as to set them aside. Now, again, a little bit of I just I just finished listening to the distributist and Aaron talking about objective morality. And what the bishop made, the points the bishop made here are pretty much the same. The points that the distributist made is that the arguments that he just trotted out are actually pre-Christian and the conceptualization that Bishop Aaron just gave in terms of what God is and how this thing is set up. These are these are pretty much Greek setups that that the bishop made. And so this is this is actually pre-Christian and in many ways broader than Christianity and part of the Western philosophical tradition. So, again, I'll back it up a little bit. And lies behind the contingency of the world. Is there in fact a great intelligent source behind the intelligibility of the world? And, you know, these these classical cosmological arguments, he tends not so much to refute them as to set them aside and to move into, I think, a much more Kantian space. Now, here I'm referring to the great Immanuel Kant, as you say, 18th century Prussian philosopher, probably the greatest of the modern philosophers grounded in people like, you know, Descartes and Spinoza and so on. Hume. But but Kant in some ways sums up a lot of the instincts of modern philosophy. Well, what do you find in Kant? But a very similar move in the critique of pure reason, his first great critique. He effectively brackets the metaphysical questions about God, that pure reason on its own can't attain to this this metaphysical realm, because all it can really talk about, Kant says, is the world of phenomena, what appears phenomena as they are ordered and received by the a priori notions of the mind. So there's the critique of pure reason. And you if you listen to Peterson and Harris again and again and again, Peterson keeps going back to Kant. And so Bishop Aaron just listened to Peterson and Harris videos. And so it's very, it's why it goes back to Kant in this. And it's the critique of pure reason. Pure reason can't get you there. And of course, Peterson isn't going to stay with reason, but he's dealing with reason because, of course, that same Harris's big argument. He tends to undo in his mind or unravel the classical arguments because they don't they don't work. However, now move to the second critique, the critique of practical reason, which talks about the moral life. And here Kant uses language that I think is echoed very much in Jordan Peterson, namely that God is a sort of pure idea of the practical reason that makes the moral life possible. Now, I can't go into all details. Read commentaries on Kant or if if you dare get the critique of practical reason and go through it. But God is what he calls a regulative idea of the practical reason. Now, take one more step. What some call the fourth critique as a book called Religion Within the... Maybe we should back up before we go there. Listen to that again, because it's really important. What is God? Is and again in my videos, is God a conscious agent or is God an idea? Is God an archetype that is now, this is God number one, embedded into the world? The limit break of practical details. Read commentaries on Kant or if if you dare get the critique of practical reason and go through it. But God is what he calls a regulative idea of the practical reason. A regulative idea. OK, so it's not just an idea. It's a regulative idea. That's really God number one. Now, take one more step. What some call the fourth critique as a book called Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone. Kant writes at the very end of his career. Religion, he says there, comes down fundamentally to ethics. Religion is basically about ethics. So liturgy and metaphysics and all this business, sacraments, that's all trivial or secondary. Now, remember again, Peterson doesn't go to church. Religion is about ethics. Religion is about what you do. Religion is about picking up your cross and dragging it up off the hill. Religion is not about what Christians do in liturgy, which is which is verbally, physically with our bodies. If you go to a liturgical church and you're kneeling, embody and have it this this world. OK, that's what happens in church. That's how you're training your elephant. Religion is what you do. It's and if you notice again, Peterson's all of Peterson's prescriptions are about doing something. All right. And so I think I think Bishop Baron's insight here is really important and helpful. So liturgy and metaphysics and and all this business sacraments, that's all trivial or secondary. What it really comes down to is ethics. Again, that sounds a bit like Peterson, where there's a great interest in in in the ethical life. But then secondly, Kant says Jesus is also a kind of regulative idea of this ethical religion. Did Jesus actually exist? I don't. OK, now, again, I would have loved to pause him there because what he's saying is Jesus is this regulative idea. And for Peterson, Jesus is a regulative idea. Now, Peterson hasn't gone out on a limb and said some of the more fringy things like Jesus never existed. That's a fairly fringe position. But Jesus is a regulative idea. That's how he functions in your life. And that's right. But now notice the the impulse at this point is, well, what about history? And I'm right there, too. I'm Bishop Aaron and I are both on. We were on both on the same side of Lessing's ditch and we'll get to Lessing's ditch in a minute. But so you have this question. Is it OK that Jesus is just an idea? Is Jesus just a symbol for who we should be? And there's a long debate within both late medieval and and modern Christian theology about is Jesus simply an ideal that we have to live up to? Or does Jesus does Jesus live? And if Jesus lives, how does his life change ours in ways that we can describe within this frame of the modern world? It's terribly hard question. It's also a kind of regulative idea of this ethical religion. Did Jesus actually exist? I don't know. Does it matter for not really? What matters is the role he plays in the grounding narrative of the New Testament because he is the exemplification of the person perfectly pleasing to God concept. Right. The idea of the person perfectly pleasing to God appears in narrative form in the New Testament. And so as I listen to Peter's, I kept thinking, ah, it's the Kantian approach again, tending to bracket metaphysics, focusing on ethics, on morality and tending to see the archetypal significance of these narrative moves and characters. You know, so in that way, I think he is young for our time. He's also very Nietzschean that could be taught for another day, but I think he's also very much a Kantian figure for our time. Now, I don't want to psychoanalyze Jordan Peterson in this podcast, and we're hoping I know a lot of people are going to email us to ask winter Bishop Aaron and Jordan Peterson getting together. We're working on that. We've got some good leads. Hopefully we'll get you guys together here in the in the next few months. But when you're talking with with somebody coming from a Jungian background or a Kantian background, how do you help them take the next? Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Brandon, the map behind you, that's Middle Earth. Pretty sure that's Middle Earth. Good job, Brandon. We got our we got our we got our we got our Tolkien reference in this video. We got it even in the video. Step beyond just the archetypal analysis of, say, Jesus and move to the historical or personal analysis. Yeah. And that's that's where you are. I think here's the first move is to say everything you said is good. I think there really are these great Jungian archetypes embedded in the biblical narratives. I agree with my friend Chris Kayser from LMU, who studied Peterson in this law and said what he does corresponds to the church fathers, what they would have called the moral sense of the scripture. You know, they say there are four senses of scripture, one of them being the moral sense. And we might say today the psychological sense. But that's what what Peterson is very good at exemplifying. So I would say, yeah, good. Right. I agree. You know, I might then begin to press it. But are there other senses of the Bible? Is there more to it than is going than is going on in those archetypal stories? It is similar way with Kant. Does the New Testament, in fact, present the archetype of the person perfectly pleased to God? Yeah, sure it does. Might we even construe a lot of the moral life in reference to that heuristic, regulative idea? Yeah, sure. I'm OK with that. And I'd say probably even more than just OK with that. Christians are very enthusiastic about this. Yes, we are to the imitation of Christ. We are to become like him. He is, in fact, our example. Now, is he more than that? And that's, of course, where Bishop and I agree. But there's more going on because I would argue what really matters at the end of the day is that it happened. And that's what we're going to have to talk about. What really matters is that it happened. And that here is where we get the, and the Bishop's about to go there, here's where we get this culture that developed in the Western Academy that got shy of that. And actually, that's what NT Wright is going to go deeper into. Now, what happened was that there was a divorce between this regulative idea that Jesus was and the historical claims that Jesus actually embodied these in real life, in real time. Those two things got divorced. And in this process, I've begun to say, you know, it's important that these things are true on all of these levels. Well, why? Well, part of it is I can go to the movie theaters and I can watch Star Wars and I can or the the the Commuter, the movie I mentioned in my last video, I can watch the Commuter and I can be inspired by by Liam Neeson's desire to be noble. And we very quickly well, well, why does does it matter that Liam Neeson was whether or not Liam Neeson was a true story? And here we would say, no, you know, I can be inspired by the Commuter that he was being noble. But then why is it the beginning of every movie that is based on or inspired by a true story? The movie makers tag that there. They tag that there because something deep in us says there's another deeper level of truth if it happened in real life than if it's just a parable. And we know that instinctively and we go there. And so this separation that we've had in Western theology and in Western philosophy and in Western real life is has is haunting us. And so when when Sam Harris bullies Jordan Peterson into saying about the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ, probably not. And Peterson continues, he backtracks from that, that whole dynamic of being able to bully him into it. And then Peterson later in other interviews backing off and leaving the door open. Here we're dealing with this Lessing's ditch that the bishop is about to tell us about. It really happened. It's not just an idea that's now narratively expressed. And I would trust it's a real person who historically speaking so embodied the archetype that he transformed the whole world. This is not just a. And right there, a real person that so embodied the historical archetype and and in many ways, you can see the archetypes develop in the Old Testament. We have Moses, the prophet, and David, the king, and Elijah, the prophet. You have all of these in Christianity. We call them typology. We have all these types of Christ before. And so they're all the archetype is coming together. And that's where if you listen to a preacher like Tim Keller, he'll say Jesus is the better Moses. Jesus is the better David. Jesus is the better Elijah. Jesus and what's more important, not only do these stories in the Old Testament embody imperfect archetypes because we can see in the story of David, we get glimpses of the king he should be, but he fails to be that king. And Jesus comes along and actually succeeds at being that king. And the gospel writers bring this in. Matthew, again, written to the Hebrews. Jesus goes to exit. Jesus goes to Egypt. Out of Egypt, I have called my son that Jesus now fulfills the calling of Israel. That's so important. And it's important that Jesus does it in the historical world. Well, why is that important? Because all of us know. Well, OK, so let's imagine that you can put me in a chamber and put on virtual reality goggles. And somehow you can run hormones through my body and keep my body alive. And I can I can be immersed in his real context to fool my mind as I'm in right now. And most of us, well, it's the story of the matrix. Most of us imagining ourselves in these little bubbles with these wires coming out of us, we instinctively say that's a lesser life. And so when they're on the the Nebuchadnezzar, when they're on the hovercraft, the Nebuchadnezzar, and they're eating that drool and who's who's what's the name of the of the traitor in the matrix when he basically says, I don't want to eat this gruel. I want to get plugged back into the matrix. And and and yo, Agent Anderson, when you plug me back into the matrix, I want to be good looking and I want to be rich. And I want to be, you know, I want to be all this stuff. Nobody explains why in the matrix everybody in the little eggs looks like they look in the matrix. You know, I don't know why. But here's here's the point. We all have an appreciation that a virtual life is less real than this physical experience that we're doing. And we all have a value system that says, well, great, I can I can play this computer game in which I have I own a Lamborghini. It would be greater still to own a Lamborghini in my garage in Sacramento than to have a computer game where I get to drive a Lamborghini, even if this computer game, I can drive this Lamborghini around crazy turns and jump over things. And and in reality, my Lamborghini might not go too many places because I don't want it to get scuffed up and you can hardly get in a parking lot without scraping the front. And who knows what? Maybe Lamborghini's aren't like that. I've never driven one. But you get the idea that we all value all of the layers more than value just some of the layers. And that's why this ditch continues to haunt us. And if you want a narrative projection of a heuristic or regulative idea, if you want, it's a projection of God's mind. The word became flesh. Right. And that's why that turns us on, because I could play the little Felix. If you go back to my early videos exclamation point, he puts it on the door and goes through the door to save the girl. And you get the idea that if you go into Deepak Chopra and the New Agers, I'm going to law of attraction. I'm going to attract the Lamborghini to me. That's a deep desire of us. That's the desire for magic. And here in the Gospels, you have the word becoming flesh and tabernacled among us. And that's deeply attractive and compelling. And that matters. And the New Testament and the Bible as a whole is very interested in the historical manifestations and the historical ways that God has communicated himself, as well as being interested in the archetypal and heuristic level. So anyway, that's where I would tease out or try to press Jordan Peterson. Why do you think for for Jungians, for Kantians that questions of metaphysics are bracketed? Do you think they just find them uninteresting? No, no. No, I think it's because this is the central drama in many ways of modern philosophy, because they felt they and I think with a deep frustration in a way that they couldn't do it, that it's just not available to them. So I think Kant is with a sort of resignation, like I kind of wish it, but pure reason just can't reach these things. And it's interesting because this frustration, this this wish it could be different. What's stopping them? I think it's usually sociology. It's exactly what Dallas Willard describes in that Veritas video that I played in a number of my videos where he says worldview is communicated subtly by the little throw words we throw away. It's by social status. If you're here in the university and you believe in the resurrection, you will lose status. If you identify as a Christian, you will lose status. If you don't vote for the right correct political party, you will lose status. If you identify as someone who likes to watch Jordan Peterson videos, you know, on the slide and you get you get found out, you will lose status. These status games are deeply important to us. And what happened in the West is via I think I think, you know, it gets generated before the Reformation. It happens at the Reformation. It happens in the Enlightenment. And I think we have to we have to face the reasons that these status issues happened. I think part of it was again, you're dealing with corruption in the church in the West. That's I think in many ways a big motivation of the Reformation. And they saw a sacramentalism that got very cheap and convenient and easy and corruption. And so these reformers, these church reformers made the moves that they did. But that kept going. Then in the Enlightenment. Okay, now we can no longer find commonality. Our imagined objective morality isn't quite as available to us as we need it to be. And so now we're going to ground reality in some combination of empiricism and rationality. And we're still in there. And so when you get to Sam Harris, that's the grounding for his that's the grounding for his worldview. Empiricism and rationality. No metaphysic. We've got a ditch. Frustration in a way philosophy because they felt they and I think with a deep frustration in a way that they couldn't do it. That it's just not available to them. So I think Kant is with a sort of resignation like I kind of wish it. But pure reason just can't reach these things. And see again what happens with a lot of these philosophers and theologians is that they are trying to save Christianity. They feel it's under threat. And so then they go instead of a full orbed Christianity, they reduce it to a they reduce it to one that they feel they can afford. One that they feel is possible in the academy. One that at least the lowest common denominator. But what happens is that that just keeps shrinking. And I don't think the arguments work. And so but I'm I'm I'm kind of I'm trying desperately to hang on to what's really good and right and beautiful and religion. And this is the way to do it. Another key thing, and it's boring people with these names, but this great figure board, I guess his first name is either got hold or got freed or something. But less thing, L.E.S.S.I.N.G. is one of the most important players in modern thought because he gave rise to one great idea. Lessing said there are yawns between the universal ideas of reason and the concrete facts of history. A great gulf. And it's called Lessing's Gulf now. This great gully, this great gulf in between what the reason wants, which is certitude, absolute truth, and what history can deliver, which is contingent and even essence facts of history. And you can't get from one to the other. So a lot of the modern, especially in religion, are either weeping over trying to build bridges over running away from hurling themselves into Lessing's Gulf. And see, in a way, Kant is responding there, too, by saying, finally, look, it doesn't really matter whether there really was a Jesus who did all these things. What matters is, and again, look what he's doing, staying on one side of Lessing's Gulf, the pure ideas of the universal ideas of reason, these regulative ideas of the practical reason. Sure, that's all that matters. And we can back at history. But see, Christianity can't do that. We have to deal with Lessing's Gulf in a much more creative way than that. Now, again, how many divisions do we have? So we have pure reason and we have contingent history. Well, now let's introduce again, Vervecky and the Axial Age. And so, well, isn't that interesting how these things align? Is this exactly the Axial Age split? It's pretty close. It's pretty close. So pure reason. Now, again, when you listen to Sam Harris, what Sam Harris is saying is that we can get there via reason. And when you listen to somebody like Jordan Peterson, who's a clinical psychologist who sits in rooms with people and listens to rooms, taught people to listen to people try to talk their lives better in a room, Peterson says, no, you can't do that. And so now, again, we're back to Kant and practical, practical reason. Well, how can we practically get there? Well, it's morality. And so then you've got Jesus as the Jesus as the quintessential human being. And down below here, you who are sitting at you're sitting in Jordan Peterson's Jordan Peterson's office and you're saying, I, you know, I can't I'm having trouble giving up this stuff. And he's giving you all these practical tips and you can make your life better and things can improve better and stay at work 10 different hours without being begrudging about it. And yeah, things will improve. Things will improve. And let's look at Heights happiness hypothesis. Boy, you get things will improve. Well, now you're you're doing better with women. You're making more money. You're paying your bills. You're staying in better shape. All these things are good. So for the next little while, you're going to have a rush that my life is a whole lot better and you're going to celebrate and that's going to be permanent. You're going to say, thank goodness, Jordan Peterson. But you are going to acclimate to that level of happiness. You are. Read Jonathan Haidt on this lottery winners when they win the lottery, whoosh, you know, woof, big upswing. It comes back down, goes the other way to people who have had a horrible car accident, lost use of their legs. Bang. Two years later, the back level of happiness. So can we really bridge the gulf? What makes the accolade so compelling? Is that again, mentally, we can imagine it. There's a vision of the beautiful. We can. There's a vision of it and that vision draws us. But every time we try to climb up that hill or get over this ditch. And as the bishop said, Christianity won't go there. It has to. It can't just leave the ditch alone because it's the story of the reconciliation of the two worlds. So actually, when he mentioned lessons, Lessing's golf, as the good bishop mentioned, thought, oh, yeah, I should listen to I should listen to NT Wright. These Gifford lectures again, because will I learn something? As a matter of fact, I will. Once the shrines were falling to left and right and fifth and right and left and right. The shrines were falling to left and right and fifth and right in the middle of all this. There was the start of what came to be called the quest to the historical Jesus. Herman Samuel Reymaris believed as a deist in a good and wise deity who would have to be discovered by unaided reason, since for him the Old Testament was misleading nonsense. And the new was a self-serving fabrication saying little about Jesus himself. Jesus, said Reymaris, was in fact a deluded would-be revolutionary who died a failure and whose followers hid his body and invented the new movement. G.E. Lessing, who brought Reymaris' work to posthumous public attention, is known for his ugly broad ditch between the eternal truths of reason and the contingent truths of history. Reymaris' account of the contingent truths of Jesus' history made the point. How could you base any eternal conclusions on that stuff? And even if you tried, Jesus wasn't like what the church had imagined. Heaven and earth remain opaque to one another. All these things go together. Politics without God, science without God, economics without God, history without God, and finally, Jesus without God. Their godfather, if that isn't exactly the wrong term, was David Hume. The five features I've mentioned are different in some ways, but they're united in a Humean philosophical thrust. They're not just straws in the wind. They are flags flying strongly to announce a new world, a new day. By 1800, the shrine had fallen and a brave new independent world had been born. This sense of a new world embodied the idea, the new idea of progress. And he's going to go into that. Again, listen to the first lecture, second lecture, third lecture. So you have Lessing's ditch, and you see that, well, we can't really accept the gospel accounts of Jesus. Very early on, that's late 17th, early 18th century, Reimaris, who apparently wasn't terribly popular. And then Lessing finds him, and now we have Lessing's ditch. And so as NT Wright notes, you have this huge divide. And David Hume, basically, there's this huge divide. We're cut off from the historical Jesus. We're cut off from the historical Jesus. We're cut off from the historical Jesus. There's this huge divide. We're cut off from the historical Jesus. We're cut off from history in many ways. And NT Wright will go into that. Now, what's interesting is that some of you who remember some of my previous videos know that I started working my way through this particular video, which I thought was an excellent video, on declassifying Jordan Peterson's biblical hermeneutic. And he walked through the Enlightenment figures. You had Descartes. You had Kant. And I had made a video on Kant and Feuerbach. Rachel, shoot, I can't remember Rachel, is it Brown? Rachel had mentioned, had mentioned Feuerbach, and I thought she had made an excellent point on the three craters about Feuerbach. And then Paul Maxwell goes on to Boltman. And Boltman has come up a number of times in my comment section. And people have been saying, you know, Peterson and Boltman, those of those of you out there who have some theological education and know something about theology, keep naming Boltman the more you listen to Peterson. And I think there are reasons for that. So you can see here that between Peterson and Feuerbach, there is the sense in which the God concept really does have its origin in the abstraction of of human particulars to solve the most basic human problems of value. And while they actually use opposing language, right, whether God is the anthropomorphization of nature or whether he's the abstracted antithesis to nature, they're both essentially saying the same thing, that God represents the abstracted ultimate of human ideals. So we've gone through Hegel, we've gone through Feuerbach. And so with with sort of Hegel and Feuerbach under a wing, we can actually look at some of Peterson's 20th century analogs. And basically, we're getting more into the material of Peterson here, which is where does Peterson get his this approach to the mythological world of the Bible that dignifies the cycle, the psychological realities to which it points while choosing to sort of liberally discard any serious literal literal interpretation of the text. Right. So where does he get this myth is such a central concept to Peterson. So so in other words, where does Peterson get the idea to look beneath the myth of the Bible for deeper truths about human psychology and philosophy, rather than either becoming a Christian fundamentalist and accepting everything word for word literally, or becoming a secular humanist and rejecting it outright because it's not straightforwardly true in a literal scientific sense either. Notice what's happened to Lessing's ditch. So now you have the fundamentalists over here, and you have the secular materialists over here and the secular materialists materialists and I've mapped this out before and some of my other lectures because remember, into the 20th century, the United States church attendance reaches its reaches its peak. The United States basically recruits God in service against the godless Russians for the Cold War. And in that point, for the most part, in 20th century, we didn't trust the Bible for history or science or geology, but we trusted it for morality. Now, at the end of the Cold War, the new threat on the horizon was no longer godless atheism, Marxism. The new threat on the horizon was religious fundamentalism, Islam. And at that point, you have the rise of the new atheists and the four horsemen of new atheism come roaring in and well, we not only have to reject God, obviously, and the Bible in terms of history and geology, but now we have to reject the Bible in terms of what it has to say about morality and human behavior. And a bunch of that stuff had been building up, but public consensus was, no, we stick with the Bible. And as we no longer needed God for the Cold War, as we were winning the Cold War, you know, Reagan, Reagan was still on the God side in terms of the Cold War, even though Nancy was into astrology. After the Cold War, now God is a liability because, well, the Muslims, they've really, they're really, you know, they're theists with a capital T, and they're crying out prayers and praises to God as they fly planes into buildings. Clearly, God is now a liability. And so the morality that had been, that had been the morality from the Bible that had remained as a guide for living in the United States suddenly is now suspect. And you get books like God is not good. Before it's, we, God didn't make the world, the world is a product of chance, random process, but we still live by that code. Now the code is going away. Okay, where does, where does, where does Peterson get his sensitivity to move beyond the need for straightforward literality in religious texts? So, so whether he gets it from him or not, Peterson's approach to biblical myth is almost identical to Rudolph Bultman. Now, I don't think he gets it from Bultman because anybody who's watched the biblical series knows he gets a lot of information from public domain stuff just that you can find on the net. Now this isn't a criticism. If, you know, I'm getting my, I'm getting my training in psychology from things that are something like Bible Hub or Bible Gateway. These are just public domain things. These aren't, you know, the tools of someone who deals with this professionally. This is just what's out there available to us. And so it's not a criticism, but I did a quick check of Maps of Meaning, no reference to Bultman. Chances are Jordan Peterson doesn't know who Bultman is. And so actually when Jordan Peterson talks about meeting with theologians in Cambridge, part of me kind of winces because it's like, boy, you're getting thrown into the deep end now in terms of there's this whole, and this is what you get from watching NT Wright. Just as there's this whole history behind psychology, there's this whole history behind philosophy. There's this whole history behind theology in all of its different branches. There's New Testament studies. There's Old Testament studies. There's biblical theology. There's systematic theology. There's, you know, there's moral theology and philosophy. I mean, there's all this stuff that's happening and has been happening still. And the difficulty is that when you just kind of get plunked into it without kind of knowing the history and how the history correlates between the different disciplines, it's really tough getting oriented. Okay, so we'll see what happens to Exodus. Exodus could look a lot different from Genesis, depending on how well Peterson can get up to speed and figure out how the movements in psychology and philosophy also tended to track with movements in theology. And I haven't heard him almost. So whether he gets it from him or not, Peterson's approach to biblical myth is almost identical to Rudolph Bultman. And I haven't heard him bring up Bultman, but I wouldn't be surprised if he did in some lecture somewhere. Okay, so Bultman was a 20th century New Testament scholar, and Bultman explains this explains sort of his approach to myth. And I'll read a little bit of Bultman here. Okay, so Bultman says this quote, It is impossible to repristinate a past world picture by sheer resolve, especially a mythical world picture, now that all of our thinking is irrevocably formed by science. Okay, what's Bultman saying? What Bultman is saying is that the changes in science, and I would argue, especially technology, have made us approach the world with different categories. When in 2019, one of us reads the Bible, we bring a lot to the Bible. Now if you watch my Sunday School class on Sunday mornings that I put on my other channel, I should probably upload this week's. I look over here because there's the camera. If you watch those, we are thinking in different categories than the New Testament authors and NT Wright's going to talk quite a bit about this when he talks about kind of a view of love, which means well what does that mean? It means that you respect the worldview of people who lived in the past world. Now this gets tricky because what we've tended to do is develop what C.S. Lewis calls chronological snobbery. Boy, they don't have science and technology. They must have been dumb. Boy, they thought that a man and a man getting married was just crazy talk. They must have been dumb. They lived in a different world, and one of the things that we're trying to work on in terms of the morality conversations is how do we regard people, how do we regard Washington and Jefferson, people who own slaves? How do we regard John Adams, a New England Calvinist? How do we regard people who had different worldviews? What do we do with Martin Luther's anti-Semitism? Do you just throw it away? How can you deal with these things in the past? Now Boltman says, well, they've got all this stuff happening in the New Testament period. They believe things we don't believe. Remember a couple of videos ago I had these different worldview categories. They had a three tiered universe. We who know today say, no, there's only one tier. How can we understand their writing? Now one way is to just throw it away. Say, well, that's just dumb. That's the same Harris. The Bible's just dumb. It's obsolete. Well, Rudolf Boltman at the end of the 19th, beginning of the 20th century, was not prepared to do that. In fact, again, throughout Christendom, they weren't prepared to do that. Now, obviously, a lot of people, individual people, did it in their own lives. But academically, that wasn't the time. The time would come later in the 20th century when they would throw it away together. But now again with Jordan Peterson, people are, people keep coming back to the Bible and say, well, there's stuff there. Maybe we should, maybe we should learn from it. So in many ways, Boltman is on the other end of Lessing's ditch. And not only is he divorced from, not only is, so what's Lessing's ditch? Well, there's pure reason and there's life here below. And so now Boltman, not only are we divorced from, so you have this New Testament, and you're divorced from the world that it was written in. So here you've got another gulf. And well, how can you understand what it's written here when we're living in an age of airplanes and cars and Nazis? That's Boltman's question. He's saying we cannot read it naively like those people because we no longer live within a three-tiered universe. We have to read it mythologically so that we can understand it. So let's listen to Paul. So we here see Boltman taking seriously the literality of scientific truth and sort of recognizing that we can't repristinate or re-represent in our world in a straightforwardly literal and truthful sense the world of the Bible, cosmologically anyway or scientifically. So he continues. This is Boltman. So for Boltman, this concept of myth poses a problem to taking the Bible seriously as a text. But he finds a way through this obstacle to dignify the message of the Bible without subjecting itself to its cosmology, and it's this. So here's our sort of final reading for Boltman. He says this. The real point of myth, so quote, this is Boltman, quote, the real point of myth is not to give an objective world picture. What is expressed in it rather, that is in the myth, is how we human beings understand ourselves in the world. Thus, myth does not want to be interpreted in cosmological terms, but in anthropological terms. Right there, remember I said, what happens in the 19th century is that people in the academy, some people out of the academy, but people in the academy say, oh gosh, these bones we're finding are dinosaurs. We don't have dinosaurs in the Bible. We have a new geology and we look around and we used to explain the Grand Canyon because of Noah's flood. Now we no longer believe that Noah's flood is a universal flood. We have questions about the historicity of the Exodus. We have all these historical questions, but we're way too, the sunk costs we have as a culture in Christianity are way too deep just to throw it away. And now in the Cold War, we need God around. So what do we do? Well, we say, well, you can't really trust the Bible for history. You can't really trust the Bible for science. You can't really trust the Bible for a lot of these physical things, but the Bible is helpful spiritually. Well, what do you mean by that? Well, someone then even began to say, well, we no longer believe in a literal devil. We no longer believe in a literal heaven. We no longer believe in a literal hell. We're increasingly believing that we're materialists. OK, this is the worldview question. But the Bible gives us stories that helps us make sense of the world. This is wisdom. Now, again, we go to we go back to Verveckis project and here we are. We're that if you listen to Verveckis talks, here we are right here in the 21st century. And we are past. You know, the world is being flattened. All right. We are explaining the Bible away and we are finding ourselves increasingly without meaning. All right. We used to look at the Bible for wisdom, but now, you know, we have the four horsemen. The Bible is not good. We shouldn't look through the Bible for wisdom. Throw that away. Now suddenly we're finding ourselves without meaning. Well, we want to reappropriate. Psychotechnologies of the axial age so that we ourselves can have meaning. Well, so Verveckis is going to talk psychotechnologies. Peterson is going to employ mythology. What is mythology? Mythology is wisdom encoded in stories. So when you listen to Brett Weinstein, when Brett and Sam and Jordan talked on stage, that was the tack that Brett would take. Well, there's wisdom, this metaphorical truth, wisdom encoded in these ancient mythologies. So Boltman comes along and says, our sunk cost in Christianity are too deep. We've got to stick with Christianity, but we've got to rescue it somehow. Got too much sunk cost. We can still get stuff out of the mythology. And at some point people are going to say, well, what's the point? There's lots of mythologies. Get stuff out of other mythologies. Why should we prioritize Christian mythology over some of these other mythologies? And that then is going to bear witness in, you've got religious pluralism, you've got New Age movements that tend to say all mythologies are the same. In the U.S. and Canada, you can find unity churches. And in many of these unity churches, you've got the Christian tradition, you've got the Islamic tradition, you've got the Jewish tradition, you've got the Hindu tradition, you've got the Jainism. I found my, I found my, and it's like having a comparative world religions class, and you can read Houston Smith's book, and you can read about all the different world religions. And then you sit here kind of as a consumer and you say, what kind of religion do I like? And then I can pick a little bit of Christian, a little bit of Hindu and kind of put them all together and I can have the salad bar religion of me. That's coming down the road, but we're not there yet. We're still in Boltman. Boltman is now wants to keep the New Testament. He's a New Testament scholar. But the question is, how can the New Testament speak to us today? Well, through mythology. Or better in existentialist terms. And just to break from both. And the myth is how we human beings understand ourselves in the world. Thus, myth does not want to be interpreted in cosmological terms, but in anthropological terms. Or better in existentialist terms. And just to break from both here, we can already hear Peterson coming through, can we? Okay, continuing Boltman. Quote, therefore, the motive for criticizing myth, that is, its objectifying representations, is present in myth itself. Insofar as its real intention is to talk about a transcendent power to which both we and the world, our subject, is hampered and obscured by the objectifying character of its assertions. Okay, end quote. So basically what Boltman is saying here is that the religious texts of the Bible are self-consciously trying to speak psychologically and metaphysically and anthropologically. Even if that intention is obscured by the fact that they actually really believe the cosmological literality of their statements. For example, the Apostle Paul really believes that there is a living body somewhere that is the resurrected Christ, somewhere cosmologically. Seated at the right hand of the Father. Who is sovereign over the world and over the universe. Right? And yet, Boltman wants to acknowledge the psychological and anthropological truthfulness which the Apostle Paul might extract from this truth claim. While sort of shedding the metaphysical husk that is embedded within Paul's worldview. So now moving on to Peterson. Peterson says something very similar. Okay. Peterson says this, quote, myth is not primitive proto-science. It is a qualitatively different phenomenon. The mythic universe is a place to act, not a place to perceive. Myth describes things in turn of their... Now that right there is really important. It's a place to act, not a place to perceive. Because in many ways, Boltman is still just perceiving. Boltman is looking at mythology and saying, we can learn from this. Peterson is taking it a step further and saying, we need to act out the myth. That's an important distinction. Okay. Because I think also Peterson has a far deeper, through Jung and through the psychologists, a far deeper appreciation for the encoding of the myth. That's something that I don't know if Boltman had at all. See, Peterson comes along and says, Boltman perhaps, I'm not an expert in Boltman. Boltman perhaps said, along with everybody else in his generation, we've got too much sunk cost in Christianity. Let's keep the truth of the mythology and even though we shred the cosmological, historical husk from it, and that's what we will preach in our churches. I'm going to go to NT Wright talking about Boltman in a couple of minutes. But what Boltman doesn't give is why listen to Christianity at all. Peterson comes around and says, stuff is encoded in this and gives a Darwinian account for the durability of the myths that Boltman never gets. So that after Boltman, people look at Boltman and say, okay, so maybe there's value in there. I'll be the judge of that value. And so if I find that myths from other cultures do better for me, I'll just get rid of the Christian. I'll get rid of the Christian book. And I'm only going to appropriate stories from the Christian Bible to the degree that I find them meaningful for me. Now, again, we're getting into the transition, the post-World War II transition that David Brooks talks about in the path of character, the secret sacred self, where the secret sacred self is the judge, the consumerist soul is the judge of the world. And so I like 1 Corinthians 13, that story about love. I like Psalm 23, the Good Shepherd. I think the I don't like the Cain and Abel stuff because I don't like too much blood. And I really think that there's like racism in that whole Jewish thing. So we'll not talk about that. But then I like these other religions here. And so I, as a consumer, am going to pick out from all of the religions and construct a religion that suits me. Quite obviously, if you watch yourself doing that and you realize that you've made the little God that you are now worshiping, at some point you're going to realize that any God that you make is no God at all. And the only God you're trying to create or prop up is yourself. So Boltman's project is quite vulnerable. And Peterson comes along, does something similar to Boltman, but he's got this whole backing for it. And he says basically that, well, Christianity has stood the test of time and once again gives it authority. So I think Paul Maxwell is right in terms of understanding the similarity between the mythology here. But Peterson is doing something different that actually gives it more impact for people. Whereas Boltman, it was just kind of we were on our way down. And so after Boltman, it was easy for the text to slide away altogether. In terms of their unique or universe is a place to act, not a place to perceive. Myth describes things in terms of their unique or shared affective valence, their value, their motivational significance. The sky and the earth of the Sumerians are not the sky and earth of modern man. Therefore, they are the great father and mother of all things. So Peterson regularly talks about myth in this way. So as the lost myth for Peterson is the lost indispensable genre with which humans hungry for meaning need to become more fluent. OK, and he approaches the Bible in this same way, basically as having an indispensable mythological element that resonates with some universally basic psychological need for a metaphysical world. And yet at the same time, being constituted by recognizably. I don't want to say absurd, but recognizably dispensable God language with which we can really dispense only insofar as we conceive of them literally. So so Peterson just wants to get beyond sort of the simple minded literality with which these texts are either commonly accepted or dismissed. So also does Boltman and the interpretive key that they use to access this new level of depth in the biblical text is the myth genre. It's the mythos concept. It allows them to strip their reading to find value beneath the cosmology. OK, so to find value despite the cosmology, I think I would say. Moving forward beyond Boltman. So again, I think I think Paul Maxwell's treatment of Peterson is great, but I think I would nuance this now kind of thinking it through it, listening to it again. Boltman is essentially on the way down and saying, OK, we're losing, we're losing, we're losing, we're losing. Well, let's try and hang on to at least the mythology of the Bible. And maybe we can find some transcendental values that are still in the mythology. But Boltman isn't giving a reason for people. He doesn't need to because again, you've got the sunk cost of Christianity now that in a sense we're past Boltman hit has fallen. And then also not only does Peterson have Peterson doesn't have Boltman, Peterson has Jung. And it's in a sense going to come up and Peterson is going to use a Darwinian idea and say that in a sort of survival of the fittest myth. These myths in the Bible have endured and therefore they are true. Whereas in many ways, Boltman banked on the historical credibility, the community inertia within Christianity in middle 20th century World War II and then Cold War cultures. Christianity still had authority in cache that he could employ. But Boltman, the House of Boltman would eventually crumble. Now I want to I want to get into NT right here and go into a deeper level with Boltman. But before we do that, I want to recognize. So I was I was listening to this. I was thinking about Boltman. You know, you bump into Boltman when you're in seminary and you're studying New Testament stuff. And if you go to a conservative Protestant seminary, Boltman gets dismissed as a liberal because it's it's classical Christian liberalism that arises in the 19th and 20th century. But then I began to think you got Boltman, you got Bart and you got Jung. All these three guys come up in the same place. Bart and Jung both survived the war in Switzerland. OK, Boltman, he's in Germany. So there's you know, there's there's stuff going on there that NT Wright's going to talk about with respect to Boltman. And then you've got stuff going on. You got another ditch between the North Sea and England and how the English language folks take, you know, deal with Lessing's ditch as opposed to the Germans and their mythologies. But it's interesting to me that Peterson is coming through Jung probably knows nothing of Boltman. So there's similarities in terms of the mythology, the mythology move with Boltman and Peterson. But we have no we have no reason to believe Peterson knows any Boltman nor ever read any. OK, so I think actually, as I'm working through this video right now, even though there's similarity between Peterson and Boltman, I don't think we can go there. Now you can draw a link between it's in the water in a sense in central Western Europe, in Germany and Switzerland. All of these issues that are there philosophically, theologically that have to be dealt with, namely Lessing's ditch. Now, Karl Barth is going to be a neo-orthodox. And so the neo-orthodox are going to try to assail this ditch with moves like, well, the Bible isn't itself revelation. The Bible is the record of revelation. And so they're they're going to try to nuance the ditch. And Karl Barth is is going to be kind of the giant of 20th century systematic theology Protestant reformed in Switzerland. My my New Testament professor, Fred Kloster, who was pretty conservative guy, had almost nothing good to say about Karl Barth in his systematics lectures, except he took great pride in that once he gave Karl Barth a ride to the airport. And we heard that story two or three times. So to me, that's a that's a lesson in status. Fred Kloster has very little respect for Karl Barth's theology because he's neo-orthodox instead of this traditional reformed orthodoxy that that Fred Kloster was and that my denomination was. But he got a little giddy giving Karl Barth a ride to the airport. So now let's look at Peterson. Peterson's going to unpack a little bit deeper. Rudolf Bultmann. With that we leap into the 1920s and 30s. Once more, greet my Gifford predecessor, Rudolf Bultmann. For him, the end of the world language in the Gospels and Paul disproved in its literal sense was to be reinterpreted through demythologization. Now, one of the things that NT Wright has done in lecture two is he walks very carefully through the assumption that got deeply embedded in New Testament studies that the the members of the early church were wrong about an imminent coming of Jesus Christ. Now, some of you know a little bit of New Testament theology are going to disagree with NT Wright on this, but NT Wright makes this a very big point in his Gifford lectures that when we read Jesus and the little apocalypse in places like the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Mark and the Gospel of Luke, when we read Paul writing in Thessalonians and for a long time people have said, well, they were all wrong about the timing of the second coming. NT Wright disagrees because that has been a big factor in people saying, well, if Jesus was wrong about the second coming, coming very soon, what else was he wrong with? And psychologically that becomes a big argument against the divinity of Christ. And so I really appreciated, I really appreciated lecture two here in NT Wright taking the time to kind of walk through the historical roots for the rise of the failure of Jesus. And you can even find this in C.S. Lewis, that the Jesus getting the timing of the second coming wrong. And now Boltman here is in that, he's after that, that has already become a theological certainty in New Testament studies by the time he comes along. And now he needs to figure out of what use in the early and mid 20th century the eschatology of the New Testament is because they no longer believe in an anticipated historical second coming of Jesus. So what do you do with New Testament eschatology? And again, if Jordan Peterson ever gets to the New Testament, it's going to be very interesting to see what he decides to do with eschatology because as I've mentioned many times, these different worldviews all have within them an eschatology. And when Sam Harris talks about this age of reason and well-being and getting rid of religion so we can let science reign and science and politics in a sense can bring in the eschaton, this is all eschatology. And Rudolph Boltman has a problem that what to do with New Testament eschatology when we no longer expect Jesus to come. Does Christianity then actually answer real questions for our lives? Proved in its literal sense was to be reinterpreted through demythologization. That confused slogan combined three senses of myth. One, the flat sense of myth as old stories we can't believe in today. Two, the more interesting sense of myth as the stories cultures tell themselves to explain the human predicament as with ancient Greek tragedies and including particularly three, the cosmic myths in apocalyptic writings which encode a different kind of truth. Boltman focused on. See now if we look at Peterson in this, I've tried to get Peterson and Wright together and they both expressed interest but again Peterson is tough to nail down to get him, he's tough to nail down with this book tour, he's a very busy man, he's always traveling. But now where does Peterson fit in on this? So you get these three senses of myths. Again Peterson comes along and says myth is validated through Darwinian selection of stories. Myths endure, the truest myths will endure. Generation after generation they're tried, found true, passed along. Tried, found true, passed along. But they're not, they're not, they're not directly applicable. This gets into the objective morality idea and again I'll probably have another conversation with Adam. But when he says objective I think he's got some images behind his idea of objective and the way that gravity is true and so yeah you learn very young not to walk off a cliff. It's that kind of objective. Well, well in what way do myths communicate and myths embody, myths embody, we don't want to say eternal truths because that then gets into metaphysics, myths embody earthly truths that have been validated from the time of the lobsters until now. Okay, we can go there. And they get encoded in myth. And again we're getting this not through Boltman because Boltman's on his way down, we're getting this through Jung, we're getting it through psychology, we're getting it through a new vein of natural theology. What for him was central, the vital existential experience. He labeled that eschatology and he translated Jesus' apocalyptic language into those terms. Boltman thus simultaneously retrieved Strauss' idealism and Hume's skepticism and Strauss' emphasis on myth as well by the way, while making his own reinterpretation of Schweitzer's conclusions. Now demythologization contains an important element of truth. No wise reader of First Enoch imagines that the author is predicting an actual white bull being put in charge of other farm animals. First Enoch is not a book in the New Testament, but it's another ancient book that the writers of the New Testament were conversant in. And, well, maybe not. But it's a book out of that same period. If demythologizing means decoding such picture language, this is basically learning how to read. But if that gets muddled up with those other points, then chaos is come again. The problem relates directly to the God and world question underneath both exegesis and natural theology. Boltman came, I think, within a few inches of the truth. But his theopolitical stance, like a thick and prickly hedge between two adjacent pathways, would never let him switch tracks. Ancient Jewish apocalyptic language was regularly used to address in well-known code what we would call political realities. Daniel 2 was not about a statue and a stone. Daniel 7 was not about sea monsters and a flying human. They were about actual worldly kingdoms, seen, to be sure, as instruments of dark powers. And they were about the actual kingdom-establishing victory of God that would overthrow and replace them. But this caused Boltman a double problem. First, he didn't want to find this worldly political messages. He held a Lutheran two kingdoms theology. God and politics don't mix. He was a neo-Cantian idealist. Ultimate truth meant platonic abstractions, not concrete particulars. Now, again, here's a vital difference between Peterson and Boltman. Peterson finds direct political application from his mythological truth. And if you don't believe that, listen to what he's saying nearly every night on his book tour. Those are the kinds of speeches he's given. That, in fact, is his entire project saying that we have discoverable Darwinian storified truth that has to play out in the political realm. And if we fail to do so, we do so at our peril. And that way he's completely opposite Boltman, even though they're both working a mythological program. He was in part a liberal modernist, assuming the non-occurrence of Jesus' resurrection, and therefore seeing no signs of new or transformed creation that might challenge the status quo. He was an existentialist, reading apocalyptic language as code, not for political realities, but for the decision of faith. Now, Boltman and Peterson, both existentialists. So there you've got some more commonality. But again, the relationship between Boltman and Peterson is a lot more complex than I think, well, Paul just did a short video. This isn't a criticism of Paul. And actually, I'm learning as I walk through Boltman a little more carefully some of the ways that he's like Boltman, and some of the ways that he's really rather different from Boltman. And so needing to be stripped of its association with unacceptable ancient cosmology. And not least, Boltman was faced with the rise of Nazism. The only political statement he could extract from his reading of first century Christian apocalyptic was an appeal for quietism. Throughout the 1930s, his favorite preaching text was 1 Corinthians 7, where Paul says that because of the present distress, one should live in this world as if not the married as if not married, the traders as if not buying and selling, and so on. One can well understand. If you were a friend and philosophical disciple of Heidegger, who joined the Nazi party, even though he then somewhat distanced himself from it, perhaps all that perhaps that was all that you could say. And Boltman returns to the point in his 1955 Giffords, the theologian or preacher, he says, can make no comment on the political situation, except that we live on a different plane, touching the world only at a tangent as if not. And that is so contra Peterson. Peterson, in fact, what he, Boltman is in a sense saying, Well, you're getting Gnostic with Boltman. And so your mythology is bringing you up here. Part of the reason Peterson is breadpilling is Peterson is taking this is mythology and saying it's grounded down here. You have to live into your theology in the world of action. Whereas with Boltman, you're using theology to escape the world into a quietism. So, you know what the Nazis do, the Nazis do. We're going to lead a simple life and we'll just pray that the allies don't bomb us. Bonhoeffer obviously took a different approach during the war. The analogy with Bart's position on natural theology is fascinating. Just a tangential touching. Though Bart was able to launch a theater protest against Hitler, partly because he was back in Switzerland and so could speak, as it were, vertically from above into the situation. And partly because he was a Calvinist, not a Lutheran. Because the Lutherans tend to have law gospel. OK, you've got that separation. The Calvinists have, I talked about this today with a couple of the people I talked to, the Calvinists have the third use of the law. Well, what is the third use of the law? The law is revelatory and that the law reveals to us the mind of God, even if the context is different. So the application of the law might be different. And we work the law not out of earning satisfaction with God, but as a response of gratitude, misery deliverance gratitude. OK, so that's where Bart's Calvinism is different from Boltman's Lutheranism. And Boltman's Lutheranism begat a quietism that basically said, we're not going to challenge the Nazis. Whereas Bonhoeffer and others said, we are going to challenge the Nazis. And Bonhoeffer paid for it with his life. Well, he didn't just pay for it because of his thinking. He paid for it because he participated in an attempt to kill Hitler. Carl Bardo in Switzerland. Who else is in Switzerland? Carl Jung. What's going on here with this mythological age? So if Boltman's first problem in reading the ancient text was his unwillingness to discern any political theology, the second can be stated more briefly. Boltman had no desire to acknowledge the reality of dark superhuman powers. This was partly because of his post-Hume modernism, but it was also because of his existentialism. Paul had spoken of sin, not simply as a human act, but as a power that acts on humans. Boltman understood him to be describing in mythological language the internal human struggle. The solution to that struggle was simply for him that one should awaken the latent eschatological possibility. Now, this might be a point at which Peterson and Boltman have more similarity, although I think it's ambiguous. Because when you listen to Peterson talk about the devil, and again if you listen to the Israeli interview that I played yesterday, he will say that the best way to represent that is as a personality. But as we played earlier, when you get to ontology, some of this metaphysical ontology, Peterson tries to stick more to the left side of Lessing's ditch, even though he seems to like to hop in and out and over every now and then if getting pressed. And that's those ambiguities that Brandon, who was talking to Bishop Barron, was talking about. Boltman's position on many issues is exegetically inexcusable for a historical critic. To understand Jesus and early Christianity, one would have to understand the Jewish world of the first century. But one of Boltman's principles in his theological DNA from Luther and Kant was the rejection of all things Jewish. Judaism meant works righteousness, whether Pelagian-style moralism or the existentialist version of that, grasping at my own identity. That was why Boltman's lifelong religiouns geschichtlich quest had had him hunting for Christian origins in the non-Jewish world, all the way from his early interest in mystery religions to his later investment in gnosticism. Neither worked. As for the actual Jewish first century world, Boltman remained content with the caricatures you find in Schurer and Birlebeck. He ignored the Jewish revolutionaries, Reimaris had been long forgotten, so he never inquired how they, the actual first century kingdom of God people, were reading key texts. His supposed historical criticism was mostly just criticism. One did not, after all, want to base one's faith on history. That would risk turning faith into a work as well as muddling up the two kingdoms. And again, in many ways, Peterson's faith, as we'll call it, is in fact based on history. It is all historical, and it's historical through, Verbecky says, I'm going to go back to the Axiolades. Peterson says, I'm going to go all the way back to the lobsters. Peterson, in many ways, buys into the modernist project, but says the Bible actually relays history, but relays history mythologically. And Boltman really couldn't say that. So again, it's another key distinction between Boltman and Peterson here. The end of the world myth thus suited Boltman's philosophy, his theology, his politics, and his exegesis. His followers to this day continue to suggest that anyone who questions that foundation must be engaged in special pleading. The boot is actually on the other foot. And since Boltman's work has shaped a good deal of continuing gospel scholarship, one will look in vain to that strand for anything that might help us gain a fresh vantage point on our underlying Gifford-related questions about God and the world, whether we're thinking about the possible action of God in the world or the possible inference to God from the world. The third movement to seize upon the end of the world myth as a hermeneutical tool were Boltman's pupils, including consulman and caseman and the systematician Martin Werner. I'm not going to go with this next section just in the interest of time, but it's also good. And again, that's the second lecture from N.T. Wright that's a year ago done at the Gifford lectures. And if you want to follow up, I think it's helpful to watch what he did in the third lecture on history. There's a lot of good stuff in that. So to let's just go back to where we began with this stuff. How many ways do we divide the world? Well, actually, we find the world divided in a lot of different ways. You have a cyclical fascination with mythology. But I think as we've shown Boltman's mythology is very different from Peter. It's not very different. But when Paul Maxwell says Boltman and Peterson are alike, I think actually they're quite different. Now, you've got Boltman and Bart and Jung all living within the same cultural framework. But of course, Jung is coming from a psychological framework and in a way while Boltman's mythology is the last stop out. Jung's theology is perhaps the first stop in. And so I, you know, as I walk through this and think through this, I think actually increasingly there's there's not a lot of connection between Boltman and Peterson. And I don't think Peterson would find much attractive in Boltman because, again, it's it's moving in a very different direction. Whereas whereas you've got all this sunk cost of Christianity and Christian theologians are trying to rescue the Bible. Both Bart and Boltman are are are having rescue attempts. We feel we're losing it. And so Bart and Neo-Orthodoxy tries to recapture it or hold on to it with respect from the academy. Boltman is trying to hang on to it practically, but very much embedded within his church political and social situation in Germany in the 30s and 40s and then obviously surviving the war. And again, there's way more in in in N.T. Wright Skifford lectures on this. So. Yeah, I don't know what I don't know what you'll think about this video. This this video is pretty nerdy. But for me, making this video was pretty helpful because at the I really wanted to get into what's the relationship between Peterson and Boltman. And now at the end of it, I think no, I think Boltman, while Boltman, both Boltman and Peterson see the myth a lot, the mythology in the text, they're really working in very different ways towards very different ends. And I think a big part of the reason for that is Jung. So I'll call it closed for now.