https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=B8F2bNYPvmE

 Hi, this is Paul. Lots of videos this week. Yesterday I posted a video on how I've seen so many people come to me who had suffered from depression and they have told me that watching Jordan Peterson videos lifted their depression in a significant nearly or not merely nearly a miraculous way and this is something I'm continuing to ponder. I noticed I began to notice having many conversations how many people came to me and had told me about their depression and of course, this is a piece of Peterson and someone put in the comment section if you having YouTube channel is about the best learning community you can find I think because I learn way more from the channel than I think I teach in it. So let's talk more about meaning and depression. Why does listening to Jordan Peterson videos heal depression in some but especially men and that's also very interesting. Not everybody obviously not everybody who listens to Peterson has depression but there's got to be something about the salience of listening to Peterson for people with depression. I suspect there's something going on there too. Now remember meaning is Peterson's sacrament and if you've been following my conversation, you know, I'm working on fleshing out and understanding what sacrament is and actually I think figuring out sacrament is key to trying to figure out the role what caused the Protestant Reformation the role the Protestant Reformation played the timing of the Protestant Reformation in history and the ways that the Protestant Reformation played in terms of the development of science and secularity in the West all of this stuff is tied together and I think it's also tied in with the meaning with the meaning crisis and that is why meaning is Jordan Peterson sacrament now now Strahn said responsibility, but the more I think about this they're connected, but I think it's meaning the biblical series was especially pointed in this many of the people I talked to again part of this is selection people are going to be connecting with my channel and the certain aspects of Peterson that I'm working on They will be drawn to the biblical series and so many of us are want to see him get back to it Please do more but instead he's doing the his book tour which again in terms of The drug he needs for his own meaning crisis and his own depression I can easily see why the book tour for him is so fulfilling now Jack Hayes I did a I did a conversation with him That'll be that's it's about my next conversation that I'm posting but I'm putting out so many videos of mine this week it got a little bumped, but I will I'll probably put that conversation out next and Next week in the next two weeks actually a whole month of May I'm gonna be doing a lot of traveling so I don't know how many videos I'm gonna be able to put out So those of you who are you know crying uncle in terms of the amount of stuff I'm putting out now Well get ready for a little drought because it may come but then again, you know how that goes with vacation. So You know pointed to me that that that's something that should have been obvious to me The Rebel will wisdom Jordan Peterson compilation had Tim Lott on it and Tim Lott said something important now lot is a journalist and He has done some of the best interviews with Peterson some of the videos that we tend to return to Again and again and again. He was the one that asked Peterson if he was a Christian now that was Where you catch someone in there in their story arc is really important and lots timing was perfect in terms of Peterson was he had just reached liftoff But he hadn't really reached the stratosphere yet And so he caught Peterson at right just the right time and in that video Peterson is sitting there like in an undershirt and and talking that not the nice suit like an undershirt and and And lot asked him about the resurrection and asked him if he identifies with a Christian and lot goes straight to it And then lot does a much more significant Not more stuff, but a longer interview then with rebel wisdom where they talked about the left and a bunch of those issues but then per Per rebel wisdoms and I've been noticing that with their their interviews. He usually circles back and asked them about Jordan Peterson and David Fowler is a pretty smart guy and he's setting up his interest. He's setting up his he's setting up his material This is what the guy does for a living and so now he has a Jordan Peterson rebel wish and wisdom compilation video of Peterson and Tim lot has a short segment in it But it's really important for this discussion that I'm having the most important thing for me Quite apart from his work with you know, these stories Modern myths was as you say his investigation into the Bible and I've always been fascinated Although I'm an atheist. I'm always been fascinated by the power of the biblical stories I often found myself looking at these Huge cathedrals and churches that sprouted up all over Europe, you know and you know even I Was last night. I was up a little late and giving Adam some grief on Twitter, you know, even on I'm in raw Even he goes into a cathedral even it right after saying there's no good to religion at all Even he goes into cathedral and can't not be impressed And and now Tim lots point here is considerably more Honest and I would say frankly rational of the biblical stories I often found myself looking at these huge cathedrals and churches that sprouted up all over Europe, you know and And asked myself. Well, what's that about? You know, why was this story so powerful? I mean, yeah, it's a defense against death if you want to be cynical Hey, you know, it could be lots of other stories, you know Well, why is this one so unbelievably powerful? And what does it mean for it to be so powerful and peace? I think brilliantly answers that question in the biblical lectures He's done and he really changed me those lectures. He genuinely did I think change the way I lived my life See and this is what I keep hearing from people This is what I talk to people a lot about Peterson and this is what I keep hearing from people and and Tim lot He's a little older than most but he fits the profile. So he's a harbinger. He's a forerunner So unbelievably powerful and what does it mean for it to be so powerful and pieces? I think brilliantly answers that question in the biblical lectures He's done and he really changed me those lectures. He genuinely did I think change the way I lived my life Because he came to this very very important conclusion, which I'm pretty convinced by I don't think I'm ever a hundred percent convinced by anything but I'm very convinced by his idea as I've someone who suffered depression and Depression is like a crisis of meaning and you're in your it's the worst thing but there it is. There it is depression at least see and And notice what we've done to depression. We've medicalized it. Well, it's a brain imbalance. It's it has nothing to do with my environment It's only in my brain and I go back to Jung's autobiography Jung is is a young medical student He's working in a psychiatric hospital and all of the other doctors tell Jung don't talk to the patients. Don't waste your time They're crazy and Jung's kind of like yeah But isn't that why we're here to help the crazy? So he starts talking to the patients and he begins to you know, listen to Verveki He begins to see patterns and he begins to say why is it that the the crazy dreams of the medical patients line up with Let's not line up with The stories in their lives What what is it about the story out there and the story in here and how this all comes together? that might manifest itself in Dysfunction because if you're locked up in a mental hospital at the beginning of the 20th century There's some real dysfunction going on. Probably is it is it dysfunction is is there perhaps? Is there perhaps a way to address the dysfunction by addressing the storytelling and if you look at the whole development of modern psychology one whole aspect of modern psychology is addressing the the dysfunction inside by addressing the story outside and working the interface between the story Outside and the story inside now as a pastor I can very much recognize this because obviously Pastoral care is far older than modern psychology, but that is exactly what pastoral care does We take the story of the Bible and the story inside and we work them together Okay now a Little bit later in this video we're gonna have to talk about in some ways why the church lost its way and how the church lost its way and it is a it is a if if someone if someone in the church is unable to talk about the way the church has lost their way in my opinion that is evidence of corruption because Again, I'm a Calvinist one of the convenient things about Calvinism is you never lose points if you talk about failure Failure in the church failure in myself. That's that's part of the total depravity. It's the big first T and tulip, baby So that's that's what Calvinists are good at so So you've got the story out there and you've got the story in here and Jung points out that there's there's progress to be made in that and if you look at the the bit from Jung's autobiography that I That I had in a couple videos ago Where he and Freud really came to disagreement and Jung was was quite was Jung really didn't Jung thought that Freud's positivism his his his ardent atheism and his ardent atheism Was impeding Freud from actually helping him work with his patients. Now, of course Jung goes hard the other direction but the basic point that the story out there and the story in here makes perfect sense given the fact that as Verveke mentions early on in the Benjamin Boyce at one point in the Benjamin Boyce conversation Story is the primary way of working through these things Okay, we we we are stories and again you look at that that you look at the friended Conversation the think-club conversation with I'm is it Amin Ra, you know, I just boy that's The problem when I watch some of those videos is it I Begin to think in very un-Christian unkind ways, but I'll I'll try to hold myself back You know the guy said well I can't stand stories. Oh, yeah, but you are a story and what an interesting story you are, dude I'm sorry Get that video out of my mind. It was just too much fun. Anyway the story out there in the story here and the big story and and of course, it's not just Analytically the story I tell myself because a lot of the story these stories regulate our emotions That's a big part of Jordan Peterson's Point about you know, you don't poke people in their axioms. They get upset Well, the our emotions and the regulations of our emotions have everything to do with our story Which is again part of the reason why The church has been and religion in general Adam has been so enormously Successful and and not only helping communities stabilize and mobilize and and but but also individuals stabilize and mobilize because perhaps the one of the best ways for us to maintain emotional equilibrium and emotional Health What's the best word it's not just equilibrium Emotional health one of the best ways for us to maintain emotional health is to continue We're continually working on the story out there in the story in here Okay and so when we see depression and it's depression and anxiety skyrocketing as the same time that the nuns And not NUNS but NONSE as the same time people are walking away from established religions They're not necessarily becoming less religious. They're just Heading out alone in their religious pilgrimage In other words again back to Adam keeps saying we don't understand. We don't understand his take on morality I think maybe Adam and I'll have to have another conversation I think I have some understanding on his take of of morality But when it comes to story people People are not meant to be alone we are enormously cooperative and Adam gets that right away We are enormously cooperative, but this goes beyond just kind of this pragmatic externalized vision of how we Are able to maintain ourselves This is everything to do with how we see ourselves The stories we inhabit the people we are with this is one whole thing and so this this entire process of of of the interface between the story out there and the story in here is deeply crucial to our emotional well-being and the rest of our consciousness Congress Will tell us that there are problems first in terms of our emotions And and depression and anxiety are going to be the canaries in the coal mine okay, so it is it is no accident then that the that the Receiving of communal religion and again now a lot of the nun and no any yeses a lot of the nuns are They're not less religious. They're just doing it by themselves Okay, now they're they're looking for their religion in Netflix and they're looking for their religion in social media and they're looking for their religion in in Star Wars and Harry Potter and Lord of the Rings But that's very different from finding your religion in the real Community that in fact has familial relationships and all of these things all around you and I think Adam though he be an atheist can appreciate the The consequence of this reality and and that and that this gets manifest in depression and anxiety Is very reasonable and that as Peterson revivifies the Bible and as you know and this again is why I started meetups as Once people start talking to Peterson and I've heard this not just from people directly to me Not just from people online, but other individuals who are actually trying to develop Institutions and things in real life somebody was in a was in a Jordan Peterson someone was in a Jordan Someone's in a Jordan Peterson book tour thing and this person who I've been talking to for quite a while now Here's the person behind him say something to the effect of wow, but who can I talk about this with? You're missing church you're you're haunted by this It's it's the nuns have walked away from from what might make them healthy now again I'm not trying to establish some there's plenty of depressed people in church And you know I as a pastor know that and that the shortcomings of church. I certainly know but You Walking away from it didn't necessarily help your cause Well, someone said well, it really helped me. Oh fine. I mean your mileage may vary I get that But what I'm trying to establish trying to figure out is this link between? That the broad social changes the broad walking away from organized familially bonded religion and the rise of anxiety and depression and Now these things work very slowly. They work multi-dimensional Now these things work very slowly they work Multi-generationally and so the more I think about this the more sense it makes to me. Okay, let's get back to Tim Lott I'm very convinced by his idea. Yeah Whenever I've caught interruptions in my conversations people like well you should put a sign on your door and I tell them I said You know sign on the door won't make any difference because I got a sign on that door and folks pastor Paul pastor Paul Okay, where were we back to Tim Lott crisis and as I've someone who suffered depression and Depression is like a crisis of meaning in your It's the worst thing about depression is not about being miserable it's being having a life that seems utterly meaningless and that's why it's such torment and Peterson in a way tries to answer the question. How do we as an individual? That's a bit of a paradox how do I as an individual Know you're right the first time how do we as an individual? That's that's exactly right. And that's why what's happening is happening No way tries to answer the question. How do we as an individual? That's a bit of a paradox. How do I as an individual? How do I as an individual? Acquire meaning because meaning is the most important thing any of us could have You know, the meaning is the most important any of us could have it's a sacrament Okay, the church of peterson the sacrament is meaning now responsibility Is coming to the table for the sacrament but but the sacrament is meaning because it is the body and blood Is quiet me that's a bit of a paradox. How do I as an individual? Acquire meaning because meaning is the most important thing any of us could have You know, there's meaning is it's you know, if you don't know and yet no one can quite say what meaning is Which I think is interesting in itself, you know again the the protestant Reformation fought over This is my body what the meaning of is is It's what the protestant reformation in many ways if you want to boil it down to one thing What the meaning of is is is the protestant reformation? Everyone's rights could have You know, there's meaning is it you know, if you don't know and yet no one can quite say what meaning is Which I think is interesting in itself, you know everyone says well, I want a sense of meaning. What is a sense of meaning? What is meaning? and Peterson I think acknowledges that mystery but also says well, you know If you want a sense of meaning It's not about just doing what you want. It's not about just following Your bliss as joseph camp would be or or having as much fun as possible or And and it's not about just doing what you want and now in our age We can do so much more than we ever could before You know when I was growing up Who what kids in high school? If you were in if you were growing up in high school in new jersey where I was If you were one of those elites that went to florida on spring break That's you were that was that was pretty upper class if you got to go to florida for spring break most of us just We just you know had new jersey spring Um now people in high school, they're going on mission trips around the world and There's so much more when I was when I was growing up if you wanted to watch a movie You had to go to a movie theater and then vhs came out and it was in college It was this amazing box and you could go to blockbuster and rent a movie and play it in your vhs And it was just like boom now you turn on netflix and Whoosh How many movies on netflix and amazon and hulu and on and on and on and on And That hasn't that doesn't do a thing with meaning it it it's like it dulls it or or we're distracted from it But beneath we're still there And in fact, it seems the more stuff and clutter and distraction we have the meaninglessness grows What's with that we don't know it but you know, this is this is this is whoops Don't go away you this is what's happening Or it's a meaning it's not about just doing what you want. It's not about just following Your bliss as joseph camp would be or or having as much fun as possible or Or even necessarily being happy No, absolutely not not necessarily being happy It's there are more important things than being happy and and i've also found that to be true in my life More important. Well, what do you mean by that? What do you mean by more important you mean? You mean It's up the hierarchy there are things higher in the hierarchy than happiness you will exchange for if you're looking for meaning You will suffer you will sacrifice happiness. You will sacrifice good things in fact Get into jordan peterson and sacrifice itself and we're going to get into that because i'm going to play a little bit more of the the peterson Sam harris debate because it's been a few months since we've played that so it's a good thing to replay but but Lot is exactly right. He's exactly right here And so you've got this crisis of anxiety and meaning and recently pew research Share of us teens who see as the major problem among their peers anxiety and depression 70% Listen to jonathan height on On joe rogan talk about cutting and anxiety among among teenagers 70% bullying 55% that's in a sense. Oh, that's a and listen again to jonathan height on joe rogan on that one, too Uh drug addiction drinking alcohol poverty teen pregnancy gangs And just look at the scale, you know 70% calls it called it a major problem 26 called it a minor problem only 4% said it isn't a problem 4% I mean, this is enormous And and once you start seeing it and and once you you know, so then i've got the sample question Okay, why mostly men? And then why? The most generally speaking why the people watching my channel Why is it that so many of the people now if you're if you're going to be the one to dig up my email address and And send me an email and say, you know I really want to talk to you and then i'll send you the link for the conversation and so on and so forth If you're that motivated to talk to me Well, you're probably up there in the hierarchy of everyone listening to me and why so many people That contact and seek me out have been struggling with anxiety and depression and it's like well, of course, you know why You know, you're going to look for this kid if you're dead and you've got to say something to the living This is what's happening Now What about jordan peterson's application Well, let's not forget that And this is something that we might forget in terms of watching my channel when I talk about the shortcomings of the church Let's not forget that there are billions of people already using the bible Okay The billions of people using the bible at one level or another maybe not successfully maybe not well, maybe not very often Nominally billions of people are christians. All right Hundreds of millions of people are using it at a much higher level All right, and so people are already using the bible to medicate their anxiety and their depression and their secularity That's already happening. In fact, even though jordan peterson might look like a big deal He's small potatoes compared to the church and as I mentioned before Billy graham used to fill stadiums. All right now it would be very interesting to have jordan peterson He's been like three five thousand men, you know venues I won't tell you what I think of joel austin but Jordan peterson compared to joel austin Joel austin he fills that or he at least puts a lot of people in the seats every week where I think it's the The houston rockets used to play in houston. I mean that's a big draw and Hundreds of thousands of people maybe millions see him on sunday morning tv Every sunday and if you've ever watched joel austin they begin They begin by saying their little pledge of allegiance to the bible And then quite frankly they quickly forget it There i'll get it out so peterson is comparatively small that's important for us to remember but peterson has been particularly effective with a population deeply impacted by the new atheist and remember the new atheist rose to prominence in the in the wake of 9 11 and again one of the One of the really good videos out there about jordan peterson and sam harris is mouthy buddhas Is sam harris losing his audience to jordan peterson and mouthy buddha? I think that did that in march last year That was a year ago And and he sensed it then and I you know watched the video. I it's it's a really good video Well, why jordan peterson? Well, doctor heal heal thyself node node did a little video following up on a video that I had done And node and I tend to kind of go back and forth and I love how node goes deep dives into some of this stuff Jordan peterson has long suffered from depression And he's at least forthright in that some people have asked me about um vox day's book because because of some other people who were some other people who had bit hard on jordan peterson and and now and and either felt spurned by him or rejected by him or for one reason or another Have been making a lot of noise against him. So, okay, so I I didn't want to After I listened to the three creators symposium. I wasn't At all motivated to look at vox day's books But because some other people were trying to get me into that conversation. I picked up the book and I skimmed through it and I find Almost nothing of value in that book because most of the book just looks like a lot of cheap shots On jordan peterson and you know if you want to They they they charge him with being a huckster, but i'll tell you if you want to turn a quick buck, you know Real quick write a book about jordan peterson and put it out there on amazon and you'll get Six dollars from a whole bunch of people and you'll make some money. Okay? I'm not recommending the book but One of the things that they knock him for is well jordan peterson is mentally ill therefore. We can't believe him That is such a That is such a And if that that's such an offensive take on depression Some of the smartest people in the world suffer with you know struggle with mental illness issues and depression In fact, it tends to skew with high iqs That's part of the reason I know i'm not that smart because i'm way too happy But So so I don't see how that's a knock on jordan peterson and what he's trying to do is he's The best people to figure out how to get out of a box is to follow someone who's made it out And that's very much who he is his journey began in the conflict of the cold war and he and he fills his home with Soviet era art and again, I you know, okay So vox day picks that up and others have picked that up and it is a very interesting thing We are not transparent to ourselves why we select the kinds of things in our lives, especially when it comes to art and there's and we're very We're we're very complicated that way, but but obviously for peterson. He's working out his own The words of the bible. He's working out his own salvation. He's working out his own struggles He's working out his own stuff with that. Well, why? Well again, it's all in his story and then jung piaget rogers these site these psychologists You know the affirmed validation of the religious against the materialistic fashion and again Peterson then goes into myth and he learns this and he begins to see how Throughout history we have regulated ourselves internally by regulating our stories externally. That is not somehow Irrational it is completely rational, you know, it's irrational taking all kinds of powerful drugs And and monkeying around with the chemistry of our brain and a lot of what passes for for dispensing Psychological pills talk to my friend james about that a lot of what dispenses for that is trial and error And as a pastor, I see it all the time someone Someone is in trouble In terms of their mental health and they go to the doctor and they give them a pill Try this and they try it for six months. Is it helping? Nope. Try this other try this other try this other And you very quickly get the idea of i'm not sure they know what they're doing they're just giving you pills and what many of these pills in my opinion my Non-professional observation See most of those pills just kind of level people out Make them a little bit more compliant a little less chaotic and part of that's really good because The chaos was destroying their lives and destroying the people around them But they exchanged it for kind of a gray death And I have seen that again and again and again as I have watched people Trying to gain sanity and so this ancient way of Ancient way of regulating the story outside and the story inside I read this very interesting piece by scott alexander a while ago where he talked about the rates of schizophrenia in immigrants and and how the process of immigration seemed to spike Schizophrenia and other mental illnesses that getting us out of our context not just of our Story context but even of our physical context Disrupts people and of course we know this you know move a cat and peterson will talk about the cat has to explore move a dog We will see this with the elderly they leave, you know, you will watch elderly people. I'm I want to die at home And they dig their nails into the into the carpet and say you're going to pull me out of this house And then you bring them into a sterile place with white walls and fluorescent tubes and here you sit here and die Oh, well, we call that hell because the family can't be bothered You know, this is what's going on And and yes the story outside and the story inside and so why not try? rationally Going the story route towards sanity And that's what's happening and and I see that's what peterson is doing and so you might say well well Drugs couldn't kick your depression. But story is is that irrational? Tell me the side effects of story Well, they cannot be significant Behaviorally, but not chemically like these powerful things that are flat Lining people and and putting them into the gray zone So, you know, this is what's going on and peterson is like he said He was working through the gray zone and he's working through the the anti-depressants and and he discovered and i'm not surprised by this Not only a change in diet if you listen to the third talk that I did with job Change in diet can be really effective for people exercise can be really effective for people but also story it's it's an the story cure is Is is not different from the talking cure because what you're doing when you're talking is you are working on your story? And I listened to that The one guy about going to um gobbermate and the psychedelic thing. Well, well again You know, you know the focus is on the psychedelic but but what he really changed was his story and and Well, why should that surprise me as a pastor it doesn't at all because this is what pastors have been doing for centuries We're changing people's stories that they're inhabiting and living in and wouldn't you know it if they live in a better story They live better lives Well, I guess I got triggered So so so young and piaget and rogers affirmed the validity of the religious against the materialist fashion And he himself is drawn to the bible Okay And and and he wanted to talk to sam harris now jonathan peugeot After those talks and I think it was a question and answer in another video. Jonathan was talking about why sam harris Why sam harris? Well, if you think in these terms sam harris is your next stop sam harris is You know peterson in a sense He he's beyond sam harris and those following peterson are walking over Sam harris and sam is like no no no story story is irrational and and everyone's saying I don't I don't give a rat's tale About your pride over rationality I want to live And and you weren't doing for it you weren't doing it for me so you know I'm done with you and i'm moving on And I think that's why I talked to sam That now okay. Let's let's turn the tables here. Let's look at the church and let's have the church do its own confession Why has the church been so impotent? with this group Those protected by quarantine don't usually develop antibodies. Okay Then if you've if you've lived in the church and if you've lived and been happy and obviously many haven't and they've left the church and and and we might argue that the the church's program was its Antiquated technology and it was built for other ages But remember that the church is huge and the church is enormously diverse and the church is The church always adapts to its its its tiny local culture and this is why even though Even though now for 20 years we've had the technology To and some churches have done this to have your high status excellent high profile preacher beamed into a worship space the majority practice within churches Is a local pastor preaching and you know, jonathan peugeot talks about the fact that okay so at least if you have a a dar if at least if you have a historic liturgy that in in a sense has been refined in darwinian terms has been refined and Perfected throughout the ages that's better than than than having Having your worship service be so dependent in a protestant church on the 30-minute homily of the pastor Because what if your pastor's a twit then your whole church, you know is useless But what's amazing is how many churches with pastors who are twits still do well? And still survive and it still works for their people Okay so so the church has actually Adapted and if you think about all of the ways, especially since the protestant reformation and the fragmentation of that church the downside of fragmentation is the loss of unity unity the upside of fragmentation is the achievement of specificity and contextuality in in almost the amazing Diversity of the world and this is what we've seen Missiologically that the the missionaries went over and the and the people would listen and that well, this is crap You know that the missionary preachers Ah Nobody wants to listen to them but but a national within their culture gets a hold of the bible and according to Maybe someone with western pedigree in in preaching gets everything wrong But he takes off like crazy why Because it's the sinking of the stories and and that missionary Couldn't connect well with the story on the ground but Boy, oh boy Once someone just had even a little bit of that bible even getting it wrong Off it goes and and this is what you see in the history of the the spread of the church throughout the world Time and time again in the history of the church And and so Yeah, the church church even though it it It changes incredibly quickly. It never changes quite at the speed of culture But but it it usually catches up and again It's usually the protestants who who wind up getting there first or sometimes when things loop around as we're seeing now You know the orthodox and the catholics are like, ah look welcome. Come on in Ah look welcome come on in but then again as I was talking To and I will I had my conversation with luke's many of you know luke from twitter that I talk with often Uh my conversation with with father david. I noted that Jonathan peugeot father david and luke are all former evangelicals and and And this is who's it see this what I would bet is that these people coming around again to the orthodox They themselves will change the orthodox church Because they're on a different culture arc than let's say You know those who are historically familial in for generations been up through that church now They find each other and they come together. I'm not gonna i'm not gonna dismiss or or depreciate that at all, but Their jonathan peugeot's Jonathan peugeot's History as an evangelical And the journey he had to take himself informs The role he plays in the jordan peterson movement. All right So so some some would some might have wandered out of uh, um This is jordan peterson some might have wandered out of the woods, but they couldn't blaze a trail But jordan peterson does blaze the trail and that's why people follow him You know standard apologetics weren't relatable and i've never found them to be relatable to me partly because Because of my upbringing i'm not really evangelical even though I line up in terms of doctrinal check marks with evangelicals but culturally i've got this african american stuff where I grew up and i've got this dutch calvinism And and i'm just an odd duck so You know a lot of the a lot of the a lot of the High profile evangelical apologists. It just never Just never got into them. C.S. Lewis. Well, C.S. Lewis kind of like peterson blazed the trail Because he walked through the journey. He grew up pre world war one He discarded his faith. He went through the war. He lived through the war He had to face the nihilism and he came out a christian With all of what he had learned from the journey Well, is there something new about this? Look at the apostle paul same thing This is the path Now we have the man from alberta he's easy to connect with in his folksy ways and again you look at Look at tim lot. It's not hard to see why jordan peterson and tim lot You know tim lot's kind of this crusty journalist and you know journalists are Most journalists at least the the old school ones, you know, they they work the streets. They work people they get their way Well peterson's got got some of that attitude to to him preaching has always been about mythology and this is something that I picked up way before this because I would I would watch these I would watch these young earth creationists and you can find them They're not hard to find and on one hand they'll pound the they'll pound their bible all day long six day young earth creationism And and they'll they'll have you know, they'll make their point about that But when they actually open the bible on sunday and teach Well, we're like adam. We're like eve now in my tradition. We call this exemplar ish And and and in my preaching tradition there was a there was a big There was a big deal about emphasizing in our sermons. We continue to convey the redemptive historical approach To the gospel and and that's deep in the dutch calvinist tradition, but this exemplar ishness this you know finding assimilations finding Accordances between the story of adam eve don't you feel like adam? Don't you feel like eve? What would you do if you were in the garden with the snake? What is it about cain and abel can you identify and relate with them? And and so on this personal mythological On this personal mythological layer Listen to joe lovstein. This is all he does. Okay. I mean they pledge allegiance to the bible, but any kind of What I would call serious tethering to the bible Gets lost and all the bible becomes then is a series of stories of examples of how you should have your best life now So that's that's that's joe osteen's schtick But but my point here isn't that that's good but my or bad my point is The form of it that it's mythology and what what peterson really did in the biblical lectures was he once again Brought the bible into the world Of the new atheist crowd he inverts all of these arguments from sam harris Maybe not all of them because you know you'd pull a string on the back of sam harris And he'd spit out for you the village atheist the village atheist line and this is what most of the village atheists do but But what peterson does is he? Vivifies it he's he's read it. So again read the history of interpretation. I have this whole and I brought this And you've got all these fun colored books back here focus camera. There you go But this series the ancient christian commentary on the scripture. This is all snippets from the church fathers on how within their sermons they They preached the texts and I remember when I I I got a thing from ivp basically saying you know, they would I joined the commentary of the month club with this commentary Which I've never done with anything else. Okay And look at the church that's pictured on the front. I joined the commentary of the month Basically with this and I I got this is the only commentary that I have the entire series of All right, all the commentary is the commentary of the month Commentary that I have the entire series of All right All these other these are all hand picked cherry picked within my own particular framework the best of Commentaries out there that seemed to align with what I was what I what I found helpful what I'd often find and this is Jonathan peugeot made a comment about this in twitter once what you'll often find let's say with Let's uh, let's grab a okay Um, this is causal man. This is causal man on first corinthians. And if you if you watch nt wright's treatment of Boltman and then his now it wasn't boltman um, but anyway So many of these commentaries so many of these critical commentaries that came about in the middle of the 20th century were absolutely Unhelpful in Finding out what the bible might mean to a person in the pew and that was that's what was behind jonathan peugeot's comment, okay And you can very quickly see where a commentary series like this would feel way more helpful but What you'll often find is a type of Exegesis by the church fathers that is very pastoral But also you have the polysemy, okay You have the different levels of the scripture and of course that's baked into the orthodox interpretations and their And their devotion to church fathers. Let me let me grab let me grab mark because i'm preaching in mark right now Okay commentaries here's A really go-to commentary on the gospel of mark. It's actually a classic from an evangelical protestant Approach and and this this is a classic commentary on the gospel of mark and to me it's a go-to commentary It's a it's a wonderful commentary and and as a practicing christian, you can read this commentary and get things out of it But that's different from let's say Here's another commentary on the gospel of mark the niv application commentary And if you see a cover like this you very quickly believe, okay This is kind of for a popular audience and the structure of the commentary always has Let's see they have If you look at a passage, they have the bridging contexts So so see now we're we're aware of the differences we're aware of the gaps that we're trying to deal with so you have your bridging Contexts and then you have your Contemporary significant and that's a function of this series of commentaries because series of commentaries always have their own pitches cb cranfield here is a um This cambridge commentary series here is a kind of a classical mid 20th century approach to the text This one is obviously more technical. It's for people who can manage greek But then you've got part of the reason I even long before the jordan peterson, I mean this is 15 18 years ago that I was getting these that I was getting these because I noticed that in many of the technical commentaries There's very little pastoral There was very little That was in them that was really past orally helpful now if I look at the text i'm going to do rough draft for sunday Pretty quick here after I finish this video if I don't eat up all my time talking too much But i'm preaching on Healing of the man with the withered hand and so they have an overview The intent of christ detractors was to discredit him, of course They had interest Um, oh, okay. Let's just go with athanasius and the synagogue of the jews was a man who had a withered hand if he If he was withered in his hand the ones Who stood by were withered in their minds? And and see so for the church fathers they're very much Church leaders they spoke to people who were trying to live within the story and navigate the story And they were looking at the crippled man And they were not looking at the crippled man nor were they expecting the miraculous deeds of the one who was about to work But before doing the work the savior plowed up their minds with words For knowing the evil of the mind and its bitter depth He first softened them in advance with words so as to tame the wilderness of their understanding Asking is it permitted to do good on the sabbath or to do evil to save a life or to destroy one? Then again this comes from his homilies and you'll find you'll find moves made by church fathers that you won't find made by Contemporary commentators because There's a world of difference between them and they're they're dealing with the text differently, but again my point here in this slide is that Local preachers always go to the mythological because it's the relationship with the stories that is helping People work out their stuff and those who continue to go to church and those who find church helpful Whether through the liturgy or the homilies or the sermons It's because somehow their world has been put together at church. That's what's happening So the polysemy excitement that happened with with jordan peterson Why seminary education is a negative indicator of church growth? I came back to north america towards the end of the seeker Church movement, which is an evangelical protestant movement and and one of the most important movements in the world And and one of the things that really annoyed Seminaries was that in study after study they determined that a seminary education Was a negative indicator of church growth. In other words the more educated the pastor The less able the pastor was to grow his church large and you may say well Why would that be especially for this crowd of you all who really like education because you're sitting through my My video you would say I really appreciate a pastor with a good thorough education a knowledge of greek and hebrew and systematic theology and philosophy and psychology A broad liberal arts education. Oh, that's the jordan peterson selective Often what preachers who haven't had a seminary education their sermons will major in the mythological and the symbolic often at For someone who is classically trained in trying to discern a specific meaning of a text Their mythological interpretation will come at the expense of what the historical grammatical approach says the text is about Now I could do an entire video on that But behind that is a whole history of philosophy About language and the bible and meaning all right And and the uneducated pastor doesn't care He just finds that telling this story in this way makes people Excited just like jordan peterson says when I start talking about responsibility they get quiet Well these preachers and the same is at least as true for preachers in the developing world that are making the missionaries look impotent Because they know their culture and they're naturally learning when I talk this way and when I tell this story And when I give this illustration and when I make this point everybody shuts up And they listen Well now you've hit a sweet spot now did they get that point from the bible maybe maybe not And this is when we get into this this this talk about the analogy of faith which is kind of a a broad way of talking about the general meaning of scripture and In the christian reform church in the mid 20th century most of the sermons were not exegetically great In fact when I looked at the the library that my father had of let's say biblical commentaries There weren't many and they weren't good but what mostly happened in christian reformed Sermons was that they preached systematic theology through every sermon and every text was it was just a jumping off point for their systematic theology I came along later in the 20th century and biblical theology was was reaching its supremacy And so now churches talk about the bible or now churches talk about well, what does the text say? And so the focus was on that So you had john stots between two worlds the art of preaching in the 20th century But if you go to a mainline church if you follow the sermons of my friend john suck who is a now a Former crc pastor now a mainline pastor in the united church of canada pastor's a church in montreal not in montreal in in toronto canada If you look at john suck and you look at what he preaches well, he'll take a He'll take a story. He'll take a movie He'll take anything and then he'll draw what's generally a social justice sermon from the context because that has become the good news All right, what's peterson doing? well Peterson what does he say that he does in the biblical series? It's a psychological approach to the bible And so what peterson is doing is taking The stories in which he lives and trying to connect those stories in a way that that that That eliminates depression And yields meaning now He doesn't have a token at the end of his See if he really wanted if he really wanted to make the Make the the book tour better for everyone. He would need to include song and he would need to have a physical sacrament That's how you turn it into a real religious assembly the problem with the atheist in their sunday assembly is they just They they don't know enough psychology Which is ironic Now darth now peterson's darwinian approach to text has a point The bible keeps hanging around it keeps getting reworked from post-moderns to jungle tribes and loincloths That and that's and that's peterson's point about the darwin you can't make up a fairy tale It keeps coming around and jordan peterson's approach picks up on this Now now here's a funny thing that there are multiple when we talk about the bible is the word of god There are multiple ways in which that is used within the bible and within the church One at one point it's what god says to the prophets hear the word of the lord Do you get into ezekiel and a lot of it's almost almost performance art But it's it's the truth that which god speaks and it's also jesus and it's also the bible and that's the logos and now we Begin to see the bible So here's the question Is jordan peterson colonizing the bible or has the bible colonized jordan peterson? And through jordan peterson is the bible colonizing you? Much to sam harris's dismay as y'all are stepping over him Let's play some of this god number one and god number two because I think in that in the process of the 20th century we can understand Why? This is shaking out the way it is now, so let's It's been a few months since i've played this i've listened to this a lot and and Part of the subcommittees of my consciousness congress have continued to chew on it and when I bump into something that connects with it Up it comes and says hey don't forget so Often I just refer to it But I want to play some of it because I started talking about god number one and god number two and that came up As I was listening to this part of peterson Peterson I would say is bringing back god number one There's a reason god number one receded And god number two took the forefront and most of who if you listen to sam harris or amon ra most of the people Most of the people most of the ways most of the string pulls on the back of the celebrity atheists And their village atheist arguments are arguing against god number two And peterson starts to get around them by bringing darwin up and showing god number one and again as I talk to people who have They'd say boy once peterson started talking about The creation of consciousness in the garden of eden and the snake and colors and patterns Well, suddenly god number one was there So What in that so in what sense do you mean What is the god? that you act as though He she it exists and what is the what what is the god-shaped thing I must have in my life? To prevent me from being a quote real atheist see and and peterson keeps The the dilla hunty talk was a warm-up for this one because peterson keeps saying you atheists aren't really atheists and that Boy, that annoys them. And so here's sam harris. Okay. Okay jordan Tell it to me straight Who is this god that you act as if exists? And and and who is this god that makes my profession of atheism cheap and shallow? Well, okay First of all, I have to point out that there's no possible way I can answer both those questions in two minutes Well, it's the same question. I mean what is it like? What what do you mean by god? Okay? Well, i'm going to tell you some of the things that I mean by god. Okay We we do have to get the question. Maybe we're gonna do this tomorrow. Yeah, maybe this is where we start Well, that was a pretty resounding no, it seems like that constitutes an audience question, wouldn't you say all right? I tell you what I tell you what let's um Let's Do this but let's be deliberate about time. Okay. Okay Okay. Well, i'm i'm i'm going to read some things that I wrote because it's so complicated that i'm not sure that I can just spin It off and oh and benjamin would just be going nuts at this point at the top of my head And so you'll have to excuse me so And what i'm going to do is sort of paint a picture by by by highlighting different things So now I already made one point here I made the point that part of the conception of god that underlies the western ethos is the notion that whatever god is Is expressed in the truthful speech that rectifies pathological hierarchies and that isn't all it does it also Okay. So now god number one Is built into the world and built into our culture and built into our biology and in a sense in him we live and move and have our being Confronts the chaos of being itself and generates habitable order That's a that's the metaphysical proposition and that that's best conceptualized as at least one element of god And so I would think about it as a transcendent reality That's only observable across the longest of time frames the longest of iterated time frames to your point so so okay, so Here's here's some propositions and they're complicated and they need to be unpacked So i'm just going to read them and you're that'll have to do for the time being so God is how we imaginatively and collectively represent the existence and action of consciousness across time As the most real aspects of existence manifest themselves across the longest of time frames But are not necessarily apprehensible as objects in the here and now So what that means in some sense is that you have conceptions of reality built into your biological and metaphysical structure that a consequence of processes of evolution that that occurred over unbelievably Vast expanses of time and that structure your perception of reality in ways that it wouldn't be structured If you only lived for the amount of time that you're going to live and that's also part of the problem of deriving values from facts because you're evanescent and And you can't derive the right values from the facts that Portray themselves to you in your lifespan. That's tim lotts i we Which is why you have a biological structure that's like 3.5 billion years old So god is that which eternally dies and is reborn in the pursuit of higher being and truth That's a fundamental element of hero mythology. God is the highest value in the hierarchy of values That's another way of looking at it god is what calls and what responds in the eternal call to adventure God is the voice of conscience god is the source of judgment and mercy and guilt God is the future to which we make sacrifices and something akin to the transcendental repository of reputation Here's a cool one. If you're an evolutionary biologist god god God is that which selects among men in the eternal hierarchy of men So, you know sam harris's god is is is micah because this isn't he's not happy with this You know men arrange themselves into hierarchies and then men rise in the hierarchy And there's principles that are important that determine the probability of their rise and those principles aren't tyrannical power there's something like the ability to Articulate truth and the ability to be competent and the ability to make appropriate moral judgments And if you can do that in a given situation Then all the other men will vote you up the hierarchy so to speak and that will radically increase your reproductive fitness And the operation of that process across long expanses of time looks to me like it's codified in something like the notion of god the father It's also the same thing that makes women men attractive to women Because men women peel off the top of the male hierarchy And the question is what should be at the top of the hierarchy and the answer right now is tyranny as part of the patriarchy But the real answer is something more like the ability to use truthful speech in the service of let's say well-being and so that's that's something that operates across tremendous expanses of time And it plays a role in the selection for survival itself, which makes it a fundamental reality Okay, now sam's going to interrupt and we're going to play that but I'm going to play it again The god that most atheists complain about is a man in the sky And what jordan peterson does here with god number one Is much more say in him. We live and move and have our being God Is well He's represented in our imagination as a man in the sky which is quite frankly in violation of The ten commandments where god says do not represent me as anything from within my creation Why? Because he is his glory now Listen to me carefully his glory is in everything that's in his creation and you cannot if you're going to Represent him the jews are even reticent about using a name to represent him even though god gave them his name but The reason that he should not be Represented by anything within the creation Is because his glory is manifest in everything in the creation and if you listen to part of the video I played yesterday of peterson at cambridge and they're talking about the God is accessible through every instance all individuality God is available Someone mentioned in the comment section they have the same cell phone holder God god's glory and see now we're we're we're being careful with language intentionally So and i'm not saying god is in the cell phone holder God's glory is manifest through the cell phone holder And see what i'm doing with that is Hedging pantheism god isn't in the cell phone holder. That's a problem of language because then oh now hey look I'm juggling god No, no, no doesn't work that way his something something about god Is god is accessible even through the coldness of the steel and the strength of the steel and the cleverness Now when I I was watching verveky's newest video today and I was watching a really important talk by David bentley heart and hopefully I get time next week to make some videos about that but God's glory is seen through the cell phone holder You see he is available everywhere Okay, but this is god number one and and and in terms of our mental pictures Both for now let's give the atheist some credit here because The god they are critiquing is the god they hear the christians talking about Which is mostly god number two But now again with my god number one and god number two i'm not saying there are two gods. These are aspects of the same god But they are distinct aspects in a way and i'm pulling them apart because they have been pulled apart Especially in the 19th and 20th centuries by virtue of the history of culture in the west in those times Okay, so you've got god number one and god number two Sam harris is complaining about god number two peterson is talking about god number one and Because of how god number one has been taken off the stage Which i'll talk about after I finish playing these clips from this talk Okay That is why god has become unreal and god has been reduced to The violation of the ten commandments, which is a guy in the sky All right, and and this is part This is part of why I remain an iconoclastic protestant And that's gonna get a bunch of comments And again i've said before if you look at the hebrew temple it's full of images Just not one of god You have the cherubim and the seraphim over the ark of the covenant But the cherubim and the seraphim are not god and they're not to be worshiped and when they make a golden calf Well, that's the most important thing Well, that's a big no-no and and the the the sanction is pretty severe What's behind the impulse of making the golden calf? it's the Diminishment and destruction of god number one All right, and so what peterson has just laid out are just a few aspects Of god number one and if you let peterson go he'd continue to make that list And and you find most of what peterson does is talk about god number one and I would argue that in fact just within protestant intramurals the rise in young restless and reformed calvinism, I think has been because a fair amount of the A fair amount of the Old testament ish god number one tends to be more strongly expressed in Calvinism then in A bunch of more recent happy clappy evangelicalism. All right, I'm gonna get some comments on that, too but My point here is that peterson is reinvigorating Re-putting out god number one and his audience is finding it compelling and finding it important for being able to Regulate and manage the internal and external stories and I thought this was going to be a short video Can I just cut in here with one question? Stop with that for now what? But he can go more So I was not hearing in that list of attributes a god who Could care if anyone masturbated Okay now sam harris's are going to funk focus on personal relational issues All right God number one is all the baked in stuff I Sam number god number two is going to focus on the conscious relationship and and for that the The guy in the sky Is and and in some ways especially jesus, but the guy in the sky really takes precedent that's god number two Uh, I was not hearing a god who depends on what else is stopping you from doing sam Well, I'm sorry, but I missed that I said it depends on what else it's stopping you from doing Well, okay, so it's yeah, but seriously it's important to do something other than masturbate. Yes Yes, which is which which actually constitutes a problem for many people which is harder than it sounds. Yeah I'm not hearing a god a personal god Who can possibly hear anyone's prayers much less answer them? God number two, right? And so i'm just i'm wondering what percentage of religious people who would say oh, yeah I believe in god and it's the most important thing in my life What percentage of those religious people do you think have in mind a god of the sort you just described? Now sam's question isn't a bad one Because he's asking what percentage of people have a living sense of god number one Well, what's happened in the west is the entire? Story since darwin has been taking god number one out of the picture and making god number one recede and and having god number one go away that's that's the god of history that's the god of rocks and trees That's the god of of biology That's the god of science and we've been pushing that stuff out of the bible except of course for this creation science camp That basically doubled down So so god number one is being pushed out and what remains is god number two and by the time you get to new atheism in 2001 The god number two that they're that they're protesting Not just in christianity, but especially islam hence the connection to to to 9 11 But but that then is sam harris's quest question about god And what sam harris is about to ask reveals his ignorance I don't know sam It's a good question because when I go talk to people When I when I talk to people online and use exactly this terminology millions of people listen So it's not so obvious which what percentage of people see it this way. It's maybe that they have the intuitions, but they haven't been articulated. Well And that's exactly right. This is this is the problem. This is what worries me about this. So Yeah, I mean you you you could do the same thing with The idea of ghosts, right? So so people traditionally have believed in ghosts It's a it's an archetype you might say the god. See, but here's the here's the irony that traditionally god number one was actually The god that they were talking about when the tsunami comes and wipes out it's only and you and you know that this change has happened because Suddenly when there's a tsunami Many evangelical and christian leaders around the world jump up and say that wasn't god Uh, it wasn't god number two, but it was god number one Well, then we get into the question of the fall of creation so on and so forth. So you know So hold off on the comments about that I I appreciate those arguments in the fall of creation and sin brought into the world. I get all that but but it's but it's It's when when the apostle paul writes about the god that everybody knows about in the book of romans It's god number one Jesus comes and You have god number two. You also have god number two in the old testament too because israel is relating to god in a very interpersonal direct way and that and that god number two isn't Outside of paganism look at the stelle of hammer abhi receiving the code from his god Okay, so so there's always been god number one and god number two but god number one has been a very big deal throughout most of human history and Traditionally that is god much more than the god that sam harris is complaining about Ghost survival of death is certainly an archetype And we know what most people most of the time mean when they say they believe in ghosts And I say I don't believe in ghosts and you say no. No you you do believe in ghosts That's not at all. What peterson is saying Ghosts are your relationship to the unseen That's a ghost So you have a a new definition of ghost that you're putting in in the place provided which I have to say Well, of course I have a relationship to the unseen. So I guess I do believe in ghosts, you know you win that argument But In a sense here god number one has been so driven out already If you're gonna fully get rid of god you're gonna have to go to war against god number two And that's exactly what the celebrity atheists have done and that's exactly why they focus on god number two that Simply isn't what most people mean by a ghost most people mean use that simplified argument about My conception of ghost as an analogy for the propositions that I just put forward This is what I see you do I mean maybe you have more to say on the topic of god, but this is what I hear you doing with god you have defined The god that most people believe in and we know this is the god that most people I was asked what god I believed in Yes, no, but i'm asking you what percentage? yes, but You you by shifting the the definition you have robbed the the noun the traditional noun of its Traditional meaning and you're giving your imparting to people Wait a second. Wait a second. I'm not so sure what do you mean by traditional meaning look and and Actually, I wish peterson. Well, he he doesn't talk in terms of god number one god number two But traditionally peterson turns to say hey, wait a minute traditionally That's not the god that sam harris is talking about at all traditionally Cross-culturally in terms of later is going to go into the whole hindu thing god number one is all over the place now There's always aspects of relationality that are in there But what's focused on is god number one and that's exactly what peterson is bringing up with the use of darwin it's one of the one of the Elemental claims in the old testament is that you're not even supposed to utter the name of god because by defining it too tightly You lose its essence. And so let's not be talking about what the classical definition of god is here. Okay, it's a historical non-starter Okay, there's plenty of religions that can I can I check in with the audience? So yeah that that it is at the expense of q a that's that's what you Let me say sam Um I do not believe in a supernatural god, but the god that I heard jordan just describe I do not have any difficulty understanding why he might care if you masturbate and I also don't have any trouble Figuring out how he might answer prayers Well, well tell me more then well I I can tell you I can tell you I can tell you how a prayer might be Answer okay, but these are specific so you could let me do that. So it'll be interesting So i'm not jordan. We've not talked about this if I heard an answer from him That actually would satisfy me as to what the mechanism of action might be that that that'd be pretty interesting And if he can tell me what I heard Uh, I think it would it would suggest that that we're not just making up stories here So you might like this you maybe don't but No, it's possible So imagine that okay, so let's imagine that hellish situation that you laid out Okay, but but let's let's put the extra twist in it because one of the things that we both decided I think was that you also have to build in the intent into that So let's say the hell that we're talking about isn't the victim of the terrible massacres that you you you laid out in the jungle story, but a perpetrator Okay, so someone who's actually acted in a malevolent manner truly malevolent manner Okay Or or maybe perhaps we wouldn't have to take that extreme case. We could say well Perhaps you've decided that any of you you've decided that you've seriously done something wrong Okay, and that you you want to get away from hell you want to make things better Okay, so here's here's an exercise you can try so what you do is is is you sit on the edge of your bed and you say Okay What I did was wrong And you have to really believe this right? So you've thought about it It's funny that he uses the word believe in this context Killing you it's killing you. It's now you're penitent And you're confessing let's say and you're confessing to yourself as much as to anyone and you say I really want to know what I did wrong And I really want to know what I could do to put it right and i'm willing to accept any answer that will manifest itself to me Try that See what happens? That's a prayer that will be answered and it won't be answered in the way that you want it to be answered I can bloody well tell you that okay, but but that now with my Talking with adam about his subjective morality. This is what we're going about Against the grain of the universe against the moral order against the dao. Well, what are you communicating with? What are you communicating with when you do that? That is something that that is a process that i'm Familiar with it doesn't require any supernatural explanation and Watch that word whenever you have someone pull out supernatural their Enlightenment smuggling. That's what they're doing. They're smuggling the enlightenment in there because what what you've done is you have Split the world in a certain way And in a way that basically defines out certain things that we don't want in there And if you ask yourself, why don't we want those things in there? They have everything to do with our fears Because we really don't want read thomas nagel. We really don't want a conscious agent Above us that will have his way with us that will do with us What he pleases we are terrified of that and it certainly It certainly doesn't Require that we imagine that any of our books were dictated by the creator of the universe I didn't say that it required any supernatural information or that it required He's pulling the string on the back of the celebrity atheist just trot out these village atheist stories. Just Line them up sam. That's what you're doing I was asked to provide an instance of prayer that worked and that's what I did I didn't do anything other than that. That's that's fully understandable In terms of human psychology and it's not understandable because we don't know where the answer comes from Well, we don't know where anything comes from. That's true. Yeah, okay, so That's true And if we can if we can admit that Will be healthier for it now again, I talked about the fact of the emergence of god number two over god number one and When well it started now these things are long processes they happen over multiple generations They have happened over decades and even hundreds of years They have happened at different spaces at different speeds in different contexts in different ways But generally speaking, I think you can see it in the 20th century towards the end of the cold war And there are certain places that you can see it and one of the clearest places to see it is let's say in This classic by chuck colson born again now chuck colson was famously one of richard hits He was known as richard nixon's hatchet man Chuck colson would go after the reputation of nixon's political enemies. That's what he would do He like jordan peterson was raised in a mainline church The mainline church was the religious expression of recruiting god into the cold war dwight d Eisenhower who was not a particularly religious man, although his mother was you can read some of that story in In david brooks the road to character The the the steal of the religious devotion of dwight eisenhower's mother got into young dwight And that's what david brooks writes beautifully about in the road to character But the mainline church in a sense Still had god number one But the last scraps of god number one as god number one was passing as increasingly in the mainline church Think about boltman you can't read god In history the bible won't tell you history the bible won't tell you science the bible won't tell you this and that and this and that The bible will only give you morals And towards the end of the cold war that was starting to that was starting to fragment so But as in boltman there were huge sunk costs in christianity just like you don't make Up a fairy tale you don't discard your entire axiomatic system all at once generation after generation It has to be set aside and have things replace it otherwise Anxiety and depression reign and so as a society the anxiety you have over losing your gods Is troublesome and you can find this in the process you can see some of this in playdoh and socrates As in some ways they're dealing with similar things so you have huge sunk costs into christianity just like you had huge sunk costs Socrates and playdoh socrates in particular at least in playdoh had huge sunk costs in the gods And so we find playdoh's republic, you know socrates is going down to the to the wharf to see the gods To see the the parade of the gods. They're still participating in the in the In the in the cultic practice of the city now what happens in The story of chuck colson and his conversion is the overwhelming Power of god number two over god number one in chuck colson's life chuck colson grew up going to church And so you'll find that when chuck colson and many of his generation Converts and that's the language they use Many in the church are offended you've been going to church You've been taking the sacrament you believe in jesus you've been going through the motions of all this and chuck colson says But no, no, no, no, no the penny never dropped. That's tim kellers language That didn't go down to to the to the depths of my heart I need a personal language To the depths of my heart I need a personal relationship with jesus I need jesus to be real to me So god number one is continuing to go down God number two expands to fill the vacuum All right. Well, what do you expand it with well some of what we expand it with To give credit to the to the celebrity atheists is projection And and this is where we'll tend to see a god who A god who can't send down fire and brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah a god who can't flood the world A god who a god who can't allow the babylonians to come and destroy the temple in israel A god who can't do the kinds of things that are not in keeping with our projection of nice up to god And so charles colson and it's a it's a wonderful book, you know New edition of two million copy bestseller. So big big book chuck colson was a big big deal And his conversion was a big big deal in a lot of christian camps. In fact There's people who are lovers of chuck colson endowed the the systematics chair at calvin seminary That's the chuck colson chair of theology and there's a lot of people on the crc left that That really drives them crazy I remember this because again, I lived through a lot of this stuff. I was young But I remember so I was thinking about this I remember that song and I had to do a little bit of googling to find it was written by ralph carmichael Who was born in 1927 chuck colson was born in 1931 very much the same generation my father's generation Okay, and I found this great youtube of it looks like something out of a nice 60s movie You got all these young kids dressed up at the beach in southern california have a nightly cookout and they're singing He's everything to me In the stars as handy work. I see on the wind. He speaks with majesty. It's god number one Though he rules over land and sea god number one What is that to me? Need a personal relationship I will celebrate nativity The aspects of the historic christian faith have not fully been moved aside yet For its plate for it has a place in history God number one is still there Sure, he came to set his people free. What is that to me? Now we see the rise of Robert bella expressive individualism Okay, this is the big me again you read about this and and And and david brooks the the road to character Till by faith I met him face to face and then ah That's how they I remember the song well sang it a lot And I felt the wonder of his grace notice all the emotional language coming in Then I knew that he was more than just a god who didn't care that lived away out there and Now we're singing love songs to jesus Now he walks beside me day by day Ever watching or me lest I stray helping me to find a narrow way He's everything to me Love songs to jesus basically now What ha what has been happening in the great walking away from the church? now according to according to amon ra what Religious people do is hunt down and kill those who defect Given the number of nuns that have walked away n-o-n-e-s who have walked away from the church here in america How is the government covering up paul vanderclay being an assassin to everyone who leaves living stones church? You know i'm keeping them in the church because I tell them yeah, you miss a sunday boy And i'll get in there at night and first i'll threaten your dog then i'll threaten your kids then i'll take your life Then i'll take your life That's what religious people do You've been watching too much tv, dude Has that ever happened in religious communities? Absolutely, do you find that happening in american christianity or even american islam? I'm not saying there isn't social pressure But hunting people down and killing them and this is a guy who says I only believe what's on facts. Well, baby, you're gonna have to show me some facts to back that sucker up. Anyway Why have many people Well, I can't believe in god because Of the hard things that happened in my childhood because of the pain in my life Well a lot of that is god number one And when god number two grows so large and the and the and the me grows so large again read david brooks the road to character Me gets so big Well, I can't believe in god then you get into christian smiths Long, I don't do I have the book here. I usually post the book um christian smiths Do I have it on the sociology section over there? See this on my office gets messy. I pull books off the shelf and then I don't clean it christian smith soul searching the religious and spiritual lives of american teenagers and he's a sociologist and he went through interviewing american teenagers about what they really believed and what he came up with this Moralistic therapeutic deism that basically said god is a divine butler who? answers wishes and Helps me give me meaning in my life and makes me feel good about myself and this is exactly the god That the celebrity atheists are attacking But the god in the spiritual imagination Of american teenagers is not the god of the bible and that's why people read the bible like I just can't I just can't believe in a god that would drown the world And well then some people say well, I can't believe in a god that would allow Environmental devastation or nuclear war or or or Not another book to the pile He's everything to me Now again in christianity it's god number one and god number two it's both and But if god number one is going away and god number two is going away Number two fills the vacuum Your picture of god is going to be imbalanced. Well, how do you balance your picture of god the bible? Jordan peterson does is revivify god number one Holy, holy, holy is the lord almighty god is not simply the sum of all which is pantheism The whole earth is full of his glory. This is a sacramental view of reality And again for jordan peterson meaning is the sacrament Now that then helps you understand What and why jordan peterson is doing scratch beneath the interface and there he is God number one. It's exactly what jordan peterson was saying God number one to our surprise and horror so So all the way back to the beginning meaning and depression well Meaning is his sacrament tim lot Nails it right there in that video. He basically says it Do you know I listened to jordan peterson and It changed me He's saying paul. What do you have any evidence about this depression thing? Yeah, look at tim lot Look at that interview. I didn't even do it but one of the viewers watched it and said yeah That's what you're talking about and a lot of them have said yeah, that's my story And it's about the crisis and anxiety now ironically The antidote to the crisis and anxiety is god number one the scary god Because well, here's the thing Suppose there isn't a scary god. Well, we prefer that the universe be governed by chaos The only reason you prefer chaos is because there's something even scarier than chaos out there And that's an intentional will able to oppose you So you've really got three levels. You've got an intentional will That is in fact In your favor. Well, that's the best of all and then there's chaos and an intentional will That opposes you So now you ask Well, which position is motivated? Again and again, I hear people saying well, you know christians just believe in projecting a sky daddy who can take care of them Yeah And maybe the reason that you've undercut your gods is because the thought of there being a conscious agent That you're not able to manipulate or control Who for his own reasons? Can take you out? Yeah, you'd better be scared about that and in fact we engineer an entire political system so that the government not be tyrannical because in many ways Uncle sam if uncle sam becomes a tyrant Well, we're all in trouble Well, we're small creatures so I hope this helps. I didn't intend for this to be a long video, but It happens So, uh gotta do rough draft for sunday yet. So thanks for listening