https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=73_uL66Q6qA

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm going to continue my work through the Jordan Peterson's Death and Resurrection of the Christ in five parts. I've done videos on sections one, two, and a certain degree on section three. I want to go into a deeper dive in section three. Section three he reads from 12 Rules for Life, do what's meaningful, not what's expedient. This is actually my fourth take of this. I usually do one take, but that interruptions, I'm trying to get a little bit of video in before I have a work thing out of town today. So and so I might not. I don't know how far I'll get into this. I've got about an hour and a half and there's a ton to cover in this chapter. Now, as I mentioned in the previous video, he uses a redacted version of the text, which is important and as noted in the Jordan Peterson Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup last night, the fact that he's reading this shows a different level of what's just different because he's this is processed work when he's doing the biblical series. It's much more unfiltered. He's thinking out loud. He's thinking with us. But when he's reading a text, he's getting his language precise. This is what he's been able to figure out so far. In a sense, when you when you write a text, you mark where you've been in a different way than you mark where you've been with a YouTube video. So let's let's take a look at this. He begins here. Every man for himself and the devil take the hindmost as the old proverb has it. Why not simply take everything you can get whenever the opportunity arises? Why not determined to live in that manner? Now, as I mentioned before, it's interesting that he starts. He doesn't start at the beginning of the chapter where he has the chapter. While the getting's good, he's in the chapter in the book. He starts with Adam and Eve, Genesis three and the King James version again, which is again, I just want to mark that. I think that's interesting and significant. What in the world should be done about that talks about the fall. And then he goes into this long quote from the Apocrypha in the Book of Wisdom and the pleasure of expediency might be fleeting, but it's pleasure nonetheless. And that's something to stack up. He loves this every man for himself and the devil take the hindmost proverb. He repeats that quite often in his stuff. And so it's interesting that he decided to start with this here. So as I said, I'm going to track through in terms of where he is in the store, where he is in the book, and we'll see how much he jumps around, where he goes, so on and so forth. Or is there an alternative? And if so, why should we bother with it? Our ancestors worked out very sophisticated. Again, and what's fun about following the text or is there an alternative, more powerful and more compelling? If so, why should we? So again, part of what's interesting to me about this is trying to get. If you're studying someone this much, I mean, part of the goal is to try to get into their head because, because in a sense, what you're doing is you're trying to understand their thoughts by thinking their thoughts and retracing their process. And it's very interesting that he said he spent 15 years writing maps of meaning and he would pour over every sentence. And, and he might be doing that with his text, 12 rules for life. And I think the fact that he's doing that is very interesting. And I think the fact again, that he's reading this, I think we're seeing, we're getting a window here into his process, how he thinks he pours over something. He redacts it, he uses text. And so he's continuing to do that. Even with the text that has already edited in 12 rules for life. Now I'm going to have to be careful or I'm going to talk so much about the process that I'm not going to get into the content. And there's a ton of content here. That's, that's really interesting. So this is going to take a while. Answers to such questions, but we still don't understand them very well. This is because they are in large part still implicit, manifest primarily in ritual and myth and as of yet incompletely articulated. Okay. Right there in that sentence, there is so much our ancestors worked out very sophisticated, our ancestors worked out very sophisticated answers to such questions. Well, what questions? Well, questions about, um, why not take right away? Why, why store? And in fact, this, a big part of this section is about sacrifice. Now notice again, his, the title for this, the death and resurrection of Christ, the commentary in five parts, because we've been talking so much about the resurrection or focus tends to be on that, but this section is really on sacrifice. And so he's, he's really commenting on the death of Christ. And obviously in Christianity, the, the crucifixion of Jesus is, is seen theologically as a sacrifice. Well, what is a sacrifice? And, and Peterson, as you know, talks a great deal about sacrifice. He's talked about it some in, in his treatment of Genesis, he's going to have to get into sacrifice a whole lot more as it gets into Exodus, because yeah, I've read the book and I know what's coming. So, so what does it mean that our ancestors worked out sophisticated? Um, our, our ancestors worked out very sophisticated answers to such questions. And the question he's posing is why do we sacrifice? Why do we, why, why do we sacrifice? Why do we store up? Why do we sacrifice the present for the future? Let's keep going. We act them out and represent them in stories, but we're not yet wise enough to formulate them explicitly. We act them out. We represent them in stories, but we're not wise enough to formulate them explicitly. What does he mean by formulate them explicitly? Because quite clearly acting them out, representing them in stories and formulating them explicitly are all in some sense parallel, um, but they're different modes of expression. So acting them out clearly is foundational, represent them in stories. It basically means we can't abstract them. Well, why, what is the purpose of abstracting? Well, we abstract things. We take things out of one story so we can apply them to another story. We take them out of one situation so we can apply them to another situation. And, and what we're really getting here is mastery. And I think if you connect over into my CS Lewis conversation, what we're really attempting to do is take what is, what is acted and then what is expressed in story and turn it into a form of what we might call reasonable argument, which is something so abstracted, something so stripped down to the nub, something that almost becomes math. Well, why do we want to turn it into math? Well, look at how we use math. We use math to, um, let's say we want to build a bridge. Well, what is building a bridge? Well, there's acting it out, acting out, building a bridge is working with stone, wood, or now steel and knowing how to connect steel together, how to form steel. And then we build this bridge. Well, that's the acting. Well, what's the story? Well, the story is that such and such a city, you know, I actually building a bridge is an enormously complicated thing. Now, now we get to the, well, what do you mean by, um, articulate it? Well, that's, that's get into the math. And, and if you understand the math, if you understand the engineering, if you understand the physics, therefore you can build bridges in various different places. So what we're really talking about here, really what we're, what we're talking about here is mastery. What we're talking about here is science in a sense that we want this monarchical vision of everything. So that we can do anything everywhere. And he's trying to come to terms with this with respect to sacrifice. Why do we sell the present for the future? And is that a good trade off? Because selling the present for the future means sacrifice. It means we don't enjoy today all that we could, we save some for tomorrow, assuming that there will be a tomorrow. Um, and then now this, this gets boy, there's, there's so much to this because when you want to hand, you have sacrifice and we're talking about the, the death of Christ, which is a sacrifice, but yet it was Jesus himself in the sermon on the Mount who's talking about not storing up, um, where moth and rust consume, but he is talking about storing up your treasures in heaven. Now, again, even if I, even when I say it in these words, it's understanding, understood in a certain frame. If you've listened to any of my sermons, you know, I'm often dealing with that frame because if you look at the Genesis one representation, when we talk about storing up treasures in heaven, it's not, how can I say this? When we talk about storing up treasures in heaven, we correctly and implicitly talk about sacrificing the present for the future, but it's important to recognize that let's say in a generous Genesis one representation that it's also geographical, we're storing things above. Well, what does that mean? Well, we're storing things outside the age of decay where moth and rust do not consume. And while we may, that will only become now in the future, the, the emphasis on it is, is not necessarily temporal. It has everything to do with our relationship with the age of decay, which is what the Bible calls this present age, an age where everything, um, where, where nothing is stable, everything decays, everything dies. So this is going to be hard and it's going to take a while. We're still chimps in a troop or wolves in a pack. We know how to behave. We know who's who and why we've learned that through experience. Our knowledge has been shaped by the interaction with others. We've established predictable routines and patterns of behavior, but we don't really understand them or know where they originated. And again, I think, um, I'm going to move him over here. So he's not over me. I can read the text through here. Again, this is his, this gets into his, I mean, his big project, his, his main assumptions, he's, he approaches this as a Darwinian and he says, this is the route that we followed. Now, one of the videos, hopefully in the future, I mean, I'm learning so much and doing so much processing through him, which is why I keep working on him. One of, one of my questions when we get to further sections in here will be, you know, what is a human being? What is the relationship between consciousness and ontology? What is the relationship between consciousness and materiality? I've been doing a lot of thinking and processing on that front, given where some of the other conversations are going. So, okay. So let's assume, let's assume the, the Darwinian, let's assume the Darwinian story and I know some Christians out there are going to just, let's assume it. Okay. And that we've been, we, we act out things that we, um, some of our knowledge is encoded and expressed in our actions. Not all of this knowledge is, can be appropriated by, okay, let's use these three levels. There's, there's what we act out. There's what we can, there's what we can represent in story. And you, and you can understand the relationship being story and acting out. It's, it's the next step. Often we have the process kind of backwards in our mind because we've been acting out things so much. If you're writing fiction, you're writing fiction, you're writing fiction, you sit down and I'm not a fiction writer, but fiction writers can pop in. You imagine the story. Well, well, on what basis can you imagine the story because you've been acting things out and the expression of the story in fiction or in drama is, you know, acted out people, people saying things, people being a certain place, people being represented a certain way, being people being represented in physicality. And now this third layer that he's talking about, this is abstraction. This is in a sense, the realm of reason where we, we disembodied the story and try to bring it down to the level of principles of, of discrete building blocks. And again, math is an analogy to this where, well, now when we've got at this level of abstraction, now we can try to transport it over and apply it in other places. And I think that move there is important because we would ask ourselves, okay, if we, if we know how to act, why do we bother with story? Well, maybe you say we'd bother with story because we have these big brains. Okay. So we have action and story. Why do we bother with abstraction? And in a sense, turning things into discrete, turning things into math, as it were, well, I think the reason we do that, our motivation behind that is because again, we want to build a bridge in lots of different places. And whereas we've had enough experience building bridges that, that fail and that fall, we don't want to do that. And so we use abstraction in order to safeguard against that. So then we can have greater mastery, hopefully at both the acting level and at the story level. So now you get back to, you get back to chimps, you get back to wolves. What he's saying is that chimps and wolves, they don't, they don't even do story. They just act and they learn as they act. And that action gets encoded. Last night after the meetup, someone shared with me cat cucumber videos. I had never heard of cat cucumber videos and where you, you've got all these videos on YouTube where there's this cat, you know, just calmly eating at its dish and the playful owner at the expense of the, of the, of the cat's peace and quiet slides a cucumber next to the cat. And that cat turns, sees the cucumber and freaks out. And we laugh because, you know, why you silly cat, are you freaking out at the cucumber? Well, then, okay, that's the action. And then we tell a story about it, which may or may not be a true story. Seems to be a true story. And now we're getting into abstraction here because we say, well, somewhere in the evolutionary development of cat, they, they, what is a cucumber? What predator might a cucumber be like? Well, it probably is something like a snake and it would stand to reason that cats would freak out looking at snakes. And so just go ahead to YouTube and watch these cat cucumber videos. The, the cat sees the cucumber first, it gets away and then cats do what cats do. The braver cats creep up to it, start swatting at it, try to figure the thing out and you know, and then there's one video of the cat eating the cucumber to figure it out. I can eat this sucker. But, but here again, so, so this kind of the jumping at the cucumber is, is there in the chimps and it's in the wolves and it's stuff that's been encoded by process and evolution. Again, we're assuming a Darwinian story here. And, and so that then is encoded. And of course, Peterson's argument is this stuff is encoded in us. And so evolutionary psychologists do, do studies on why are we so afraid of snakes? And then you get into Jordan Peterson's treatment of the book of Genesis and the Garden of Eden. Why is the snake in a tree? Why does the tree bear fruit? Why is it a woman offering it to a man? Why is it a snake? Why is it a talking snake? What is a dragon on and on and on and on. And Peterson's argument is all this stuff is encoded within us. Okay. And so just like, um, we're afraid of spiders and snakes, just like the cat is afraid of a cucumber and all of this stuff is in us and the chimps and the wolves and even we act out stuff and we act out stuff and we don't even know why we're acting out stuff. We just act it. And if you, if you spend any time with human beings or pay any attention to human beings, you know that this is true because one of the things that you learn in dealing with human beings is that human beings act stuff out for reasons they don't understand. Again, you might read, uh, Jonathan Haidt. Jonathan Haidt will, will go into the rider and the elephant and the elephant, the elephants work doing its stuff for, for its own reasons. And the rider so often is creating post-hoc stories that explain the elephant. And we can dabble a little bit into our reason nature conversation. And, you know, I know I'm going through CS Lewis. I know I'm a committed Christian, all of these things, but sometimes I think if I weren't a committed Christian, I'd be an epistemological anarchist. Well, what do I mean by that? It's a, it's a close competition between, well, we actually use reason and, uh, none of us have any idea of what we're doing and reason itself is a scam and a facade and a lie we tell ourselves and a post-hoc rationalization for all the stuff our elephant is doing. And that's why truth be told, if I were a naturalist, this is the problem with naturalism, I don't think we can be honest, authentic naturalists, because if we had an authentic, honest naturalist, we would never hear from you because. What would be the point of talking to all of us about what you think and promoting your argument? Well, that was maybe just encoded in me that I'm, I'm going to promote my argument, but if you think Calvinists can get really deterministic, um, I've never seen a Calvinist anywhere near as deterministic as naturalists should be. Because, you know, let's say all of this rationalization, all of this storytelling, all of this attempt to, um, take the transition from story to, I'm calling it math is, is just post-hoc post-hoc reasoning. So there's no point to it that the world is simply running through its tape and it's going to end how it's going to end in nuclear destruction or environmental devastation, or in, um, we create a super bug that wipes us out or whatever. I mean, to me, these seem to be the two arguments, the, the, the, the atheists who argue for atheism seems to me to be the, the poorer sections of both sides. If you were a thoroughgoing naturalist, Hey, and the devil take the hindmost. Um, why sacrifice for tomorrow? You're just playing out your, you know, playing out your, your tape. Well, then you'd say, well, but it's in my tape to sacrifice for tomorrow. And this is in a sense, Peterson's project. Um, wolves scarf down their food. Um, when you travel into the jungles in Africa and find a chimpanzee tribe, you don't find a grain elevator. Um, these animals are living for today. Somewhere along the line, human beings develop the idea of sacrifice and the idea of sacrifice as Peterson talks about is connected to the idea of the future. The idea of sacrifices, as Peterson says so well, the idea that you can bargain with the future, that I can have a relationship with the future. And what's interesting is that again, I don't think you can have a relationship with the future. Without some mediating above layer. And obviously for most of human, for most of humanity, that layer has been the divine or the spiritual or the God. Materialists. I, again, I think, I think many of them have simply not worked through all of these issues and that is behind some of Thomas Nagel's critique. Now let's, let's be generous to our, our naturalist materialist friends, because they've only been working at this for a hundred and some odd years. So, you know, we've been working at theism for thousands of years. So we have a big advantage. And we also have a big advantage because it's, it's the majority case. Now there's plenty of details in theism that, that we continue to argue about. But I mean, materialists are, you know, despite all of their talk about imagining themselves as to be the, the, the next evolutionary phase, they just, they're, they're just getting started on their project. And I have grave doubts that their project is even feasible. This is where we're at. Okay. Okay. Dr. P let's keep going. They've evolved over great expanses of time, but we didn't and still don't understand what it all. They've evolved over great expanses of time. No one was formulating them explicitly, at least the dimmest reaches of the past, even though they've been telling each other how to act forever. One day, however, not so long ago, we had a conversation with Dr. P about the concept of theism. One day, however, not so long ago we woke up. It's interesting. He's, this is pretty significantly redacted. Oh man. The biblical narrative of paradise. Oh boy. Okay. We jumped to chat. We jumped to paragraph again, as when I study the Bible, this is what we do, especially when we're doing synoptic studies between Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, where I was comparing tech. When he skips over things, I want to go back and say, why'd you skip over that paragraph? Why is that? Why is that less important for the point you're trying to make here? And again, I know a lot of people look at the synoptics and say, oh, they're all different. That means they're inaccurate. No, no. That means that the authors, for example, Mark or Matthew and Luke, who pretty clearly had access to Mark, they were, they're acting like human beings. They have motivations. They're making a point that are addressing an audience and they feel free to shape the text. Now in the ancient world, they had, they had different standards of storytelling. And so they felt freer about some things that we don't, and they were probably restricted in some ways we wouldn't be. But that is what they're doing. And again, Dr. P here is shaping the reshaping his text. I'd be curious to know what's on his mind behind it, if he can even articulate it. So again, we've jumped a paragraph and now we're over into the biblical narrative of Paradise in the Fall. The Fall is one such story fabricated by our collective imagination. Where's Jung in that? Working over the centuries. And again, the, again, in terms of biblical studies, there's, there were, there were, there were quite a few decades where biblical scholars were very interested in the prehistory of the text. And that was approached as texts. Peterson is interested in the psychological prehistory of the text, which is really interesting. And I think this is part of why he's, at least for me, adding a fresh layer to the conversation about the Bible. And, and so now again, in his, you know, we act things out and we watch each other act and we learn even if we can't represent it in story, and especially when we can't represent it in abstraction. Okay, Benny, have a good day. So Peter Peterson's getting at, okay, where does this text come from? So we've acted it out in story and this is, or we've acted it out in behavior. And that's, that's a, that's such an interesting idea that, you know, the story of, which is so foundational for, you know, the, the Bible, the Bible is about the people who are in the Bible. And we've, we've, we've learned a lot about the Bible. Which is so foundational for, you know, for Christian theology, especially reformed theology chapters, the Genesis chapters, one through three, hold so much theological punch. They're so foundational and formative for the rest of the story. And, you know, and, and quite rightly, some biblical scholars want us to pull back from that because they're actually within the Bible, a lot of creation stories and the ones at the beginning get the most attention because they're at the beginning, but they are so foundational and so formationable, formational for, for so much Christian theology that, well, and then the idea that, well, how did these arise? Well, we saw, we watched each other for, you know, for how many thousands of years, and then we started telling stories and these stories were the ones that emerge now in the modernist. Peterson, Peterson is trying to give an account for the creation of the story. In the modernist, the modernist, Christian modernists have been attempting to do this. And I mean both the fracture between the modernists and the fundamentalists. Both sides have been trying to do this. The modernists would be, would generally be more comfortable with Peterson, except they don't like his social agenda. They would generally be more comfortable with Peterson. The fundamentalists would be less comfortable with Peterson because of the connection with Darwin, but what's, what's interesting here is that the fundamentalists and fundamentalists, fundamentalists last modernists. And what I mean by that is that fundamentalists have also been impacted by the post enlightenment. Need to base things in history, which I've talked about in previous videos. The fundamentalists tend to account for the story of Genesis. Okay. They're, they're the books of Moses. And so fundamentalists tend to want to. Historify, but his stuff is so complicated. It's so hard to tell. It's so complicated. Historify, but his stuff is so complicated. It's so hard to talk about because there's so many theological landmines and landmines in the church. But again, I'm a low, this is the, this is the luxury of being a low status person. You know, you can kind of say what you want, but I am, I am a minister of the word who is bound by the creeds and confessions of the Christian Reformed Church and can be brought up on heresy charges if enough people think I'm a heretic, I don't think I've said anything heretical and I don't really think I will. But fundamentalists have tended to look at the story of Genesis and said, this was revealed to Moses. Okay. How, how was it revealed to Moses? We have tended to tell a story that is not unlike a Muslim story or a Mormon story in that I've heard, I've heard fundamentalists say things like God revealed that to Moses, which I think is theologically true, but the question is what is the manner of revelation to Moses? And again, this is where we get into organic inspiration versus mechanical inspiration, and I think there's a great, there's a great temptation for modern fundamentalists along with Muslims and Mormons to adopt a mechanistic view that God put Moses into a trance and it was some exercise of automatic writing. Now, organic inspiration does not necessitate that backstory of these texts. All it says is that God, these texts are inspired and God worked through the process by which we have received these texts and in the church we hold these texts as canonical. Well, what does that mean? Well, let's talk about the area of action. That means we defer to them. That means we revere them. That means we treat them as texts of authority. We submit to them. Now, that's the action that we have with respect to the text. What happens in a lot of the fundamentalist fights is that people take some of this non-canonical backstory of assumptive mechanical revelation and pour it into their doctrine and say, unless you subscribe to this mechanistic presumed backstory of the text, you are outside the theological fold. Peterson's not within any theological fold. He's free to work on this as he chooses, which has an upside and a downside. I think we have a bias in our contemporary culture where we imagine the preferred environment for exegesis is open frontiers. And I think that tends to assume that gives a value to openness that is prejudicial against the confinement that we always have, even if we don't recognize it. So Peterson is saying we have an evolutionary backstory to the text, that these texts emerged first from behavior, and then this is the story element of the behavior. And what theology does, what Peterson is trying to do from a psychological perspective, what Christian theologians have been trying to do from a religious perspective, is in a sense, turn the story into math, turn the story into science. And I could have a very long conversation about the relationship between theology. Let me say it this way. I could have a very long conversation with the current manifestation of theology as science, because in the post-enlightenment world, once science proved to be such a powerful tool, what we tried to do was abstract science into the math of science, let's say, I'm using math as a metaphor, into the math of science and then reapply it to theology. And so much of the theology written in the last few hundred years has very much been that project. Now, Peterson is avoiding that project completely, and he is saying, I'm studying these texts psychologically, but psychologically, he has a backstory to the text, and that backstory is foundational. And I think the newness for most of us in reimagining the backstory to the text, which is different from this backstory, which emerges from the modernist fundamentalist split, has been fresh. And I think part of the reason why many people are looking at the Bible again and rediscovering faith again, because I think now what Peterson is essentially doing is looking at the Bible within the cultural frame of reference of so many of his listeners, that the modernist fundamentalist feud is spent, people are exhausted from it, they haven't found the modernist, which is usually the mainline churches, to be interesting. If so many on the religious right are the Republican Party at prayer, so many on the religious left are the Democratic Party at prayer. And why go to church if you can have the power of government to bring in your eschatological kingdom of liberty and equality? Well, even if we have to sacrifice liberty for the arrival of certain kinds of equality. But so this is the fight that's going on. And so the church has not been compelling. The church where preachers are talking about the Bible, because for the most part, what has happened in the modernist fundamentalist split is that you go to a mainline church and what will you likely hear about in terms of the homily? What is the major agenda of the church in a mainline church? Well, it's in many churches nearly identical to the agenda of the Democratic Party. And so why bother with the church when the when the booth that matters is not the confessional booth, it's the voting booth. And the sacrament that matters is not or the action that matters is not liturgy, talking to a God for which you've got real questions and doubts about but going out and protesting and waving placards. And in one of my previous videos, I mentioned that statue that's on Route 80 as you're driving into San Francisco in the Bay Area of you know, these it's a it's a statue, metal statue, and everyone's holding up these placards and the placards are empty. Why are the placards empty? Because they have now been abstracted. And you know, fit your post your grievance here post your plan for remaking the world right here. And this then is the modern liturgy about how the eschaton how the kingdom comes, the kingdom comes and you know, Pepsi worked this out with whatever Jenner, whatever Jenner girl was, I'm sorry, I'm not a I don't read People magazine, I can't keep up with all the Jenner's. I you know, whatever Jenner was in the Pepsi commercial, I remember the Pepsi commercial, because they were acting out the contemporary eschatological story of the left. Now Peterson is coming along and he is saying, we need the Bible, just like a fundamentalist, you know, you can't live without the Bible, you will be lost without the Bible, we will die without the Bible. If we if we don't have the Bible, our threat is not necessarily again, he always keeps that door agnostic, our threat is not necessarily an afterlife, our threat is falling into the two pits of the 20th century, which is fascism and communism. So this is Peterson's project. Peterson is is once again, asserting that the Bible in the West should have a privileged foundational position to determine our behavior. Now, when I say it that way, and I'm saying that as a Christian minister, everybody starts to freak out because we've also been indulging in a long story about mean Christians and their superstitious, you know, the religious morality being imposed on well-meaning oppressed people. And if you listen to the stories we tell each other, because remember, first we act things out, then we represent them in stories. And while Americans don't really like to read history very much, and people don't think history is very important, if you ask someone for a very low representation, highly abstracted story of history, it would probably look something like Charles Taylor's abstraction story. It would probably, but more on a sociological thing, it would probably go something like this. In the past, we were superstitious and believed in things like gods and spirits until we had science to enlighten us. And that was a step forward. And then once we had that, we realized that we were doing all kinds of counterproductive things like being mean to gays, like oppressing brown and black-skinned people. And we were doing this because of the Bible, even though the real neo-Nazis, the real white supremacists have always really had a hard time projecting race as skin color back into the Bible because it's just not there. And the sons of ham, nah, it's just not there, boys and girls, because that wasn't an issue they were dealing with. They were dealing with lots of other issues, and there were certainly issues of ethnicity and ethnic tension, but those tribal tensions were not tagged by race. Those tribal tensions were expressed in culture and expressed in clans. And to imagine that we've gotten rid of our clannishness or our tribalisms, well, that's just silly. So anyway, backing up the tape, the history story we tell each other is that on the basis of superstitions, which is religion, we were mean and oppressive towards each other and we robbed people of their liberty. And that's what we're talking about, their liberty for really bad reasons. So now we have thrown off all those, and all that stuff is connected to the Bible. We've thrown off all that bad stuff, and now we live in the new freedom of the modern era. I think that story was dominant about 20 years ago when the left was in the phase of the arc where Don't Judge Me was the, was the dominant message. The arc has continued, and now that the left has achieved a degree of cultural hegemony, now the phrase is, you know, don't be a bigot, don't be a racist, don't be a hater. So that's probably the greater abstraction from bigot and racist is a hater, because hate crime, that category is, that category can include, you know, the most poor treatment of sexual minorities, but again, pay attention, only certain sexual minorities. There are still some sexual minorities that are continued, the hatred of them and the legal sanction of them continues. And then of course the conservatives worry that, well, we're on a slippery slope, and even if you read Freddie DeBoer, who is a Marxist, and I don't mean a Marxist that, you know, Jordan Peterson labels as a Marxist, this guy labels himself as a Marxist, you know, Freddie DeBoer recently had an article out that said, ah, the conservatives were all right and were all correct about the slippery slope, and I'm glad. So, well, Freddie DeBoer is a Marxist. So this is the story we tell ourselves about history, and well, when we tell ourselves that story about history, we are really defining ourselves, and so, okay, first we act it out, then we represent it in story, and then we get into the business of abstraction. So Peterson jumps now into the creation and the fall story. It provides a profound account of the nature of being and points the way to a mode of conceptualization and action well matched to that nature. And again, you've got to be careful whenever you hear Peterson talk about being, that's a huge category for him. And so that's really his ontological category. And so when he says being, he's talking ontology. In the Garden of Eden, prior to the dawn of self-consciousness, so goes the story, human beings were sinless. Our primordial parents, Adam and Eve, walked with God. Then, tempted by the snake, the first couple ate from the tree, and the second, the third, the fourth, the fourth, the fifth, the sixth, and the last. Human beings May never live with God. by the snake, the first couple ate from the tree and turned away from God. Mankind was exiled from Paradise and began its effortful, mortal existence. The idea of sacrifice enters soon afterwards, beginning with the account of Cain and Now before I discovered Peterson one of the things I did notice was that the first altar to show up in the Bible is in Genesis 4 which is really significant and I see this, I can keep my eye on the time because I've got a meeting, in Ripon, California most of you don't know where Ripon is. Ripon is the center of Christian reform in Northern California a little Christian reform church which is spread pretty thin in California and most of the country is concentrated in certain areas and that concentration is in Ripon, so I go to Ripon. Why is there no altar in the Garden of Eden? Now Peterson understands, connects altar with sacrifice which is correct but one of the things that I noticed with there not being an altar in the Garden of Eden is the function of the altar What is the function of an altar? An altar is in a sense a, it's a sort of telephone now I'm showing my 20th century roots, it's a sort of telephone, it's a sort of mail system, there's our 19th, 18th century roots it's a sort of internet, the altar is a means of conveyance by which a gap is overcome Okay, here's a Genesis 1 representation, you have the earth below, you have the firmament and after the rebellion God does not destroy the rebellious gardeners who are there to garden and develop the garden according to his desire for his glory instead he cuts them off and in a sense gives them the garden but he warns them that the garden will not be obedient to them that the garden in fact will be their enemy and if you look at my last video I talked about the ongoing war between nature and reason us being the only creatures in the world that possess a degree of reason that can challenge nature so the heaven and earth are cut off, well why is there no altar in Genesis 2? There's no altar in Genesis 2 because there's no gulf between heaven and earth well what's the deal with the gulf between heaven and earth? The story, one way to understand the story of the Bible is that is the divorce of heaven and earth that this divorce comes in Genesis 2 and is not finally overcome until the end of the book of Revelation so there's no altar in the garden of Eden because there's no gulf between heaven and earth, you don't need an altar well what is an altar? An altar is a way to establish, well let's call it a portal an altar is a way to establish, to reestablish the connection between heaven and earth and that is done through sacrifice and you know now Peterson's perspectives can enrich my view because I add to the geographical function that an altar fulfills with a relational function that an altar fulfills with a temporal function that an altar fulfills so not only is an altar a portal between heaven and earth not only is an altar in a sense a stairway, a staircase between heaven and earth an altar is also a time machine, an altar is a way that we sacrifice the present for the future now this gets into, see this is, see so how does, boy this stuff is so hard if we look at a traditional religious conception of sacrifice which understands we sacrifice the present for the future the dominant paradigm in the current American evangelical context for sacrificing the present for the future is in the words as understood by American evangelicals, storing up treasure in heaven that is understood in temporal ways primarily by historical evangelicals it should also be understood in geographical ways so in this sense Peterson operating as a secular psychologist in a sense maintains the secular frame which is really gutsy move because the secular critique of religion is that it's superstition and by appropriating the word superstition and using it, we use it sort of as a smear that in the words of Sam Harris, religion is failed technology giving to the church might get you a tax deduction but it won't ensure prosperity and here is some of the argument between religious people and non-religious people because I know plenty of religious people that will testify I always had money trouble until I started giving money to the Lord until I started tithing, once I started tithing I never had money trouble now this is where things get complicated because a bunch of secularists will jump in and say well that's because the act of tithing forced you to take control over money and the important thing is not the metaphysical miraculous intervention of a God in your life who somehow gives you more money, the important thing is psychological that now you can manage money because it no longer has power over you because you tithe the religious person will say, no I think it's the other way around because, and now a really smart religious person might say, because the future is uncertain and my God holds the future so in fact God giving me the brain power to use at my work or the fortune to have the job that I have, all of that is given to me by God therefore you can't simply tell me that the benefit I receive by tithing is only a psychological experience you can't know that, then we get into this measured agnosticism which Peterson practices and so this is a truly gutsy thing when Peterson talks about sacrifice last night at the meetup we had a pretty vigorous debate as to whether virtual reality technology and even YouTube technology will replace church and this partly was posed to me by a member who came to the meetup who came to the meetup and said what do you think about church and video and I told him, well what I'm doing right now is an experiment in this for me by Sunday ten times as many people will have seen the rough draft for my sermon as will be present at Living Stones to watch my sermon what does that mean? religious people believe that sacrificing in the present not only brings about the good but as in Jesus words those who have given up for the kingdom will receive 50 or 100 fold in this age and the age to come what does he mean by that? Jesus is in a sense magnifying sacrifice now again this is a lot of people who hear Jesus within a secular form and they think that Jesus is a person who is a person who is a person who is a person it's not a person who is a person who is a person who lives a life that death and sacrifice now again this is a lot of people who hear Jesus within the secular frame and say that's not Jesus I know Jesus I know is nice to outgroups and I talked about that in my should preachers should pastors tell you how to vote video to outgroups. He's far much more than that. And what I think is we're doing in this is showing that there's something that remains in the traditional Christian, even the fundamentalist expressions of Christianity that endures. And I think that's part of the reason mainline have been dropping like a rock. I think people implicitly know there's not a lot of reason to engage that. Whereas if you're a conservative, you go to church because you're actually participating in a belief system with communal reinforcement that says, I am going to go and I am going to sacrifice my money and I'm going to sacrifice my time and I'm going to sacrifice my labor. And I believe that it will be more than worthwhile. Now, this is where I get into what I talked about in my previous video about the relationship between gratitude and let's say, acquisitional motivations for sacrifice. Does my motivation for sacrifice, which is primarily selfish, devalue the sacrifice, which again in reform theology, reading the Heideberg Catechism, gratitude is the motivation for sacrifice, which is a better motivation because it's a better motivation for lots of reasons. But I can't fully dismiss the other side of gratitude, which is, I need something from the Lord and I'm desperate, so I'll pay anything to have it. That's the pearl of great price. So I can't discredit that mode. I think that mode is a very natural mode. It drives a lot of people and maybe we can frame that relationship in terms of the older tradition, which continues to be worked quite productively by the Roman Catholics of nature and grace. Maybe it is natural for us to approach sacrifice with greed in our hearts because we're afraid and we have avarice and so we think that if we give something to God, he will bless us in return. And that motivation is most often seen nakedly in prosperity gospel contexts. I don't think we can dismiss that. Maybe we'll call that nature and maybe we'll call gratitude grace. So we'll have a both and instead of an either or. I prefer to preach misery deliverance gratitude because I think in the long run, the grace motivation for sacrifice is healthier than the greed motivation for sacrifice. Anyway, back to the Genesis 1, Genesis 2, Genesis 3, Genesis 4 representation. Altar is a portal between the geography of heaven and earth. If you understand that geography in the Genesis representation, Altar is a time machine. Whereas we engage with the future now, Altar is a relational conveyance such as the mail or a telephone or FaceTime or Skype where we express to God and there are many passages in the Bible where what sacrifice offers is a pleasing aroma to God. Now one of the things that so when we got caught up in our little debate last night over whether virtual reality given enough technologically development could adequately replace face-to-face meetings such as a meetup or a church service. One of the things I wanted to bring in was aroma was smell. Now we unlike my dog are not primarily motivated by smell. If I walk into a place that reminds me of a place from my youth by smell, those smell smell is deeply tied to memory. You know infant smell and so this is why I don't think we're going to replace actual physicality of meeting together. Now you could argue that the transition from the sacrifice of a ram or a bowl or a grain offering gets abstracted into the sacrifice of money and of time which is primarily what's being transacted in contemporary worship in North America. Yes but I would also say that when the Hebrew family brought their best animal and they had far less cushion than we have. When they brought their best animal up to the altar and the father of the family representing the family laid his hands with the priest on the head of that bowl in order to transfer the sin of the family into that bowl and you know butchered that bowl for sacrifice. Yeah that's a lot more than sticking a check in a plate or clicking an online donation button. But this is why this is why there's an altar here and this is why I think I'll take Peterson's point about it showing up in Genesis 4 but the reason it doesn't show up in Genesis 2 is because heaven and earth have not yet been cut off in that what we see at the beginning of Genesis chapter 3 is that the relationship between God and the man and the woman is face to face and what happens with the exile of the garden is we no longer can see God's face. Why can't we God's face? Why can't we see God's face? Because it would kill us. Well why would God's face kill us? Well God's face would kill us because we if we'd see that much beauty. Have you ever seen have you ever seen a a man who is prideful and has based his identity on a specific virtue such as intelligence or physical strength or sports prowess or prow or competency in another area a man who is vain and prideful and bases his identity in that specific area then meets a man who is double or triple his competence. The vainful person is crushed because they base their identity on that competency. Let's imagine a a vain woman who considers herself the most beautiful woman of all the women around and then she meets a woman who is way more beautiful than she is who when the other woman walks in the room all eyes go to the other woman instead of to her. What happens in our hearts when this happens and this is why I always resist saying pride is the cardinal sin because what happens with sin is that they all get engaged and the dominoes all tend to fall when when things get extreme so we can't stand the face of God. He is he who just simply because he is so glorious because he is so beautiful because he is so brilliant because he is so intelligent because he is so all-knowing because he is so omnicompetent when we see him we see ourselves in his light and we can't stand ourselves and so we like in Revelation 6 would call on the mountains to fall on us because we would rather be destroyed than to see his face and so in that sense the exile is punishment in the other in another sense the exile is mercy because for God to be there would be would be hell and this this gets into all kinds of interesting speculation about heaven and hell because the presence of God will be heaven for those who love him the presence of God will be hell for those who don't or those who can't and then very quickly you get into well is is just loving in or hating him a tribal thing no it has everything to do with our hearts and who we are and well how can I begin the process of being able to see God that in fact is a beatitude. They will see God well well how will they see God why will they be able to see God because they will be so humble well look at Moses. Moses saw God read the book of Deuteronomy. Moses was the humblest man in the world. What's the connection between humility and being able to see God? If you have any pride in you or any envy in you or any self-importance in you and you see God the vision of God will crush you because you will never see yourself again in the same light. Again it's like the the kid who's the best musician in his high school goes to music school and discovers yeah you're average and well how then do you feel about the greatest musician? It's Salieri and Mozart in the movie Amadeus. Will you see the gift that Mozart has and because of your selfless love of music be in the heaven of Mozart's music or will you be Salieri and say I will hate Mozart and I will despise him and I'll do what I can to destroy him because it is not about the glory of the music it is about my glory and and if you can begin to understand this perspective on the Christian life the entire story of the entire Christian story will make a world more sense than it does in so many of the other frameworks that culturally we have kind of moved beyond and and it's that moving beyond that for many people have have driven them to say well I don't buy that story I don't buy that framework so there's the altar enough of that back to see where oh gosh and developing through the Abrahamic adventures and the exodus after much contemplation struggling humanity learns that God's favor could be gained and his wrath averted through proper sacrifice and also that bloody murder might be motivated among those unwilling or unable to succeed in this manner and again this is the this is the greed this is the greed based motivation for sacrifice that Israel and I don't want to discount that and again maybe nature and grace is the proper framework that we can look at acquisitive motivation for sacrifice versus a gratitudinal expression as motivation for sacrifice well let's we got a chapter thing let's see where he goes if he goes into the next the delay of gratification when engaging in sacrifice our forefathers began to act out what would be considered a proposition if it were stated in words that something better might be attained in the future by giving up something of value in the present and and there again is is the thesis his thesis for sacrifice that that what happens in sacrifice altar therefore is a time machine altar is the means by which we we engage productively with the future now there's a secular side of that we you know we have a 403b or a 401k retirement account we have we build equity in our home we you know this is what we do we're engaging for the future and as he says many other places that this depends on a stable economic and political system recall if you will that the necessity for work is one of the curses placed by god upon adam and his descendants in consequence of original sin i don't know um the necessity for work if you look at adam's waking to the fundamental constraints of his being his vulnerability his eventual death is equivalent to his discovery of the future okay let's let's go back a sentence first because i like the second sentence a lot that one really informs me the the curses now it's always important to recommend that the man and the woman are not cursed the serpent is cursed very interesting anyway the the man's labor he labored before the fall he labored before the rebellion but his labor is different now his labor is frustrated thorns and thistles and the woman's labor again in in hebrew the the the comparison and the connection is far clear that the woman's labor is different now the woman's labor is different now the woman's labor is different the the the comparison and the connection is far clear um the man thorns and thistles represent frustration in labor well pain represents frustration in labor and maybe the connection of labor in terms of the word between what happens when a woman gives birth and what happens when a man toils in the field in a sense the field is the realm by which the man brings life and the womb is the realm by which the woman brings life okay and these stories are archetypal these stories are paradigmatic these stories um represent you know way more than a man and a woman they represent more than maleness and femaleness they also represent masculine and feminine and they they scale out bigly um but i i would i would quibble on his sentence um that on the necessity for work but i do like where he goes next which is the um uh his waking to the fundamental constraints of his being his vulnerability his eventual death is equivalent to the discovery of the future and and you know as a kid again i grew up with these texts and so as a kid we would read this story and on the day that you eat that you shall eat of it i learned in the king james or actually revised standard version and the day that you eat of it you shall surely die and i as a kid i would always hear that and think what do you mean they don't die because again i was thinking of it in terms of day in terms of how a seven or eight year old thinks of day um but that gets more into peterson's articulation that boom at that moment he discovers the future like he never did before and and if you read the genesis story there's the the the man and the woman before the rebellion and after the rebellion are are very different creatures that they are woken up somehow by this rebellion the future that's where you go to die hopefully not too soon your demise might be staved off through work through the sacrifice of the now to gain benefit later it is for this reason among others no doubt that the concept of sacrifice is introduced in the biblical chapter immediately following the drama of the fall again um i'd want to include the conversation that i did before it's not just sacrifice i think peterson's got a piece of it i don't think we should miss the geography and the cutting off business there's little difference between sacrifice and work they're also both uniquely human sometimes animals act as if they're working but they are really only following the dictates of their nature and right there is again where peterson's not a materialist uh where he's not a determinist where they're following the dictates of their nature again if you're a naturalist or a materialist um everything is the dictates of nature um there there is no choice and and what peterson is saying here is that we act like we have choice and so sacrifice a pleasing sacrifice is a willing sacrifice it's a voluntary sacrifice and this is where again we get into the relationship between a an acquisitional motivation for sacrifice and a gratitudinal motivation for sacrifice i'm running out of time here but we'll keep going beavers build downs they do so because they are beavers build dams they don't think yeah but i'd rather be on a beach in mexico with my girlfriend while they're doing it i love that line i that line goes through my head over and over again beavers build dams they i love that line prosaically such sacrifice work is delay of gratification but that's a very mundane phrase to describe something of soul-shattering significance the discovery that gratification could be delayed was simultaneously the discovery of time and with it causality at least the causal force of voluntary human action long ago in the dim mists of time we began to realize that reality was structured as if it could be bargained with that's again it's an italics it's a really crucial thing we begin to realize that that reality was structured as if it could be bargained with and so peterson connecting work and sacrifice very much gets into the theist atheist debate materialist non-material because work is work you labor up mammon work you you compile things you build relational chips that's essentially what credit is you build reputation we understand this within the material layer peterson by talking about sacrifice again sacrifice has been dismissed and disparaged why go and give money to the church because you're just giving it to the greedy pastor and there is no god that watches you put it in and so you scoff at the at the grandma who is is sending all her money into the tv preacher and imagining that she's storing up treasure in heaven when you know that the tv preacher or maybe the youtube preacher is a charlatan and he's just going rich on the on the the widow's mites of a million widows this again i think is part of the reason okay first we act and then we represent in story well and then we bring into abstraction peterson as someone with academic credentials in the secular university in a secular place in time who i doesn't i doesn't identify with religious people is keeping open the door that sacrificing might not be such a dumb thing and he's in fact he's saying that this is something that was coded into us by evolution okay now much to the embarrassment i would say of some ardent materialists as they try to discover the evolutionary roots of morality even if you listen to brett weinstein he'll tell you um a lot of the the morality we receive by evolution today we reject tribalism uh ethnic based tribalism we reject that well why do we reject that well isn't that coded into our evolution are you being a hypocrite if you both eat a paleo diet and think that racism is wrong why because if your body if your body was built for uh being a hunter gatherer on the serengeti wasn't your tribalism built for ethnic kinship now no don't hear me wrong here um i i very i'm very much against racism and i'm very much against racism because i'm a christian because the um blood of jesus speaks a better word than the blood of abraham or sorry the blood of abraham than the blood of the blood of abel you can find that in the book of hebrae's so peterson is opening the door here with sacrifice and suggesting to people with the authority that he clearly has with a lot a lot of people saying you should see with a lot a lot of people saying you should sacrifice well you mean i should um save up from my 403b or your your 401k yes and you might even consider going to church and putting something in the plate well he's never said that and he doesn't go to church and i don't know if he puts anything in the plate and here's a preacher talking about offerings and it's it's one thing i much to the dismay of my deacon seldom talk about on the pulpit maybe that'll have to change because again first we act it out then we represent it in story and then we try to abstract it and turn it into the metaphorical math so we then can have mastery over it and apply it into different contexts i'm about out of time um let's see if i should finish up the paragraph yeah we'll finish up the paragraph we learned that behaving properly now in the present regulating our impulses considering the plight of others could bring rewards in the future in a time and place that did not yet exist we began to inhibit control and organize our immediate impulses so that we could stop interfering with other people and our future selves doing so was indistinguishable from organizing society the discovery of the causal relationship between our efforts today and the quality of tomorrow motivated the social contract the organization that enables today's work to be stored reliably mostly in the form of promises from others and and again okay so we have we understand this in a communal level and you think about the the amount of red ink that the united states is creating in its ever-growing debt and um you know those who were the tea party that was screaming about the deficit and political candidates who scream about the deficit when they're out of power when they get in power you know run up the tab and okay both parties do it and if you want to have a fight in the comment section about which does it most have at it i don't care but peterson again is saying okay at one level at one level we know this to be true our ancestors assumed at other levels they knew it to be true and they acted it out and modern people at this level say no no no that was superstitious we're only going to do this level and peterson here is saying how do you know that why why do you so quickly dismiss jesus words store up treasures in heaven where moth and rust don't consume and again i think a lot of us are really interested about peterson getting into the sermon on the mount as i've said before over my videos about the meek the sermon on the mount is hard um and and and you know maybe this is why peterson's in genesis because genesis is hard and the sermon on the mount is hard um because and and they're both genesis and the sermon on the mount are hard not because the text is difficult the text as such but because the frame is difficult for genesis and the sermon on the mount so there we go um i'm out of time right now i've got to render this video um i'll try and get it posted today maybe later today we'll see depending on my work situation but thanks for watching i know i haven't done a lot of commentary lately um i've kind of i kind of want to get through this commentary i'm never going to be able to do a commentary on all of peterson's stuff he simply makes too much stuff and when he starts in an exodus i'll probably jump into exodus who knows what will happen but i as you can see i'm trying to balance some of my c.s lewis stuff some of my commentary some of the practical things that come up with the meetups and all of that so i'm trying to balance all of this and have conversations within my own denomination do my rough draft for sunday i found youtube to be a really fun and productive tool for my work so um and and also my work in terms of my own self-growth and my trying to understand peterson because the truth is at the end of every one of these videos i know more than i knew at the beginning of the video and lately i haven't had a lot of time to to to um wade into the comment section or to answer i know i'm behind on my emails too um i haven't had a lot of time to catch up on some of those things and i'm i apologize for that but it's you know the you know why is it so helpful to sit and talk into this camera and into this big fancy microphone i don't know but i know that it is and i know that the the involvement of you who listen to me whether you send me an email or whether you put a comment or whether you show up at a meetup um you know i everyone should have this this is this is really cool and um it's it's been awesome so um it's sent thank you for watching thank you for commenting thank you for agreeing thank you for disagreeing thank you for half agreeing and disagreeing thanks for engaging um it's been really cool i'm not signing off i'm not going anywhere unless i die in a car crash on the way to ripping if so this video will go viral and uh then then i'll get to um uh anyway my mind goes a million different places i gotta render this and then i gotta go to work so thanks for watching