https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=c6S8JiBuUGo

 Often people ask me afterwards if even if we don't share it they say could I do you have a recording of it? So I can go back and say what we talked about. So yeah, absolutely. Yeah So tell me a little bit about yourself I reread I reread your email to me so I think I have a Good idea about what we're gonna talk about but anything's fine. So, okay. I actually made some notes so anyways You have your very own document All right, so, okay, my name is Alex I live in Napa, Idaho, which is pretty close to Boise Let's see here And turn you up a little bit I'm an engineer. I work on robotic systems, which is kind of exciting. Yeah Yeah, so anyways got a wife a couple kids I am a Lover of Pink Floyd Yeah, yeah Let's see here. I'm a competition shooter. So I really yeah. Yeah, so interesting. Yeah, I got second in our local state Ring this last year. So I was pretty happy about that. Wow, that's awesome. Yeah, so Anyways, yeah, and I'm a lover of hot sauce hot sauce Very cool very You know like spicy things so yeah, that's me So you grew up in a you grew up in a Christian home and your and a number of people in your Parent grandparent extended family. These are people who have Positions of leadership in the Christian community Yeah, let's say so, you know my grandfather he was a Church of Christ pastor for a long time and then He was actually the president of a Bible college Okay for quite a while and actually I went there for one year. Okay, and so yeah, so my uncle is a pastor of a fairly large church in the area and You know, so lots of Lots of On my wife's side. There's lots of pastors over there too, but that is kind of a different story altogether. So So you both grew up in in very Christian context? Absolutely. Yeah, so You know like I grew up in a Christian church when I was You know younger, you know are the churches that we went to It wasn't always my you know, the family church so to say because we you know, we went to We lived in Tennessee for quite a while and so, you know, we we had no family over there, you know So we had you know, we just kind of found our own church there and it was very you know, what do you say? education oriented So, you know very very factual You know theology, you know, so, you know, I even before I went to you know Bible college I still had a pretty good, you know biblical foundation, but I would say that it was a very Let's say filtered Type of foundation. Okay, so And I really appreciate how you've talked a lot about this is like, you know It all derived from you know, the the the authority of the bible Downward. Yeah, so, you know, it wasn't the bottom-up approach. Yep. Yep. Yep. And so, you know So yeah, you know and I still you know, I I still follow this is probably a bad idea for me My third grade Sunday school teacher on Facebook She's got three big things, you know, she is a huge ken ham fan so yeah, and but then also fluoride in the water and Okay, anti-vaxxing. So, you know Well, actually, you know there's in In California, there's a lot of people who are You know very new agey Who are also anti-vaxxers? So, yeah. Yeah, it's it's just kind of weird though and so, you know, I remember because I hadn't been back to visit in a long time that my dad and I About a year ago. Well a little over a year ago. We went over to We flew over just to see anybody and that's the first time i've been back for a long time And as it happened, uh, we all went to get dinner together And so here I am sitting with my dad and a couple other friends and my third grade Sunday school teacher and somehow Something comes up and I can't remember what it was exactly but something about you know starlight or something like that and She's always I think it's the only thing she talks about is you know The ken ham thing and I brought up some argument something about like, yeah, you know, well You know, the galaxies are quite a ways away you know and we're seeing the starlight from those and boom All of a sudden I am no longer a christian Yeah, yeah, you know so type stuff like that, you know, it's so um You know and other things happen in that church, you know, like for example You know, I was big into the music when I was just learning to play guitar I bought my guitar from the worship pastor uh when uh, I was very young, you know, I was 14 or something like that I bought it with my own money from him and uh Uh, but you know, uh, so he's somebody I looked up to and he actually came out as an atheist not too long ago But it was a really weird kind of route that he took it was kind of like a Well, what do you say? Uh, it seems like he was more running from god than running to something If that makes any sense at all, yeah, and it came out that there was some let me know that he had had some uh, um Exactly what the nature of the relationship was I don't know but something along the lines of an either an affair or an emotional affair with uh, you know some of the members of the church and stuff like that and so you know in his videos on youtube and I watched it and it was kind of heartbreaking because um, he's uh It came across as very spiteful very You know, um you know, uh, he says that he was not mad at anybody through in the church or anything like that, but it was His kind of demeanor kind of said otherwise and uh, he even rewrote um Well, it was an old hymn that he actually rewrote to be an atheist version but it was almost so bad it was It was cringe-worthy. I mean like, um, i'm trying to remember the uh, which him it was Um, it'll come to me But uh, yeah, so anyway, so that was you know, so that was kind of weird. Um You know, uh, we moved back and uh, you know, uh Um, you know eventually, um, I was always told that I was going to be an excellent pastor Uh, you know, and that was just kind of the uh, it was kind of a given that that's who I was going to be So I left uh, I did my first year at a bible college. Um, I won't say which one but um, Uh, very uh, let's say conservative Place, uh, you know, not quite bob jones, but you know something along that line, you know, okay, um very Uh anti-alcohol anti-tobacco, you know, those are the couple big things that they harped on, you know And i'm supposed to dance stuff like that. Yeah, you know, so here I am, you know a 18 year old kid who always kind of had a little bit of a rebellious streak trying to find out who I was at this place of People trying to be the best christians they could possibly be Which is always kind of interesting because I think that a different part of people comes out in an environment like that You know everybody's on fire a lot of for good and for bad, you know, yeah And so thereafter, uh, you know, they're they're they're eager to make their you know dent in the world, you know Yeah, you know and that's a but you know what? It's something I didn't really feel like I really fit in that well And I kind of you know found myself more You know aligning with the outcasts, you know, like the people that were kind of the rebels in the in the group, you know, and um and you know, it's not like that, um You know, well my grandfather was the president You know, and so that's kind of something you know where he was the person that everybody sucks up to Yeah, i'm not about it and I was kind of different because I could just walk around in his office and So You know the the 18 year old me was also there was a certain aspect of um You know like I didn't know how to navigate that sort of stuff And so I didn't know who I was and I had some serious doubts about what I believed um, but the thing is like, you know granted I only did one year but everything, you know, the the foundations and stuff they laid seemed very Surfacy, you know, it's just like um, the assumption was the bible is true everything from there you know Every for everything derives from that. Yeah. Yeah. Well, like what if it's not nope, you know, we don't talk about that Yeah, you know and that's something so, you know, uh, so I I did one year that had enough I joined the coast guard actually so I did the military thing and uh, that was even more awkward to believe it or not because uh, here was the christian boy who was trying to You know on one hand I wanted to leave it behind but on the second I was you know, trying to you know Maintain I understood that there's something valuable about it. Yep Oh Yeah There's a somebody's kid. Yeah, that was that was nathan. I'm going to talk to him later He probably just clicked the link. I'll let me just uh, let me just close the room. Come on nathan Nathan's a good guy Okay, here we go that way people don't have uh unexpected poppings in that's okay, that's all right So, you know like me we'll try to know who I was. Um You know, uh then uh, I got out came back to idaho, uh got uh married anyways, uh, and that was Well gosh, we've been married nine years now and now we have two kids wonderful and uh, that seemed like uh 10 minutes ago. I mean just I don't know what happened but here we are and so, you know, we've uh, we we've attended, uh, you know, not a nominational church since then and uh, You know and I kind of would say that uh, you know for the last You know, maybe eight years or something like that. I just kind of act the part, you know, I uh I come because it's important to my wife. Uh, and uh, you know, and honestly we have friends and stuff and so You know the community is uh, uh definitely beneficial. Um but you know there was um You know something deeper that was just kind of leading to You know some turmoil, you know, so, you know, we had problems in our marriage we had uh, Um you know, uh, there's a part of me that's always been my dad that Never seems to go away and I think i'm a lot more aware of it than he is but it's still there Yeah, and uh, you know, uh, the guy with the short fuse, you know kind of a temper things like that and plus, you know, um You know not uh, I don't look at things at the same level that a lot of people do, you know, like I never know how I never know how to explain that because it because it seems like You know the people I I would say that i'm a person that that kind of exists on the tails of the distribution in a lot of ways in a lot of different ways uh, you know I took uh jp's uh, uh know myself, uh, or what was it? Um His personality test Uh, I don't know if you but have you taken that? Yep. Yep. Yep. Uh, really insightful So it turns out that i'm actually fairly high in openness um I'm actually moderately low in conscientiousness, which actually really surprised me. I thought i'd be pretty high in conscientiousness, but i'm actually not um uh he is um extroversion i'm actually mild, uh kind of mid high Uh, I think I was like a 56 or something like that. So not high not low, but you know, um Agreeableness Uh, I think I was either two or three percent Well, well well there's your problem I disagree And you're in a tightly wound conservative community that that essentially demands conformity well that there's That'll explain a lot. You know, nothing you say that it's kind of obvious, isn't it? Well, you know the the I mean these big five they don't just what you know, they just don't pop out of the ground They're also developed in these changes. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah well, I mean The ethos of these communities obviously and I grew up in the christian form community and everyone has their own little things but you know, these are if you're high in openness and you're low in you know, agreeableness and you're you're I mean It's There's going to be friction Oh, yeah, so uh But there's one more Neuroticism Okay 798 Wow So it's gonna bother you too It's gonna bother me if you had low neuroticism. Well, then you know your high and openness and your low and agreeableness and your low Neurotism is like And honestly, you know like and when I was reading it it said, you know Like don't take this if you've been kind of, you know low or you know things like that and so You know, and I actually like when I first like paid for it I read that I actually I closed my laptop and I thought you know what i'm gonna wait a little while before I took it I did but I still probably It was probably still it wasn't the lowest day of a low week But it was still a kind of a low week. I would say on on a particularly low month. I would say so, you know Maybe there's room, you know, and i've taken other ones and uh, try to be you know You know not let what I know influence me and they came out a little bit more Optimistic, you know, yeah and so, you know um, you know, so you know, there's there's there's things that could contribute to that, but uh, you know, so uh As you might imagine, you know that you know Yeah, this this whole you know stack up, you know, what is pretty tough And uh, it brought me to a place that was not good uh, and uh it Went so far as to bring me to a place where one night I was standing in front of my wife with a gun to my head uh my own head and uh, you know and asking her is this what you want? and um I'm a guy of a pretty strong determination You know, I loaded the gun before I went in there. Wow You know, uh, and I told myself i'm pulling this trigger. Oh my and uh, you know, but I looked at her and I understood In that moment what it would do to her and just like I I couldn't you know think like, okay the the I just realized what I was about to do to her. Yeah, and i'm like, uh, Okay, I put the bullet in the floor instead um Not exactly the high point in my life. No, um, that was a year ago september. Okay um So anyways, uh, then the police came Which is yeah fired a firearm in your house or Yeah Yeah so anyways, um so yeah, I And there's a lot of duality to this because on one hand you know, that was Absolutely not acceptable. Like you know It was the product of a place I was in. Um, but that I should never have been in but I I Take full responsibility for that and I own that right. Yeah. Um that being said the state Was not helpful Um, you know, there was an immediate because they turned it into a domestic violence issue. That's right. That's right yeah, and so uh they um, because they kind of spun this narrative and uh, and even though my wife, you know, Said no, this is not what's going on You know and like I had to get a lawyer and we uh, watched the police tapes and it was just you know Reprehensible, you know because they would they were definitely leading her in her answers and this you know Because she was shaken up and sure And then she would say one thing and they would write something else down and they uh, and so they Um, so they they they came out with every single law that they possibly could You know every single uh, you know charge I guess I just was you know and so that was uh So anyways, it took months to even see my family again And you know here my wife was you know, like, okay. Well, you know, this is my husband We're willing to work this out. We want to work this out. This isn't over We we both knew that but we both had uh, in a way i'm kind of grateful for it because it Kind of got us to a point where we thought okay. Well, we need to start talking again. Yep. And so finally, uh, but it turned out My uh, the judge I was assigned to was involved in some scandal. So I never even saw him What I saw was eight different substitute judges And uh, you know and my wife, uh went into the prosecutor's office and said like hey, you know, like this is a misunderstanding He never threatened me that what you're charging him with is completely inappropriate Yeah, and they just got out their notepads and uh wrote down and said oh well, honey you uh, You're just a victim and you don't realize it. Yeah, and uh, you know and you just don't know what danger you're in and uh, And all this sort of stuff and she says well actually i'm a licensed social worker And actually I worked three years in a domestic violence shelter like I know what domestic violence is Yeah, so then their then their whole game flipped and all of a sudden, uh, She was in on it You know, and so anyways long story short the state was completely Uh completely unhelpful. Yeah, it's just about every way you can imagine but um, You know, and I understand their angle from it, but um It was amazing though that because when we finally reached a judge who actually listened He actually listened to my wife and she gave her a little speech and uh, he's like, okay like okay This is turning around right now. And uh, so I would say the outcome Was about as good as possibly could have been under the circumstances and then a little bit better than that Good, so, you know, so legally it's behind me now. I don't even have a record, you know, like we took a deal but um, You know, so that was a weird blip. Yeah So anyways the all that to say though, um I uh Was stuck in a cell that night, uh for and I was in medical isolation, which is not isolation. It's um Um, I was locked in a tiny room with a bunch of other people Uh, no clothes, you know, because you might hang yourself if you have clothes, right? Uh, so you're wearing a little cover basically. It's kind of a like a horse blanket almost it's Um concrete floor that was it lights that don't turn off 24 7 So, uh, you know, I did a lot of prayer that night or the next three and I was there for three days because that was a friday night And then I was there until uh, tuesday morning And I tell you Man, that was an eternity um, however, um So, you know, i'm not doing too good and I finally get my grandfather of all people bails me out so Yeah And um, I go in and uh Move into my uncle's loft. He's the pastor Okay, uh, because he has had a little loft over his garage and so it's kind of an office thing But hey, you can crash here for a while. Yep. I open up my laptop and uh, I need something to get my mind off of things because I just got out of jail. Yeah, and I see a video by jordan peterson Never heard of the guy That's interesting never even heard of the guy and in fact and I really wanted to make sure that that was actually I was actually True in that story. So, you know You can say a lot of things about google, but they uh, they record everything. Yeah Yeah, so my youtube history Um, I can see right I can see what I was watching right before the incident and the very next thing after and it was sure enough That night, uh, you know tuesday night. It was my first video. I watched of jordan peterson and uh so anyways, um Let's just say that I was fairly well primed To kind of listen to what he had to say. Yeah You know and uh, my my family was doing kind of a lot of finger waving which You know, it's kind of understandable. Yep, you know, so i'm not going to be too, you know hard on them for that. Yeah um So, uh Yeah, so, uh, I kept my job which was fantastic relief, um, yeah, it's um, And that's a little kind of complicated as well because I was a contractor at the time Uh, and so I was a contracting for this company Uh, and I was probably just about to get that offer Uh, but you know, obviously, you know with the things got kind of shaken up. So they did not make me that offer So i'm still there as a contractor a year and a half, you know later well from when I started so Yeah, you know, I mean that could you know, so You could you could make the argument that it cost me a job, but you know, i'm still there So and I think that it's going to happen. So we'll just but you know, it gave him some nervousness. Yeah But what's nice about work though is I sit in front of a computer and I mash keys all day and I work with shapes and numbers So You know you can listen to other things that that leaves a big part of my brain completely on Used and so I can listen to I'll listen to a lot of you and I listen to you know, obviously anytime peterson comes out with something and I listen to marina rubin and Anything, you know by the Weinstein brothers Weinstein wins. I never I can figure that out You know and so uh So that's great that's that's wonderful. And so Anyway, so it's got me, you know, i'm kind of back, you know now things are back to You know, I would say normal but uh since then, you know like this great, you know, jordan peterson awakening you know all this new information stuff that i'm finally able to articulate but never You know, I always understood it but never could quite describe it and he's describing these things He's like making sense and he has this place of you know where I come i'm seeing the traditions of my faith in great value I see the utility in it and funny thing is my Family kind of converges on that like, you know, like white blood cells, you know And they want to you know, they want to discard this because and my dad outright told me he said I mean, and this is pretty much verbatim. He said alex what we have told you is correct Don't question it. Just believe it Yeah and I don't know if uh If you're to try to think of something More convincing for me to walk away than that. Yeah You know, I don't even know what to be even recursed in you know that like if you were if you if you throw away what uh what What I see in jordan peterson's message when it comes to you know christianity You throw that stuff away I leave You know, that's like that's that that's the last thread so to speak. Yeah. Yeah and so uh And so it's kind of weird how they um, you know, like we went uh, my wife and I we went down to salt lake to see him and we got the vip tickets and uh, yeah took a couple days off and you know made a date night of it, you know, and uh, Uh saw rubin at the comedy club the night before who okay. Yeah, and uh, and jordan showed up at the comedy club Okay, got up there and then I'd be like here we are And like I can reach out and touch you, you know, yeah, like he was that close. Okay He spits when he talks a little bit sometimes sure sure I guess, you know So anyways, but uh phenomenal and so, you know, like we're all excited and you know phone at home and saying like and You know like hey, you know, like guess what? You know, this is what we gotta see and all that and um, by the way a leaked copy. Uh, you showed up on youtube So, um, I think it's one of his better speeches to be honest. Oh the salt lake speech. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, look for it's okay. Um, it's it's something i've never really heard him talk about before so it's really good Okay, i'll check it out. Yeah um, but um So yeah, so so there we are. Uh, so here we are now you know, and so, um, you know, i've kind of i'm kind of um Opening up to new lines of uh thought You know and and like and you know Decided that you know, i'm kind of enough is enough to kind of like staying in this flux You know state between like okay. Well, i'm going to behave as if it's yeah, you know that's the reality and Well, let me ask you this. What do you want? I mean the the number one question jesus asked people are was what do you want? What do I want? Well, gosh That depends on the day you ask I guess what do you want now right now, yeah Right now i'd say uh, you know Just kind of keep chugging along for a while. Okay. Yeah and and and and uh I understand that those were I Don't let those words be too concerning, you know, like, you know You know, uh worry about what I think Yeah You know, here's the thing about you know being you know depression and uh, you know, you know You know, here's the thing about you know being you know depression and uh, you know and then suicide and things like that is uh, You talk about it people treat you very much different. Yeah, they they start trying to fix you Yep, which is not what you need. No You know No, that's right. No, I just need to make sure well like yeah, you're right, but they well they think they can yeah I'll continue to they they want to help which is yeah Well, yeah, absolutely so uh, but uh You know, what do I want now? I guess I would like to know And what do you think what do you mean by knowing What does that feel like what does that look like so there so there's a You know, there's different types of truth, right Um, you know, there's the metaphorical truth and there's like the more the literal truth. Yeah, like I would like to know that literal truth Okay, so it's one thing, you know that um, you know consciousness is a little bit of a bugger because I can't out in a naturalistic framework. I can't I can't justify it. I can't find a way to make it seem um plausible Okay, like I can almost get to the point almost not quite that there's some you know, handsome bag of meat out there named Alex running around, you know Doing all his crazy antics like I can almost see that Being a reality, right? In on its own accord The fact that I am here right now observing it and pondering on it That's something different entirely And something your dog doesn't do I don't think so. No, I don't think so but That's why my dog is sitting over there. Yeah, my answer He's right on the corner like it like in his private parts, you know Just just waiting for the next thing but but you're self-aware and you're self-conscious and you're You've just talked about yourself in a way that your dog could never do Well, and maybe that's just mental capacity and uh, and i'm not so sure about the separation between us and animals you know, um I'm uh, I think that there's a very convincing argument about you know, that the fact that we're having a conversation such as this right now You know that our dog can't but maybe that's just mental capacity too you know like uh, you know in all probability, you know, like I was It seems like I was more uh, just Almost infinitely more probable to be an earthworm or something like that, you know and not who I am Too, you know, but you couldn't be anything else other than who you are And maybe not we often play this trick well if I was born in another time you wouldn't be you And and when you say just mental capacity, well, you have it and your dog doesn't I mean there's that's the funny thing about history is we always try to think about like these these alternate things But when it comes to who you are right now It's it's all of these experiences that you've shared with me And all of that has come to make you who you are right now. Sure And And and so then you know, you're right to pause at the question. What do I want because ironically? It's it's not an easy question And what's what's amazing is that when jesus, you know People come to jesus with all these different things and they come to jesus and jesus says well, what do you want? And and this is a guy standing in front of them that is known to have You know done things like, you know You know heal people and things and so You know heal people and things and so And and this man asks, you know, well, what do you want? and then suddenly it's like well What do I want and you know I could hear in some of your answer the the trip that you've been on through the Criminal justice system and through the social service system and all of that I mean part of what you want is okay I want to I want to have my job and I want to have my family and I want And I want this to go well I want to have a certain kind of relationship with my wife I want to have a certain kind of relationship with my kids and and part of you wants to have you know a a certain kind of relationship with your father and with your uncle and your grandfather and so And and in a sense some of what their religious tradition has said is Unless you adopt these things In this certain way or at least pretend like you do or tell us you do We are not going to have You know that our relationship with you is going to be limited Absolutely And and that then and you hear that and part of you thinks well, what does that mean about these things that you want me to embrace because When see here's the irony of your situation You can lie to them I could I have yes and plenty of people do and you know that You know, you told me the story of the worship pastor who you know Had lit out for the territory and did a video and read did a read it to him so Lots of you can you can lie and then have those relationships, but you know well enough that That relationship won't actually be Whole it won't actually be authentic is the word we're using now for it. It won't actually have integrity To say dad These are these are some of the things these are some of the questions that I have These are some these are some questions that the answers you're giving me. I don't find compelling or satisfying yet at the same time i'm your son and How can we You know How can we have this relationship now? It's noteworthy again that your grandfather took you in You know your your uncle There and that's and that's where this all gets weird because on on one hand their family and they stood up for you And they said you need you i'm not going to let you sleep on the street Come in here and you sleep here. I get my little talking to you about this stuff And I'm gonna lean on you about this stuff and it's gonna irritate you, but i'll still take you in Sure And and that's you know, so then suddenly it's like well How do I negotiate these relationships and how do I? Okay, so I want to know the truth and And and I want to know it Yeah, and and the The irony is that you know you talk about literal and metaphorical truth The any this is some of the stuff I get into some of my videos Any truth that I can know Is limited by by my capacity to know it By definition, I can't know a truth that I am incapable of knowing And so Okay. Yeah, sure and and so Okay So we've got my my my extended family and the church tradition that i'm from saying all of this is truth And and often, you know one of the things with some of those traditions I look at them So well everything has to come from the bible and I say, okay But do your geological models? Are those successful in finding petroleum to put in the car that you drive and don't think anything of it? Sure, sure and and then i'll ask people will say well we need to have a biblical We need to have a biblical cosmology and even on that point I start say well Let's start with genesis 1 and let's look at that firmament and then things get you know Things might get testy at that point But then i'll go to go to another point and say you demand that we have a biblical cosmology Do you also demand that we have a biblical anatomy? Because there's actually in the bible you know Bunches of sayings, you know paul says we believe with our heart Well, do you think the heart pumps blood? Sure, sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so there's lots of ways you can go with that conversation, but most of them don't really Don't really go too far because as peterson says People have their axioms you start poking people in their axioms You're tearing down their world and you love your family. You don't you know You're not you're not looking to tear apart their world. You love them Sure, and what I hear you saying to adri is hey, wait a second Can you give me a little bit of space? That that I can Have some room to think about this myself right Right doesn't seem like a lot to ask Uh, but they're but they're afraid And oh, yeah. Oh, yeah for some good reasons because they know the youth pastor story and lots of other stories like it Where in a sense, so here's the here's here's our system here we all are and boy it is really We believe in groups And so there's always the pressure in a community to keep everyone together and everybody on the same page Because that helps all of us stay on the same page and that helps all of us get through this crazy Painful world together and there is a tremendous amount of value to that Okay, so Okay. Let's so let's say that there's like this divide between my family and myself, right? uh, you know, obviously There but there's also a divide between me and Okay, let me give you let me give you an example um, you know, we uh, we went to a new bible study a few weeks ago and uh, we uh, and it wants to you know, uh try it out so we uh, we show up and uh We can immediately tell that okay. Well, this is not our um, You know, we're we're the only people there without an aarp membership, you know At uh, and uh, you know and we're Just talking and the the uh, we do our first study and I don't even remember what it's about but it's just so surfacey and so You know virtue signaling almost in the christian type of way and uh, Yep, and just how everything is a confirmation that what we believe is Yeah, correct. And and I see this a lot in people is so that uh, that um, They almost go overboard i jordan said one time, uh, you know overstatements about faith Oh, they wallpaper over with uh overstatements about belief. I think is what they we said once And I actually stopped wrote that down. I was like actually that makes a lot of sense, right? That um, So it's it's not that they were trying to convince me but almost as if they were trying to convince themselves Okay Now here's a subject. I don't know how to handle um You know like i'm a pretty smart guy Something i've always noticed about smart people is they typically never tell you they're smart, you know Uh, but I took an iq test and I came up pretty high. Yep. Yep You got a degree in engineering you I mean, okay. Yeah. Yeah, even at that point you can say You managed to get through college or the degree in engineering. You are at least above average. We'll we'll leave it there. Okay. Okay, so um you know, uh So when I discuss things, you know, like I I get uh You know tired of discussing like I love movies for example But I discuss movies with only certain people because you know, uh, oh did you see the latest avengers movie or whatever it was and all the explosions and all that was awesome and thinking like Yeah, you know Like I want to talk, you know You know subtext I want to talk, you know, like themes, you know, like uh, no country for old men stuff like that, you know, and You know it so But I find it, you know hard and so i'm trying to develop this I'm trying to figure out how to navigate this because you know, like we started going to a new bible study We're two weeks into it so far Um, and so far I like the group. Um The uh, they seem to be you know, pretty good people Um, but I get a little bit of it where I kind of want to you know, sit down and really Think about things and dive a little deeper But at the same time, you know, that's they're the same kind of shallow, you know surfacey Yeah, you know and and it's not that they're dumb people or anything like that, but they just know They're not diving into it at the same Level that I would prefer to yeah. Yeah and so What do you do in that case? Like what? You know, I mean you're obviously very well educated and like, you know and in the bible and philosophy and So your level of understanding is a level i'm, not even going to say my level of understanding is different but I want to have a I hate talking about this Because I just I I because I I hate even you're listening to myself talk about it But well, I want to have I want to have deep conversations and I don't think that people around me You know, uh often like I wish I could go to your meetups. That would be awesome I'd love to have you and the meetups are I don't a lot of number of people have asked Oh, could you put the meetups online and I won't because I want to honor the room and and yeah You put a camera in there Yeah, yeah other things they have to think about but Well, there's a number of things obviously number one There's going to be groups. Well, I I think it's helpful in a in a situation like that To have a bit of understanding of why they're doing what they're doing And and I don't mean this in a dismissive way. But again, you get into peterson and the question about axioms people Life is hard The world is scary And people need community And so a lot of what goes on in a bible study like that is there's there's just a lot of You know, i've been spending a lot of time. There's just a lot of the group Orienting themselves and looking at each other and saying Can we trust each other? Do we know each other? Will we are we are we a group? Can we? Can we find solace here? That's that's a big piece of it You know, i've been doing a lot of thinking lately about what what's the relationship between words and And ourselves and like somebody said writes me and says, you know, I want a church without creeds and i'm thinking I can't imagine a church without creeds that'd be like a person without words where what we're doing right now via Conversation is we're mapping the world and finding it making a common map so that you and I can explore territory together And learn from each other. That's what we're doing Now often especially when church groups get together A lot of what's happening in that group is we are rehearsing things together to to to all of us be on the same page because that is such a Important thing for human beings and then there's always little fringes of it around where okay So you get your chaos order thing. I need a little bit more chaos need a few little things so all of that is happening now the problem you have if you come into a group that That's not what you're at you've got some specific ideas for what you're learning well Now you say well, well, this is the church that one my wife needs or this is the church that yeah Yeah, it suits suits my children. Well, so I'm you know when I go to this place. I am just kind of resigning myself You know, like when you go to the dmv you think all right, I'm going to dmv I'm going to be here at the dmv for a while. I only you can't take a book to church. So Besides the bible or I do see people sometimes they're checking their fantasy football scores. Well, my bible's on my phone Yeah, but so is your fantasy football app But but you know So part of it is you go with the resignation that okay my my my mission here is not primarily going to be my needs I'm going here for the family And then maybe sometimes i'm going to figure out like when I was a little kid, I'd go to church Go to church all the time. I'm a pastor so Go to church all the time. I'm a pastor's kid, you know, I count the ceiling tiles I look at the stuff on the wall. I mean I didn't just buy anything to keep my minds, you know going Yeah, exactly. Yeah, absolutely. So one one part of it is you're just being an adult. You're just doing that But then there's always and and this is what i've seen in almost any church no matter how conservative how buttoned down There's going to be a few outliers And in a sense part of your job is to figure out Who are the outliers who are in this group and they're kind of doing exactly like i'm doing because I bet you there's at least One or two of them there Right know it because they've learned to mask because they're We're doing the conformity thing right? We're not looking to cause trouble but then Ask a little question And then well, maybe you didn't ask it right you freaked the group out. Okay, and then you learned that okay that question Now you ask a little smaller question And then you you just kind of try to figure out where the group is at and You know churches are people are so funny because on one hand The most doctrinalistic churches i've ever known Almost always value loyalty above doctrinal purity Sure If you go to that church again and again and again At almost every church I know has their beloved heretics within it And and they'll come in there and they'll say yeah He doesn't you know, he's got all kinds of wacky views and we might not let him be on the church board because he's got some Wacky views, but he's still one of us Sure, and then you become the village heretic. So, you know, there's a lot of ways There's a lot of but but that's really important because here's the thing If you make your way into a church and you become the village heretic At some point some teenage kid Is going to get in that church and they're going to be exactly who you were and they're going to be looking around and they're going to be You know fuming and somebody in that church is going to say you know what this kid is this kid is going There's trouble here But we have our village heretic. Why don't you go talk to him because he's okay And I see this happen in church All the time and you know It might be that you and your wife have to find a different church or I mean there's always the I think we're pretty happy with where we're at. But yeah the so something i've been i've been playing with a little bit is like I was listening to peterson and he was you know, like talking about you know, how we act out archetypal themes in our lives, you know And uh, you know, and we don't know where they're coming from but there's a basis to them. Yeah, there's a Perhaps I don't know an evolutionary Reason for them for you know, but uh, either way that there's this story that's ingrained in all of us Um, and so I realized that even though like when people say something It might seem surfacey, but the game i've been game is probably a uh, Unsharable word, but um, i'll say it anyways the game that I play is um That okay. Well actually what they they really are saying something of deep profound meaning You know, but it's easy to dismiss it because okay. Well, it's cliche um, however Cliche is kind of one of those things where You know, they're derived on truth So anyways, that's the that's the You know game for lack of a better word that i'm playing right now and that's actually I'm finding it fun and honestly for me personally, it's more about you know, just Meeting other people friends, you know and people that you can you know, hang out with them on the weekend and things like that That's right. That's right. And so, you know, so I guess, you know, um You know back to the belief thing What is it exactly if I say That okay, you know if I were to place a bet to whether uh On the existence of a metaphysical god You know and peterson avoids this issue, right? And I know you've talked about that recently And I find it frustrating. Yep But uh, let's say that I had to place the bet I would probably say not Okay, however, he also says and now And I'd also don't want to play the game where okay my My faith is different than jordan peterson's and I we talk a lot about him, but I want to make it very clear that um You know that he is not um But if he makes up his mind tomorrow, my mind will not be necessarily be made up Absolutely, you've got you've got some boundaries. You've got identity. Yep. Yeah, and so um, but what I would say is that um, If I were to place my bet I would say no however I am willing to live my life as if god exists not because of fire insurance or not because of Um You know like maybe conformity into you know, not wanting to disrupt but I do see the value in it and that and that's one thing That I very much appreciate of him is laying out that value Is that the same thing or is that I mean, where does that get me as a christian? You know for is that is that does that count as salvation? So this is this is where some of the this is where some of the little boundary markers within christianity start to Because even when you if someone's in one of my bible studies and they throw out this word salvation Well depends on the context often But if if the group is honest enough and if they know me enough almost always tag them on that word salvation say Oh, what do you mean by that? Because what what what's happened? It's become this code word for After after you die exactly go to the good place and not the bad place. Okay, exactly so and and You might not even believe that entire narrative and one of the things that I one of the things that I I noted When I was so I was you know, I grew up in the church. I wasn't a rebellious kid I went to christian college, but by the time I got to christian college it was like I kind of want to I kind of want to make up i'm an american. I I want to imagine myself to be you know I'm the master of my own ship So i'm going to decide if this christianity thing is true or not So then I kind of started reading the bible with new eyes And I started reading the new testament and I thought you know all of this mapping I saw over here in terms of all the church Language that I see used I don't find that in the bible. I find elements of it But yeah, absolutely when I look at the stuff that's in the gospels Yeah, that doesn't really map very easily on it. And so and that kind of drove me to saying yep Well, maybe I should maybe I should like pay closer attention to this and try to figure out What's going on here with the kinds of stuff? Jesus is saying? so and and I and I don't like asking that question because it And I can't put words to it, but there's something fundamentally wrong with the question If that makes any sense at all with the question About salvation. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. Yeah So well, I see and and then why what I began to realize And then I started paying attention to the word saved and I found boy the bible uses that for a lot of different things And in many ways much more colloquially similar to what I use it for You know if if there's a near miss and i'm crossing the street or someone pulls me back and say wow, you saved me Okay, so I understand what that word means but but very quickly the question I began to ask when I was reading the bible Is saved from what? so so what exactly is the peril Separation from god, maybe Well, yeah, so then well then then you begin to discover that there's a lot of different ways to formulate this peril and So anyway, I don't want to run through one through that whole thing. Sure, but So, okay. So then what is a christian? Oh boy You know, you're you're in a muslim country and and you say well, you're an american So, of course, you're a christian and jordan peterson says to sam harris. Well, you know, you're a christian And and peterson I think he says we have this thin layer of belief. That's that's above us right and and you know and actually when When you listen to what church what preachers say and even the most conservative churches They will be out there telling their people. Well, you don't act like christians. Well, what do they mean by that? Usually the preacher saying well, here's what it means to be a christian and you're falling short So and then they work through that in different ways Well often it means that you know, uh, do you follow the family practice? Yes. Yes Yes, because this is this right here is what we this right here is how we define real christians to be And but that is obviously nested within a socio historical framework so so You know, so then I then it comes to me well well who gets saved and then you start reading the gospels on that question and you and you find You know a centurion who is Who has a sick slave who's a jewish slave and this is a roman centurion so You know jesus doesn't stop and say hey you deserve to lose your slave You you lousy roman subjugating the people of god jesus doesn't say that jesus, you know the the centurion says can you come to my house and save my slave and jesus is Or my slave is sick and jesus is like, okay, i'll come to your house and this insurance says no You just stay there. I understand how this how how servants and masters work Just say the world and he wouldn't be okay and jesus says i've not found such faith in israel and you think Okay, so here's a guy Who is a pagan? You know, he's a centurion He's not part of the people of god and jesus says he hasn't found such faith in all of israel Well, what does jesus mean about that guy? And then you have matthew 25 and the sheep and the goats which some groups like to point to well What about those people and then the lord lord passages and then the wedding banquet passage and you begin to see that Oh my goodness this this saved business is not quite so simple as Either side likes to say it is So where does that leave me? Well, then you start looking at some of the other things that jesus says and you ask yourself Well, well, can I believe this guy? Do I care even what this jesus guy thinks and and you just you start working through the stuff And you know and when I listen to you, I think You're working through the stuff mean you went into the underworld in that cell Oh, yeah You get out and yeah, you found jordan peterson. It's like oh and that's bang Well, and I think that other family worries that's okay. Well jp's the new savior, which is obviously ridiculous But yeah, yeah, and you're not going there But but right away you find someone who's helpful and then you know, you'll probably find a series of people who are helpful But you know, you're here's here's another night. Here's another nice little fact often You know in your 18 and you're 18 in your early 20s you're getting an education and your hormones are going crazy And you're thinking about who you're going to marry You know, you're not going to marry blah blah blah You're going to get a job in your 20s. You kind of settle down you get a job. You have a couple kids Get your 30s. Well, what do you do in your 30s? Well now suddenly you've got a few things in order and you begin to say hmm What do I really think? Mm-hmm. Where should my life really go? And so in many ways in my opinion you're doing exactly what you should be doing Now now you're making your family nervous But okay, they'll be a little nervous. They'll be all right They've shown themselves and and the further you get you'll probably and you probably already do you say, you know My grandfather my uncle my father. I really esteem them for their you know, when I was in trouble They didn't say oh you heath a stupid heathen pagan, you know go live on the street. No, they stepped up They did boy. I'll tell you when you look at I don't know how fundamentalist Christians or how heretical people who step like that They got something going for them. It's true and you and you say, you know, okay, whatever I think of all of your little boxes It's done something good for you and it's made this community a community that people can rely on. That's a good thing Okay, so there's that but you're doing exactly what you need to do because quite honestly I would rather have people in my church who are honestly Dealing and asking honest questions Than a whole bunch of people who are just Conforming now conformists are really nice in some ways because Are they tithing and they're saying yes and they say the correct answer to all the right questions So i'm not going to even disparage that But you're doing exactly what you need to be doing And I I you know and yeah your family and their tradition they're gonna have to work with it and But that's okay and I think actually in the long run Like you said you might become the village heretic. You might become the family heretic, but All these other values people will see and when someone else in your family winds up in jail They're gonna look at you and say you had some rough stuff in your life and you worked that through right you talk to him So You know and and I think you know, yeah, you're I mean you've got a degree in engineering um, i've had a number of engineers in my church engineers tend to Approach the world through a particular vein because they're engineers, but you're robotics engineers. So that's even more You know, you've got some other stuff Going on but I think yeah, you're gonna you're gonna have to read books and watch videos and think And so what what do you recommend? Well, I don't find interest to be a bad navigator because at least that I you know, I I obviously recommend c.s. Lewis that i've used a lot of because Lewis wrestled with a lot of these questions in the mid 20th century when when modernity kind of reached its height in the war, but there's a A book I really enjoyed recently was a book on Tolkien and Lewis and let me see if I can pull it up Let me see if I can pull it up Too many computers open Um, I I also just finished and in the video I just put out today and I read um, Andrew clavin's Man, oh, yeah I was oh lovely book. Lovely book. Oh, yeah, and you know wrestling and he he had to deal with his jewishness So, you know he and he converted into another tribe, which is even tougher Oh, yeah, hobbit a wardrobe and a great war how jr tolkien and c.s. Lewis recovered faith Okay, fellowship and heroism in the cataclysm of 14 to 18. So I I really enjoyed that book, too But okay, I think you know find You know, so so here's the crazy thing. So, you know you get you you come home you turn on there's jordan peterson Well, you know truth was there were probably eight videos on that screen Why did you zoom into jordan peterson? Your whole mind is smarter than the little conscious part of you Sure and so interest actually isn't the bad thing to pursue Because what interest kind of says is that the unconscious parts of your mind are Telling your eyes where to look Because that's what needs feeding It's not god, but it's it's an indication of where you're actually where you actually might be productive in your exploration Or sometimes it's god Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha sometimes it's the holy spirit baby, you know, I I want it to be true I do and and I think You know and even belief And that's what frustrates me about well, you should believe this. Well, you know what belief isn't Subject to my will Entirely not it's not no And and and for you to be honest and for them to in a sense You know you lose status for being honest. Well, yeah, you do sometimes but yeah You'd rather you'd rather be honest and right And you're right for that Well, I don't know if I even have the vocabulary right now to you to describe that because if you ask me if do I believe I would say yes But if you ask me if I were to make a bet On which it was I would say no Oh, that's interesting So what that um There's something there that I'm still trying to untangle. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yeah. Yep No, I I think you're I think you're I think you're doing the right thing. You're you're you're working out your stuff And and and I think to a certain degree We all have to do it but again if you know if you if Some for some people it's more complex than for others. It just it just is Well, and it also you know, like and I see I see this in me as an engineer as well I always start at the bottom when I design something You know and uh, you know, somebody say oh I got this this and this and you can use this and finish it out Nope. No, I want to start from scratch every time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so there's some temperament And and there's some some fun some of what being an engineer has made you Oh, absolutely right Well, I don't know if it being an engineer maybe that I just or maybe that made you an engineer Exactly. I think that I think that uh You know just like a mop to the flame. I just uh, yeah I uh, it just drew me, you know, like those little blue lights, you know, and I just go and yeah eventually You know, yeah when I reach the light who knows what will happen. Yeah But and and it's you know Part of what's difficult is, you know, a lot of people right say oh, I wish I lived in sacramento So I could go to you. Well, maybe you wouldn't maybe you wouldn't well You got to work that stuff out Yeah, but you got to work that stuff out. And so you find a church that I mean people are complicated and you've got you've got a wife you got kids you get a job You've got family relationships. And so you tend to find a place that says, okay this it's not perfect because there is no perfect church But this is workable for us now Yeah, and there'll be upsides and downsides but part of what working it means is that i'm going to find out how I can achieve some of my goals of growing and learning and You know when I went to I remember going to seminary after college and I knew a lot of seminary students They were griping about the seminary. It wasn't a spiritual place It wasn't doing this kind of thing and I I went to seminary. I said look this place is what it is I'll get from it what it has to offer And i'll for for whatever other things I need I'll go other places to find those things and I actually was quite satisfied with my seminary career because my expectations didn't surpass their capacities So So you're working through I hope this has been helpful It is I am actually really excited to have had the chance to talk to you this is uh, Really great I was very nervous when I guys I gotta go uh here here though Here's the way I saw it is like the tickets were not cheap, you know But they sold out just like that. I mean they were gone And uh, the only ones left were the meet and greet and they're like well I guess for paying for it So the way I see it is we paid like something like 1781 per second for like a 30 second therapy session Yeah Yeah, I did the meet and greet too and meet and greet is a pretty um Is not really the most accurate description of the little vip moment you get with jordan peterson and 160 Other folks who show up that night. I uh, what I did is I wrote him a letter Uh, I wrote him a letter and handed it to him. Okay. I hope you read it. Yeah Um, you know just kind of describing kind of you know, like what brought me to that moment and Thanking him, you know, yeah, but uh, so I don't know if he read it or not. I hope he did It's it's got to be I mean, I just have a tiny little taste of what he's had Yeah, it's got to be Crazy for him because you just I can't imagine I I can't imagine either because even just the the volume of emails and stuff I get i'm behind on my emails right now Oh, yeah, it's and and and you know, I don't have a sometimes we were like What you do these things would get a bigger channel a lot of times I think I don't know if I want a bigger channel Well, and the thing is the thing about him is I don't think he wanted it Yeah, no, it it found him. It found him. I think that uh, I think that uh, you know, he says he doesn't know what to make of it. I I believe him. Yeah, like I think that uh, I I think that uh, he's trying to figure out what to do. Yeah I hope he doesn't burn himself out. That's my big fear. Yeah, it's it's It's gonna be interesting to see it's a fast I mean just it's just a fascinating thing to watch see where on earth is this going? I mean, it's the truman show. It really is. I don't know I mean, uh, there's something that came out today Like he was griping on twitter about something. I didn't get a chance to look into it because that's at work. But um, the you know the hit pieces and the And that's kind of like the way You know that something's going right is when You know you see the opposition to it You know, like for example like political movements and stuff like that or political figures for that matter It seems like the candidate that you like the most is the one that they attack the most. Yeah Anything consequential will attract adverse will attract it. Absolutely. Absolutely. Yep, and uh, but uh, yeah Well, I think i'm a little over on time. So well, i'll tell you what i'm gonna send this to you because I very much want you to have a chance to Review it before I would post this because there's a lot of personal stuff on that and so You know, it's important that you consider it and then you decide and okay and it's um, you know It's completely up to you. But it's you know, like for me The delight of having a small channel is this that we can have this conversation because your story Yeah, your story enriches my life Okay, and I learned from it and I grow through it and so I would I actually think and hope that That will also be true of your family with your story And I I really do think it will be true because just listening if they're the kind of if they're the kind of folks that'll say You know, here's you can stay here They're there. It sounds like they're good people. Well, that's the that's the You know, do we put it on the internet or not? That's one thing. Do I send a link to my family? That's a whole other I Can understand that well I will send it to you and you can you can do with it as you will and if you'd like me to share it I'd be happy to share it too. Okay. All right. Well, I appreciate that. Well, thank you alex And thank you pleasure to meet you you too. Bye. Bye. Goodbye