https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8T0YQ0Jm6y0

 Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot, podcast is out. Why wait? This is Paul, no PowerPoint. One night's sleep, let's jump in. So I received word about the podcast from a friend who was on the channel via Twitter. It was late. I wasn't going to go to bed until I listened to it. That meant I stayed up late. That's just the way it goes. I listened to it, had a variety of things. I tweeted a few things as it went, but then after listening to it the first time, I wrote this Twitter thread, which I'll read and maybe that will give me some orientation. It's always difficult when I work without a PowerPoint. Now for those of you who are going to leave the comment that what you did was ramble and interject, yes, that is exactly what I'm going to do. I'm going to ramble and interject. And if that's not your cup of tea, you can leave the video right now because that's exactly what's coming. That's most of my channel. So there it is. These are all first drafts and rough drafts on this channel for the most part. That's how I use this channel. So if you come here for the Peterson stuff, there's lots and lots and lots of little sites with clips and there's the work itself. Look at that. It's all there. What I do on this channel is I basically give you my thoughts as I go through it. That's what this, that's what at least my monologues are about or my commentaries are about. So here we go. After the first run listening to it, this is the Twitter thread that I wrote. I'll likely do an initial take on Jordan Peterson and Jonathan Peugeot conversation tomorrow. Here it is. I had three or four videos in mind this evening wondering which one of them would emerge tomorrow. Then the conversation surfaced on Peterson's podcast. The internal debate was over. Shot right up to the top of the hierarchy. The big impression I have is the repeated haunting question of Peterson. Peterson asks, why hasn't the church manifest this vision of theosis sufficiently that? And I want to pause right there because it's just at that moment. We understand the ache. We understand the shortcoming and Peterson gets at this a number of different times and ways in the conversation, but you can't finish the sentence. No one can finish the sentence. We all want to finish the sentence. The end of the sentence pulls us towards us. In fact, at one point in Jordan's talks with Sam Harris, gosh, how many times have I listened to those things, especially the first one. The future is like, and this is Harris's words and it's his words of sort of unbelief. The future is like a tractor beam. It pulls us in. That's exactly the motion that's happening when Peterson in many different ways reiterates this. He both expresses the terror of it that if this is actually true, it's terrifying. That gets expressed in Ion. Of course, the uber boyos did a very interesting series on Ion. This is the heart of where Peterson is at. Now a haunting question with Peterson is for a lot of people who are sort of keeping their eyes on the tribal markers, is he moving or isn't he? And I would say right off the bat, don't listen to his words, watch his actions. And you say, well, I can't watch his actions because I'm not watching him. And that's exactly right. And that's the way it is with almost everyone. And this is something you learn very quickly as a pastor. Words are important. Actions speak louder than words. If you want to know what someone truly believes, Jordan Peterson says, watch their actions. And this entire conversation is haunted by this question of will he act? Can he act? But it's also haunted by the fact that Jordan is in many ways continues to be disabled because of the benzo withdrawal and all of the medical stuff that has gone through there. So yeah, it's one heck of a story. So the big impression I have is a repeated haunting question of Peterson asks about why hasn't the church manifest this vision of theosis sufficiently that, or even to turn it from the church, which is out there, second person to him, to first person, what if I go further in this? Where does this lead me? And that's where we're sort of with Tolkien and the Hobbits. If Gandalf comes knocking and dwarves fill your house, and that's pretty much what's already happened to Jordan's life. The dwarves via YouTube have filled his living room and both given him gold, but also are inviting him out of the door. You don't know where it'll take you. And that's Tolkien. I think Jonathan Pigeot is right that some version of theosis is at the heart of Christian eschatology. And in my tweet, I quote Colossians 1, 15 and following, the son is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation, for in him all things were created, things in heaven and on earth visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities, all things have been created through him and for him. He is before all things and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church, he is the beginning and is the beginning and the firstborn among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy. For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood shed on the cross. Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior, notice behavior right there, but now he has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you wholly in his sight without blemish and free from accusation. If you continue in your faith, established and firm, and do not move from the hope held out in the gospel. This is the gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven and of which I, Paul, have become a servant. Now later, read the whole book, it's the book of Colossians, and then keep reading. It's all in there, but we don't have eyes to see. We struggle to understand. So Peugeot talks about theosis and I think Peugeot is right that at the heart of Christian eschatology, this is where it goes. Now right away, other traditions, including my own, will pause and say, and that is the theologian's life, to stop and say, well, what exactly do you mean by theosis? What exactly do you mean by God? You'll find it in Paul being in Christ. This is why certain forms of Christianity that reduce it to going to heaven, that's there, but it's very low definition because then you have to ask, well, what is heaven? It goes on and on and on and on from there. I think Peugeot is right that all true Christianity winds up in some version of theosis. It's union with Christ, Lou Smedes, Christian Reformed Church. It's being in Christ, Paul of Tarsus. It's eternal life, the Joannine part of the New Testament. It's the kingdom of God or the kingdom of heaven, synoptic gospels. It's through and through and through and through and there's lots of different ways to say it, but it's union with God through Christ. That's Christianity. Jordan's haunting question is the question I hear asked in a hundred different forms and ways inside and outside the church. It is implicit in every cry of despair and longing for shalom. We ache to be in Christ, as Paul said. John says it in its own way. Another great verse to read this in is Romans 8, where Paul sort of sets up the dichotomies of this and talks about the groaning and the spirit groans on our behalf. This is basic Christianity, but the folk versions tend to prevail, which is sort of natural. I think Peugeot is right when he talks about hierarchies in this sense. This stuff gets so complicated so fast. Peugeot is also right in that outside the body of the church, the church as a larger body, as a Voltron, allows the different members of the body. This is what the apostle Paul says in 1 Corinthians, allows the different members of the body to participate in the body. I thought Jonathan Peugeot did quite well in this conversation. Jonathan Peugeot takes a while for a lot of us who are deeply formed by secularity and the materialist, instrumentalist ways of thinking and inhabiting this world. I think you can map all of that onto Paul and Epithumia, the over-desires. This is part of what makes all of these conversations difficult is that anyone who listens to me has to know something enough to have this stuff map onto it. The truly amazing speakers, Christ at the center of it himself, talk in a way that simultaneously disrupts and invites deeper into. That's very clearly what Jordan has done. I think Peugeot is right that Jordan stands on two continents. Other repeated strands of the conversation, worship and attention, I think Peugeot is right. I think that's part of the conversation that gets into the cognitive science that gets into the verveci stuff. I think about Marc LeFevre who I had a conversation with how he's been pursuing the verveci stuff. Marc makes this point again and again and again to people on the Discord server. I hear him make it and he's right that this is how we work. Peterson a little bit later in the conversation talks about, yeah, if you merely dismiss it imaginative, you live, and he says, via Jung, you live in your imagination. That's all you have. That's who you are. To think that you are this skin-enveloped sack of fluids and that is your most basic self is not a human being because in the Civil War, I got to take your arm or it's going to gangrene. Take the arm, doc. You'll keep the arm for what? This is why decapitation is such a brutal thing for us because we do live in our heads metaphorically. Other strands, worship, attention, and trust, not simply cognitive ascent, but living into, up to, and Jordan actually had a really good way of articulating that that I haven't yet integrated yet and can't pull up, but as I go through the video, I will. Again, a disclaimer, I do these videos because I'm thinking out loud. If you want settled conclusions, you'll have to get me in a different format. This is the format for this for me. If you don't like it, unsubscribe. Every time the algorithm pops my face up on your feed, tell Google, no, thank you. That's fine with me. Other repeated strands of the conversation, worship, attention, and trust, not simply cognitive ascent, but living into, up on, of course, produce the ache. How long, oh Lord, how long? The most poignant moment for me was Jordan talking about his pain blocking his capacity for joy. And that's a little bit earlier than later when Jonathan says, yeah, but you're not in a sense, but this is so. Pentecostals will talk about a covering. Peugeot here is talking about a covering. And a sense if you can sort of see through the language of the different traditions, you can notice how they're actually holding together and running parallel to each other. I can deeply resonate with Jordan's disappointment and frustration with the church. And in fact, the video I was likely going to make today, which will probably seep out in all kinds of ways and what I say today, the video I was likely going to make was just experiencing the fact that I've got a deep frustration and disappointment with the vessel. It's as some Christian writers talk about the problem of wineskins with the vessel of the church in terms of how it facilitates the movement of Christ through the world. That's really the church's job to facilitate the movement of Christ through the world to be his witness. Now the church does this badly and has always done it badly. Now a little bit later, Esther had a comment. On one hand, I get Peterson's frustration. On the other hand, it's hard not to be hard on him, but he should realize that much of the church's best and noblest work is going to be unsung and unnoticed from a bird's eye outside perspective. And that's exactly right. And this is why I say what I say a little bit later, that despite my deep frustration with the church, it's sort of a John Six moment, where else am I going to go? Who else has the words of life? And when I say church, I don't just mean the Christian Reformed Church or the Roman Catholic Church or the Orthodox Church or the Protestant Churches. I mean that Christ does work through his church, but he also works through history. Christ plays in 10,000 places. So I can deeply resonate with Jordan's disappointment and frustration with the church, but as Esther you haven't seen much of it, Jordan. And what you see via the media, well, if you look at how you're treated in the media, think of how the church is treated. The media is not some unbiased canal through which the world comes to us. It can't be by virtue of the Peugeotian attention principle. And so the only way to see the church is to be in the church, but then you have the problem of the only way to see the church is to be in a church. And actually, Lewis talks about this because you have to then learn to see the whole church through a church, no matter how poor that church is at doing what Christ calls it to do. And so there's always this process of purification, which is of course, the Protestant Reformation is about. It's what reform is about. And again, it's Tom Holland's noticing this continual movement of reformation within the history of the church. Christ initiates that and launches it. You can find it in the Hebrew prophets. Gerard, Rene Gerard notices this too, this continual capacity to self-critique without being destroyed. In some ways, it's the burning bush. It's the consuming fire. It's the altar outside the tabernacle to which Aaron's sons attempt to bring alien fire and they are destroyed for it. It's that process of continual renewal and perfection that, and this is where Jordan goes when he's talking about the better. We sort of always look for the better. And that's right. This is embodied in Christianity and this perpetual renewal. This might be strange because I'm of course deeply in, okay, I can deeply resonate with Jordan's disappointment and frustration with the church. That might seem strange because I am of course deeply inside of it, but I've got a thousand stories of its shortcomings to the few that he has, yet I can't, won't give her up. I won't give up the bride of Christ. I'm part of her and being part of her is how I'm united with Christ. It sounds odd for a Protestant to say, but that was really the beating heart of the Protestant Reformation. It's this discouragement that, and it's in this way that Jordan is deeply Protestant because he looks at the church and says, this? And Christ says, she's my bride. She's a mess. Read the book of Ezekiel. It's always been this way. And that's why Peugeot's emphasis on, see again, if I use theosis, I trigger people in other traditions, but it's the path towards Christ. It's moving into Christ. It's becoming like Christ. The different traditions say it in different ways. Perhaps it's analogous to the young person who avoids marriage because they watch the failure of their parents' marriage. Avoiding marriage doesn't actually solve much. It just means you miss out on the potential a covenant union affords. And that's the appeal I hear from Jonathan throughout. I'm sure I'll have more to say tomorrow. Here I am after I sleep on it and listen to it again. I'm about two thirds of the way through my second listening. I'll continue to pray for both Jordan and Jonathan because I think the work they are doing is vital for the next stages of Western Christianity, far more than most see. And if I didn't believe that, I wouldn't be doing this channel. I wouldn't have, I mean, I got, remember early on, lots of different criticisms and critiques. Why are you spending so much time on Jordan Peters? Why don't you, why don't you, why don't you talk about Jesus? I say, well, look at my day job. I talk about Jesus all day long. The church has not known how to connect Jesus to the world very well. That's a deeply complex dynamic. I think what I'm going to do now is just end this recording and then start the commentary. And maybe I'll put this at the beginning of the commentary video. So here's a little short introduction for those of you who want a short video. And one person tweeted me, my brother says he's really hoping for a two plus hour one. And I don't know how much time I have today to do that. You know, part of it is the more successful I get, the more the success, the more I have to manage the success. And Jesus had that all the time. And you read it in the gospels. It's again and again, Jesus goes away to a lonely place to pray. And you might think, well, what is he doing? Is he getting information? No, he's, he's, he's being in the father so that those who are in him can also be in the thought, the father, again, read the gospel of John, the gospel of John says that again and again and again and again. So I'm going to, I'm going to cut this off here. I'm going to post it and I'm going to keep going.