https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2UA_kojms44

 All right, I think we are live. I'm on hotel Wi-Fi. I don't really know how well this is going to work, but I was going to make a video to talk about Arc Day 2. Some of you might have noticed that I accidentally posted the member video onto the main channel. So some of you got a little peek at what goes on in the membership section, all the secret sauce. But then I put it back to the members. So sorry, membership has its privileges. I think we're streaming. No viewers yet. That's quite interesting. Usually some jump on it. Well, this is completely hey, there's Taiyo. Well, Taiyo is in the same time zone I am. I will see Taiyo soon enough, I'm sure. Big thanks to Taiyo for working on a lot of the arrangements that we have going. Have one more day of the Arc. I was going to say festival. It's the German thing of the Arc conference. And as in the membership section in the membership video, I there's McMose. In the membership section, I usually talk about a bunch of the little things, how I what I'm doing. I just released a satire song. Oh boy, I haven't seen that yet. They're releasing a ton of stuff. So they actually if I weren't at the festival, I would be quite happy to that they are releasing the talks quickly. And you can watch a lot of the talks and you can. Taiyo just sent me a DM. What did his DM say? Oh, yeah. Let's see. Make sure I got the right number. Yep, there you go, Taiyo. Now you know where I'm at. So you can find me. You can come on up. OK, so. I have, in fact, said Primm Grizz to a number of people, and I have mentioned paintball to Jesus, to Rafe Kelly. Rafe Kelly, of course, has his own embodiment practices going. And I was thinking I spent. I spent. So I spent most of yesterday with Nathan Jacobs. I don't know if we'll get our video in. I spent most of today with Rafe Kelly and had a great day with Rafe and mentioned paintball for Jesus embodiment and had a lot of had a lot of things on my mind with respect to. With respect to the conference and how it's structured, especially after doing a bunch of other conferences recently and thinking about estuary and thinking about what they're. Yeah, there's a lot of talk. I haven't seen anything yet. I'll be I'll be staying. I'll be staying with the Brits. I'll try to blend in, although. Although I was given some grief by a certain certain Russian Israeli about my hat. He said I should I should get a beret and wear a beret. Get a beret when I come to Europe instead of this very American looking baseball hat, which is actually a Canadian hat that I got when I was up in the Canadian Rockies Moraine Lake. Andrew with the bangs recognized the lake, so I didn't eat fish and chips. I ate pizza. I walked across the street and I got a pizza. I ate it. I was delicious and I ate the whole thing. I haven't eaten much in the UK since I've been here. So that's that. OK, day two, day two. Lot of talking, a lot of talking, a lot of speeches. So day two, here's the program. That's program with an E on the end. The English way to say things. So. There were sector dinners tonight. And when I finally when I finally responded to that whole thing that had gotten, it was a little bit late. And there's the social sector, the economic sector and the political sector. And I didn't feel like I really wanted to do the economic sector or the political sector. I would have only been interested in the social sector. So I didn't. I didn't get to go to that dinner, which is just fine, because truth be told, I don't stay too long because I'm going to get a good night's sleep tonight. And I've been at this for a week now since I got to the Netherlands about a week ago. And Wednesday and Thursday last week were big days seeing Amsterdam and seeing the Hague and then seeing seeing Apes Church, which was absolutely lovely. That was really a high point of the trip, seeing Apes Church. And then the then the German festival was I haven't talked about the German festival at all. So I should probably talk about that a little bit. That that, too, was an absolutely lovely festival. It wasn't quite so Spartan as the last time. I'm sure I can sure like homes that it wasn't as it wasn't as spark. There is there is. I told we I got to give. Oh, gosh. The problem with the comments is I interrupt myself. Teddy wants Teddy wants me to have a different hat. OK, so back to the German festival. The German festival was tremendous. Why was the German festival tremendous? The German festivals was tremendous because of the people that were there. And there were people from all over Europe there. And those of you to watch this will know I'm talking about you. Latvia. I had a wonderful I had a wonderful time meeting our friend from Latvia. In fact, I took the train with him from Mannheim to the airport in Frankfurt. And then we flew back to Latvia and I flew to the UK. Friend from Macedonia, who I'd seen last time. Always fun talking with him about Macedonia. Diego, who is in the Netherlands now, but originally from Venezuela. Old number of Germans got to know got to know Thomas, who I had a couple of videos with before. And and just the conference was just lovely. Now, Cassidy isn't going to have the same kind of speed of turnaround that the art conference has with respect to the videos because it's just Cassidy and she's got her baby. And after the conference, they had to drive all the way back to the Netherlands with Andrew with the bangs and Ferdy and the baby and Cassidy. So I'm sure they all made it well and they had a good trip. But the German festival was just very sweet. Aaron from the Netherlands just did an amazing job talking about Nietzsche. That was one of the most helpful lectures on Nietzsche I had ever heard. And just the whole the whole spirit of the conference was sweet. It was intimate. We got a chance to talk, get to know each other. The the campfire the night before. Everything was just lovely. So then I had to ski daddle after the conference and go over to the train station, take this train north to Frankfurt. And then he, of course, flew to Latvia. I hopped on British Airways, flew from Frankfurt to Heathrow. And then I had to figure out how to get my way from Heathrow back to the hotel here. And that was a little bit of a journey and an adventure because the Elizabeth Line, for those of you who know London tube, the Elizabeth Line would pretty much taken me all the way right here. But for some reason, some trains on the Elizabeth Line shut down. There's also some trains that are out for working on them. And so at a certain hour, I couldn't get the Elizabeth Line. I had to get a special Heathrow Express thing. And that got me to the Jubilee Line. And that got me to a train station which is a little further away. And whenever I get out of these train stations, I immediately have trouble finding my way around. Bring compets back. So, yeah, Mannheim. Well, we had lots of rain. I've had I think it's rained every day I've been in Europe. We've had plenty of rain. But we're inside most of the time. We're not camping like we did like we did last time. So it's been it's been cool. So then I got to I got to Heathrow. Finally made my way back all the way to the city and then had about a mile walk from the Jubilee Station to this hotel. It was probably some dyslexia. I'm dyslexic and don't have any real good natural sense of direction. So I'm using Google Maps and it was raining and yada yada yada. And I had all my stuff with me. I've got two backpacks on so can wear one front one back. People on the subway weren't real happy with the tube, weren't real happy when the tube was really packed. And so we were just all all together in this thing. And I tried to keep inching my way towards the door as I knew my station was approaching. But I wasn't real close. And I watched other I watched other Londoners say sorry sorry as they try to make their way through. But they aren't six foot four two hundred forty pounds with two backpacks on. And so I said sorry and nobody moved. So I started moving and I just sort of parted the sea on the way out of the train. I'm sure there are some people who are cussing me out under their breath but no lives lost. So we had the Arc Day one. I made the video about that this morning. Arc Day two. Who did we have? Now there's a lot. This isn't right. These things have changed. All right. I'll use the app. So the conference has an app. And the app works pretty well. So open it right now. I go to my agenda. So day two. Oh yeah. Constantine Kissin was really sort of the headliner this morning. And you can already see his video there. Grim Grizz has already sort of chopped it up. I did a lot of thinking today about how the conference functions and what the conference ostensibly wishes to do. And of course Grim Grizz had his little hand signal about the WEF and now the Arc, yada, yada, yada. The room is filled with invitees. And I think in some ways it's sort of a combination. So the people who are really putting this together, I think, are Philippa Stroud and Jordan Peterson. Philippa Stroud, I believe, is the wife of the guy who I thought gave some of the best speeches at the conference. David Stroud. David Stroud gave us the welcome at the American reception last night. And I thought that little speech he gave was tremendous. Philippa Stroud is his wife. Apparently she got into politics. Members of, she became an MP and then she got canceled for something that she had said year before. I believe David and Elizabeth Stroud are evangelical Christians. David is the senior pastor at a large church in London. They're very impressive people. And so that made me think. Now, I hope David Stroud's speech makes it to YouTube. Probably hardly any people will watch it because it's not a name that a lot of people, I suppose, outside of London know who he is. But I think in many ways his vision is probably the most focused. And it is the most focused in terms of the Lion Initiative, which I spoke about on yesterday's video. He harkens back to the Lunar Society and Aaron Wren would be all over this because this is very similar to Aaron Wren's vision of establishing a new elite that can really move the culture and society in a positive direction. Now, there's there are a lot of tensions in this direction, which which come out because they're trying to bring together a coalition. And some of the tensions, some of the tensions are around progress. Has anyone seen AARC versus Netflix commercials? I can't read. I can't read that. I can't read the comments when have I seen Dave from Rebel Wisdom? Are you enjoying Rowling's book? I haven't gotten too far in Rowling's book because I got distracted by some other books and I've been busy at this conference. I did enjoy the first little bit of Rowling's book and I plan to get back into it. No sighting from Dave from Rebel Wisdom. And I think people are a little worried about it. David Rubin was there. Again, this this place is a who's who in terms of IDW YouTube. And I talked about that. I talked with Eric Weinstein a little bit today. I talked with Brett and Heather a little bit yesterday. There's just basically greeting Eric's. Eric said he wanted to talk to me more because he doesn't feel I have an accurate picture of him and which I completely imagine is true because my picture of him is through this tiny little YouTube space. And he probably doesn't have an accurate picture of me either. I don't know if he cares about that part, but he and I don't know if we'll actually get a chance to talk. It's a it's a busy, busy place. So what was his name? Philip Shrave, Philip Stroud or Paul Stroud? Oh, come on. David Stroud. Okay, good biblical name. All right, so I'll just go through the day. Constantine Kissin, entertaining speech. But as with many of the speeches, the speeches, many of the speeches are sort of it's sort of a political event. That's probably the best way to describe it. The speeches, even if they're not given by politicians, they're often political in nature. Some of the speeches are there to inform. Some of the speeches are there to influence. Sometimes people, they have 20 minutes on this stage and it's just bullet, bullet, bullet, bullet, bullet, bullet, bullet, bullet. And I think, okay, what's the purpose of this speech? Is the purpose of the speech that people in the room agree with you? I think probably a lot of the people already do. Is the purpose of the speech to inform people? Well, my read of the room is that this is an unusually well-informed room. Is the purpose of the speech to get onto YouTube and do this thing in front of YouTube? Maybe, but then why are you doing it in the room? So in some ways, YouTube is sort of disrupting even a conference like this, which gave me a lot of attempts, an attempt to re- Yes, the dynamics of the British ruling elite were different from the American ruling elite, but not that far. And so I think in some ways it is. You know, I think in some ways they're trying to rival. Curtis Yarvin is there. I didn't see him. Rafe had a chance to talk to him, but I didn't see Curtis Yarvin there. So I think they are trying to rival the Blue Church, but in a sense they're sort of looking to reestablish the older Blue Church instead of allowing the new progressive church to just continue to go ahead. And I dealt with that quite a bit in yesterday's video. And what I said in yesterday's video still stands. I don't think that's possible. In some ways it could be a more secular, much better dressed, moral attempt at a new moral majority. I could see some resonance between that. So, so, Philippa Stroud and Jordan, I think, are the sort of the two poles. And I don't think they're necessarily far apart. There's a lot of talk about progress. Look, listen for Mary Harrington and what she had to say about progress. Mary is a no-nonsense woman. And she, Paul Kingsman might burst into flames if he was here. I've been hanging out with a lot of the artsy people from the symbolic world faction of this little corner. And, you know, they're just uneasy by a lot of this stuff. They're artists and they act like artists. And I think that's the progress. Rafe Kelly is, I don't see a lot of representation from the verveci corner of the corner. Rafe is here and I think making good use of his time. And Rafe is just, you know, flat out one of the coolest guys you could hang out with. He's just a really wise, fun guy. I really have enjoyed, really enjoyed Rafe, really enjoyed Nathan. So just really enjoyed many of the people that have been here. Had a great time hanging out with Kendall, who's been in my channel, she's been on Jonathan's channel. So great time hanging out with her. Just really fun. And then meeting some people that I had never met before. So that's been awesome. So, again, what is this conference about? What are they trying to do? In some ways, this is Jordan sort of setting up a secular church. They're trying to do a blue, reinstantiation of the old blue church. But, you know, they've got a lot of Jordan's energy ideas. And if you've watched Jordan's channel, Jordan's favorite people on the environment, they are in here. Schellenberger's in here. Paul Marshall. Paul Marshall gave, I thought, a really quite amazing speech. I didn't know what he was about. So I will be staying with some Brits, and they know a lot about most of these people than I do. This is a smaller place than America, and everything sort of revolves around London. So everybody knows the names and people get into Parliament. And it's a smaller pond than America. So getting the background from my hosts in London has been really helpful. So then there's a poet who's really quite good. I don't know if they'll put those up on YouTube. They were quite good. Do you think IDW folks can be convinced that their pushing back against comes from liberalism, not outside of it? Jarvin's argument. I think that's complicated because most of the IDW folks aren't as purely liberal as I think even they themselves seem. Eric. Eric and Brett are just very smart guys. You might disagree with their conclusions. You might disagree with a lot of what they have to say, but they're pretty smart guys. They're very well read. I don't really see Brett and Eric with a hankering for modernity as much as I've heard in this conference. Peterson sounds that way, but Peterson's an interesting character. Nathan Jacobs and I at some point are probably going to get on it and really talk this through. Who are you most surprised to see there? Really in some ways, no, no. Rod Dreher is here. You got to understand it's a big conference. So most of the people I don't know. I'm not going to lie. Chris Williamson was in for a little while yesterday. A lot of YouTubers have sort of stopped in. So people were not happy with the talk about going to get into some of that stuff. Then the second thing in the in the morning was, in my opinion, some of the big stuff. So that was in the social fabric. I was on the news reports on Erica Commissar. What a name. Oh, Kurt and I, Kurt Jemungle and I spent a nice conversation today. And I did a Stan. I did an epistemology thing with Peter Bogosian, which went terrific. And that'll be out on his channel. I was super happy with that. So I think that Erica Commissar just kind of gave these bullet points about kids in schools. Some of the bullet points I could agree with, some of the bullet points I couldn't. Sometimes when you listen to some of these experts, you wouldn't think that humanity would have survived until the experts came around to tell us how to do things. Part of the tension in this narrative of progress. Someone said it very well. I think we're always trying to deal with the progress that we've just created over here. And there's a ton of that. Warren Farrell was, Warren Farrell did his shtick. And I think Warren Farrell has some great points. Warren Farrell sounds like he's still talking out of the 70s on some points. But I really love Warren Farrell. And his points are terrifically important about the importance of fatherhood. Bishop Barron was actually at the conference. Now, I think that there's sort of a VIP section, which is different, which is amazing because the regular section is pretty darn VIP. So there's yet another level up, another level of VIP out there. And so I would have I would have liked to shake Bishop Barron's hand. I did get to talk a little bit with Oz Guinness and that was fun. But Bishop Barron gave a great speech. I'm sure it'll be on the YouTube channel. He's he's just an accomplished speaker and knows his stuff about philosophy and basically took at a takedown of normalism, which I think I'll have to talk to Nathan Jacobs about what he thought about Bishop Barron's speech. But give a great speech. A lot of for a lot of people, I think a lot of Roman Catholics, that was the best speech of the place. Did anyone talk about Grim Grizz or Chad the Alcoholic? Me. I talk about Grim Grizz and Chad the Alcoholic and some of the other people know what I'm talking about. So Kendall, you know, is pretty solidly in the corner. Kendall's a busy mom. She doesn't have time for everything. Boo, normalism. There you go, Eric. I wish, you know, I would like to have more. So so like I said, the Peugeot, the Peugeot corner is well represented because Jonathan's on the leadership team. And so Jonathan got his people there. Rafe is sort of it from the from the Verbeke corner and I'm kind of it from my corner. But so, yeah, people do watch. It appears the assassins have failed. Can you all hear me? Extra extra savings or points if you could say you can hear me. I was using this little action cam as my webcam and apparently. Did quit so apparently you've been out here watching. So, if you can hear me. Test test test. Good. All right. So now we're using the laptop webcam with all of its glory. I didn't bring them something. OK, so so Bishop Baron was definitely a big deal. And then there was the the panel with Jordan Peterson, Louise Perry, Mary Harrington and Steve Blackwood. Not enough time to perform, but fun to have them on stage, fun to include them. I mean, this this is sort of part of this sort of Jordan Peterson's all star line to change the world. And well, Jordan Peterson doesn't officially belong to any church. This is sort of a Protestant thing without singing, and it could use the singing. There is a music, but. I think singing would have helped. So what were they saying? I don't know. So the morning was good. And then in the afternoon, I skipped the free market, good governance thing, because there were a lot of people outside to network with. And I had a appointment with Peter Bogosian to do his thing. And that was I had a ton of fun doing that with Peter. And I think he enjoyed it, too. And I think it'll be a big hit on his channel. And so wait for that when that finally comes out. I know it's taking Peter to get that. And then there was the next thing in the afternoon, which I also skipped. And then there was the next thing in the afternoon. And I didn't catch all of David Stroud's. And again, I think when you watch the videos, hardly anybody will watch the David Stroud one. But if you want to get a sense for what this arc is about. Part of this is George Pearson and George's fingerprints are all over this. But part of this is David and Phillipa Stroud. And that's I think there's. I think Jordan is trying some things. I think Phillipa and David Stroud have a little clearer vision to try to reconstruct. That kind of sound like a robot. OK, now you should be able to hear me. So Phillipa and David Stroud, I think in many ways are a lot behind this, too. And they're not people that any of us know. Who knows? Maybe I'll read. Because I really love David's reception talk. And I only caught half of his talk today. So I'm really looking forward to listen to the whole thing. I think he's clearly a preacher. He's clearly a good preacher. And this is an attempt, I think, to. This is attempt to kind of put the old thing together. So go back to the video I released after yesterday about lions and foxes. So I stand behind that. I think. Let's see. And then there was OK. So tomorrow. Some big name speakers, Peugeot was talking tomorrow. And more talk. More talk, more talk, lots of talk. And I think a lot of the people are sort of now starting to pick the things they want to listen to. Because there's really opportunity to meet and visit with other people. This conference needs some estuary. And what I mean by that is this conference needs some getting people. If you really want to have this conference, build new friendships and relationships, you need to set the platform for it. And Teddy was complaining at the German Festival about the amount of speaker time that was at the German Festival. And that was fairly intimate. Teddy would be not thrilled by what's going on here. And because there's just a lot of stage time. And then most of the networking time is unstructured, which partly due to the fact that even though these are all invitees, there are definitely layers and different groups of people here. So some people here are sort of leaders of, let's say, NGOs. These are people or other NGOs, government organizations, Christian organizations, things like that. Things that Jordan Peterson has bumped into that David and Philippa Stroud, know that their networks know these people got invited. Then there's clearly some, there's a lot of politicians around, almost all conservative politicians or all conservative politicians. And there's a lot of business people around. So it's a very good looking room. And yeah, so I'm the mall Santa. And so if you actually want to have. Cross fertilization. I think, I think, frankly, you don't really want to give the politicians the stage because. Politicians tend to give very safe speeches to try to attract followers. And what's funny is that this is exactly what Jordan Peterson complained about preachers and his line preachers talk. I think if the politicians actually wanted to gain from the experience, if they were part of little groups running the estuary protocol, they would very much have a sense of what even some of these extremely influential people are thinking. And when you finally get a chance to listen to Paul Stroud speech, which I hope you get a chance to. I think you will see that he is trying to knit together a network, a worldwide network that is going to do good in the world along the lines of the visions of the members of the of the of the conference. Now, again, there's some diversity in it, but. I don't think it's an ungappable diversity. There's enough diversity and and I think if they had more. Estuary type process. You could probably. Deal with some of the issues of liberalism, deal with some of the issues of their framing of progress, deal with some of the issues around. Sort of. Uncritical technological advancement. It was a stone nation in Germany, by the way, I don't think it was a Freemason, but it was a stone Mason. So. I think for a first attempt, wow, you know, one of the hardest things to do with something like that is get a lot of people there. That is in many ways to get the people you want there. It's not easy, especially at this level. And I think they probably succeeded in getting most of the people they wanted there, so good on them. Are they taking able to take advantage of having them for there for three days, two days or three days? I don't know, because I basically think that the format. Of the conference. Isn't facilitating the kind of networking and relationship building that I think is essential to their goal. There I said it. One person said to me. Who? Found me through my Jordan Peterson commentary videos. He pointed to the room and said what they're saying in there is not what made Jordan Peterson, George Peterson, and I thought that was an extremely insightful comment. I don't think it's. So. I am for the most part very much in favor of the fact that. I don't think it's. So. I am for the most part very much a. Regular guy and I know it doesn't seem that way. Rogan isn't there. No, Rogan's not there. And so when I go to a room that's full of politicians and suits and wealthy people, I tend to hang back because. I will hang back and talk to the guys working the cameras and I'm just very comfortable with people in low places. I like people in low places. That's why I do Randall's conversations in many ways. Part of the problem of talking to a high status person is that you just get even though they may not be very NPC. They talk like an NPC and that's totally the problem with. Political speeches because political speeches are exactly the kind of lying that Jordan Peterson used to complain about from preachers and now he's held a conference that is full of lying politicians. And high status people will tend to give safer remarks. Paul Marshall, I was really impressed by what he did. So and then when so much of the conference is filled with those kinds of speeches, which number one, I think you're the people there are already tremendously informed. They don't need the new information. Number two, the people there are already extremely motivated by virtue that the fact that they got them there. So you don't need speeches to motivate them. Number three, the coalition building by speeches and just sort of having a conversation with the people there. Number three, the coalition building by speeches and just sort of having a rah rah event. I don't think they need that either. I think what you need from something like this, if your goal is to knit together. A new elite. To lead the world in a better direction, which I think is exactly what he wants to do to sort of sort of oppose the World Economic Forum. You need to have a kind of process that. Sets the artists in front of the business people and the politicians and actually gets them talking in a way that quite frankly, the estuary protocol does beautifully. You see the Pope to crown the Emperor, you know, I. It's it's interesting playing with these ideas. Because the truth is there is a there is a Korean. There is a K drama. The buzz saw still works. I have no idea what you mean, but you gave me $2 and so I will put it up on the screen. Anti Davos echo chamber of revival meeting. I think if you really want to buy these people together because I I suspect in a meeting like this. Well, I'm the one going up and talking to all the youtubers. If you're already on YouTube, you're already talking to the youtubers. If you're the business people, you're talking to the business people. Politicians are doing their political thing. If you really want to get the people together. You need to better connect the artists with the business people with the politicians and with the NGO crowd. And you're going to need them into small groups, not on dinner tables, not with wine glasses and hors d'oeuvres. Because again, they'll tend to clump up with other people they know. So. Those are my thoughts so far. We'll see what happens tomorrow, but. I think, you know, the first day is sort of like a networking frenzy because it's like bang, bang, bang, bang, bang. Hit all these people. The second day, it's like I've already talked to these people and all the rest of them I don't recognize. Now, I'm sure from the business world, from the political world, people would recognize them. But. Yeah. Good night, Grizz. Sleep well. Run the icebreaker games. And that's just it, Eric. Most of my experience is with most of my experience with large meetings are not political campaigns and they're not business seminars and they're not academic meetings. They're church related meetings. And actually, churches have gotten quite good at process. With large groups and this could use a lot more. You're exactly right, Richard Lowell. It is religion that connects commerce, politics, art and civic organizations. And that's really why they need. To think about that a little more clearly. So this could have used a ton more thought. And I think that's the reason why they need to think about that a little more clearly. So this could have used a ton more thought given to process if their real goal is to knit together a new elite. And they didn't have it. At least they haven't had it so far. So last night was a reception, tonight is a dinner. But again, I would imagine. So I've mostly been hanging out with people of the corner, which means. How am I supposed to? How am I supposed to get? I don't even have any pounds in cash. So I'll just have to buy when I'm out with Ty O sometimes. And he isn't showing up yet. I'm kind of expecting him to pop in any minute now. All right, so that's my spiel questions. If you got questions, put them in the. Put them in the put them in the chat. I'll try to answer them. Sounds like they want to be religious, but not spiritual. Yeah, you know, and the Brits to. The Brits keep their spirituality real close to the best. And even the religiosity, one of the things that I noted in Europe was. People who are self consciously Christians take a much bigger hit here. Than they do in America. I number of people told me stories about people who got fired or didn't get promotions or didn't get jobs because they let other people know even quietly that they were a Christian and well. We can't trust Christian to do these things. So if you talk about negative, negative, a new elite for whom if you talk about negative world, yeah, it's much more of a negative world. A new elite for whom? Anglo-Saxon world. The so Canada, US, UK. And Australia, all heavily represented, some from Africa, but mostly from the English speaking world. Did Brett and Heather invite you onto their channel? No, I don't know. I don't go looking for invitations. If the reason I don't go looking for invitations is. If they don't know anything about me, then it's going to be like a political speech and I'll just basically run through all the stuff that all of you know. I'm willing to do that if they like me to, but it's not a very interesting conversation. I'd be happy to have a conversation with them. I don't know that any of them, besides some random guy with a big beard who sort of takes. Does criticism of their stuff. They probably don't know a lot about me, so I don't know if the conversation would be that good. Seeing a literature of some sort help them reach the little guy. Well, this gets into the dynamics of how to change the world and. Aaron Ren follows James Davidson Hunter. And basically saying that there's an elite. Are you at the door tile? I only have one share, so I don't know how this is going to work. They can move that bench over. We'll see. He's not at the door. He's probably just in the hotel, so he should be up soon. They're very much into story, so you know, Peugeot and all that. Like our newsletter or something. Isn't it radically obvious that two thirds of the world considers what's happening in Gaza now? An apartheid genocide that there and there isn't Jordan Peterson literally. And then there's Rod who enjoys his job. Sounds like they're accomplishing exactly what they intend. That could very well be Rod. This event. This event is all about signaling, putting up the beacon elite wield power privately signal publicly. That's a very sharp guy. I. Yeah. You're probably right, Rod. I think you're probably right. I think you're probably right. And so they do have. I think there's a lot of competition here. So GB News, which is controversial here in the UK. They've got a big booth and my buddies are running media things for other groups. I appreciate that. I don't know what else to say. I'm not an expert in either case, and people have strong views about it. And the difficulty with something like this is it can overwhelm every other conversation. And I don't know. There are wars in the Ukraine. There are wars in other places in the world. I don't know that this one war should dislocate every other conversation on either side. Here's Tio. ARC is Association of Responsible Citizens. How are you, my friend? Good to see you. Watching you and also seeing you in person. I'm trying to figure out how to get you on the live stream here because I only have one share. I hope this thing can move. I'll just be the. Oh, it's canceled. So. All right. So two of us on here. So here's Tio. And he just got in here. And first time I've seen him this trip, I have to thank Tio because Tio has been organizing everything for the trip. And so after tomorrow, this thing goes to like five or something. And then Tio's got stuff planned or not stuff planned. I don't know. We'll be fine. Yeah, it's very strange. I was watching you on YouTube and now I'm on YouTube with you. Wait, wait till we bring more people in. So yeah. Any other questions? The Anglo-Saxon world, there would be one play Rupert Murat, Serena Richard, are part of this conference. Politically, it's definitely it's definitely conservative. There's no question about that. And that's that's some of what sort of makes the artists uncomfortable because the artists don't really play in any conservative box. They're sort of all over the map. They're open. And so they're open to everything. And that's the artists. And that's why I think having some more process, letting the artists and the business people and them get to know each other. So I think that would be helpful. But yeah, it could it could very well be that that Rod is exactly right. There you go. Tio, they're giving me money for you. I don't know. I'm going to I'm going to repay you. Blink twice for free palestines. He's fine. Oh, my goodness. All right. So I'm going to I don't know how this is going to work because, of course, I'm on this hotel Wi-Fi and it's gone pretty well anyway. Let's paste. See if anybody wants to come in the stream. So there's the link. So Tio, how are you doing? Doing good. Great to see you. It's great to see you. I'm sorry. It's during a rainy season, but most of it's rainy season. So it's like this all winter long. I mean, yeah, for the most part, it's it's London. Wow. So we did have an abnormally hot summer. So we are a few weeks from it. We're coming free. So maybe we're a few weeks of rain. Wow. Wow. It has been rainy. I was rained on in Amsterdam. The Hague was a pretty good day. I walked in the rain when I first got here. Yesterday wasn't too bad. And then it actually hasn't been too bad. It's been mostly cloudy, a little bit of rain. So anyway, I dropped the link in if anybody wants to jump in. I've got a question regarding art. Yes. It's kind of disappointing to you, but not surprising your review of it so far. Really? Yes, because. Disappointed in the review or disappointing in art? It's disappointing, but not surprising about your review so far. Yeah, I was watching Grim Grizz's first Randall's Continue Review earlier today. And he was detailing his journey and his experience with Peterson. And his summary seems to be exactly what art seems to be. They are still trying to revive modernity. Yeah, yeah. That's palatable. Yeah. And I don't think you can do it. I think they're sort of leading with what they know. Paul, just a quick note. I had tickets for Chino and Breakwater and missed them all thanks to my wonderful daughter who was born Sunday. Glory to God. Well, if there's a good reason not to go, it's having a daughter. So yeah. You know, Rod's point, which he said, which I think sounds right. And that our expectations might be more than theirs. That what they're really trying to do is sort of put up a signal and gather people. I think the difficulty is going to be we live in a very distracted world. And so you can get attention to people on the Internet, but there's churn. All right. Gregory, how are you? Hello. I'm fine. Thank you. I'm not too far away from you. Just a couple of miles, I think. Oh, really? I just missed probably the last 20 seconds of what you're saying. A stream yard was loading up. But I think Ty was saying he shares your slight caution or disappointment, I think. Is that what you're saying? Yeah. Yeah. Maybe recalibration of expectations. Did you read Jonathan Pujo's email that came out, I think, today? Say. I didn't. I saw that it was sent. What did he say in it? He said he hopes it's not a golden calf. Yeah. I think if they're trying to hit what Rod is trying to hit, then I think it's OK. And I actually have some other. There's long time been someone who has stayed in the background, who has communicated with me quite a bit over the years. And from what he said, Peterson is watching the reaction. He's trying to get a sense of how is this going? And so if this is just sort of like a trial balloon and they're going to continue to try to adjust to move forward. And if they do that, then. Oh, look at this. This is great. If they do that, then we'll. Then they'll have to follow up. The difficulty is that the first time you do something like this, it's kind of the easiest time to get everybody here. I mean, I I don't know if I had to fly all the way out here for only this. If I would have I would have done it because then I get to see Tio and I get to do the stuff that I'm going to do next week. So I probably would have done it anyway, but it just lined up perfectly with the German festival. So Teddy is here. I got to spend some time with Teddy at the festival. I wouldn't want to be too critical about it, but yeah, I guess I was also reminded of was it Jonathan's talk at the what was your conference called the way home conference where he said a similar thing, didn't he sort of said. It'll never be you'll never be fully at home in in this life. It's best to be disappointed. I'm starting to believe Jonathan Peugeot is deep down a Calvinist with symbolic tendencies. So he's about as he's about as pessimistic and dire as I am with some of this stuff. So but but the fact that he's still on the leadership team leads me to believe these are patient, long term people that and again, when you listen to David Stroud. I thought the vision he laid out now again, I think it's it's the old lion vision. But what else do they got? So we'll see. I don't know. Yeah, Teddy. I'm sure Teddy doesn't have any opinions on any of this. Can you hear us, Teddy? Yes, I can hear. Can you hear me? You're just fine. Eric, Eric is reminding me as Luke does often that when I attribute things to Calvinism, they always like to say, well, that's just plain Christianity. You call it Calvinism. Well, the only Christianity has ever been is Calvinism. So you'll have to forgive me, Father Eric. Teddy, what are your thoughts? I thought touched that topic, but I'm more curious because we just returned from Germany. And I'm curious, how would you structure an event that is better? Because this event is for an elite, but also how is one an event that will be propagated from the bottom from the common folk from the people who behind the camera, as you said, and those who are not part of the spotlight? How will you structure an event for them in order to create the change that Peterson would hope to see? Well, I would probably do it more like Chino. And Chino had a fair amount of structured estuary time. I would probably either assign people to estuary groups and that way start to build relationships between the different camps of people. So the NGO leaders, the business people, the politicians and the artists are all mixing from the beginning. This is a very different. You have to think about the audience when you construct an event like this. And this is a very different audience from, let's say, the German Festival. The German Festival was a very different audience from the Chino event. The Chino event and the Thunder Bay event, a little bit more commonality between them. But the Washington, D.C. event was very different from the others again. So especially because this was invitation only. Another issue is that you're dealing with, especially when it comes to the business people and the political people, these are very high status people who generally speaking get to do what they want. And so how that works, I don't know, if you start structuring things too much, maybe they buy them out. So I don't know. Welcome, Sam. Hello, guys. So if you conquered the world. One of the things I mentioned to Teddy a lot is here in Europe, you guys need more support from the other side of the Atlantic. You guys, I think, culturally, there's a lot more resistance to Christianity here, definitely than in the United States, probably even than in Canada. There's more in Canada than the U.S. But the stories I'm hearing from Christians here, you guys got it tough. We've been in a negative world much longer than you guys. It's baked into the culture. And I think that limits that limits some things. And so we have to figure out how to support you guys better. And so I'm done. You know, at the beginning of this trip, it's like, oh, another trip. You know, travel is kind of a pain in some ways. But now that I'm here and, you know, as German festival and, you know, look forward to getting, you know, some of the estuary groups here, I really look forward to supporting it because you guys need more support. And Teddy, I want to boost Teddy's signal. Teddy's been doing a great job on this side of the Atlantic to have conversations and growl them. And so, Sam, we got to get Teddy hooked up with Randall's United, the streaming account so that so that he can start streaming on that. And so because there's a lot of people in the U.S. that keep odd hours. And so we can get a little bit more cross fertilization. So anyway, thank you. All right. Well, twist Jacob's arm a little bit harder. Yeah, Jacob should be very open to this. Given that Jacob should be very open to this. I saw I saw Jacob's Jacob came to this little corner by virtue of becoming disillusioned with Eric Weinstein off to tell them that tell them that if I see it, I'm sure he'll be crushed by it. And so I think that Jacob Fedorecchi stopped following him and started following me. So question, Paul, what what has this conference made you want to change, if anything, about your channel or your YouTube presence or overall ministry strategy, I guess? I've sort of validated what I've done in that, you know, there are some guys there with some big channels and but I'm probably the only one there who has the kinds of relationships through my channel that any of them have. So a question would be, should I work harder at building more relationships with the kind of people at this conference? Maybe there are some very high status people at this conference who came up to me and quietly follow the corner. That's true, too. And I think part of what they value about the corner is that you're making me nervous. What's that? You're making me nervous. One thing of it's just people like Anselman out there listening to us. It's another thing if you've got quote unquote unnamed high status people. You know, I got there thinking I was, you know, a turd in the punch bowl and I didn't deserve to be in the room, imposter syndrome. And then I kept getting messages from people. Hey, Paul, I watch your channel. Can I meet you? I just I'm really easy to spot. I'm taller than everyone else and I shine like a lighthouse. So I say, find me, grab me. I don't care if you got to interrupt something. Shake my hand. And then I do what I always do. Tell me a little bit about your story. Who are you? What do you care about? Why do you watch the channel? And people care about what we're doing in this little corner because there's a role for the elites to play. The elites sort of do things from on top, but there's a role for the people on the bottom to play and Heaven and Earth have to come together here. So, Paul, a question. Who would you? You said this event is mostly networking. Who would you like to get out of it with strength and network or strength from relationship? What relation? I think so. So there have been some embarrassing moments when I have to walk up to Brett and Heather and Eric and they they have the YouTube thing where they look say, oh, we've met. No. Oh, oh. Three stages. You're that guy. And they were super. They were all super about it. I think it would be better to if we could have some better conversations up. Because, you know, Eric's was like, well, I don't think the map you have of the matches the territory. Do you use those words? Because that would be hilarious. What's that? Do you use those words map and territory or is that your summary? Oh, no, those are exactly the words you used. And I thought to myself, I would probably guess my map of you is more accurate than your map of me because I've listened to you way more than you've listened to me. But even if he does pull me aside at some point tomorrow, I think he's basically going to focus on my map of him. I don't think he's going to spend any time to get a sense of his map of me. And part of what I wanted for this quarter is to set up structures so people can compare their maps. It's the goal here. And so I, you know, I go to these things that I think I should probably do a little bit more reaching up. I saw Chris Williamson and I talked to him briefly and, you know, Chris and I connect on Twitter sometimes. I should probably have him into the channel. I think his I think his channels continue to improve. And I think he has grown in wisdom. And so I think in some ways he's he would be a good person to have a little bit more aware of this. Peterson, Peterson follows what's going on with us to the degree that he can. And yeah, so I don't think we are unimportant, but the truth be told, I like doing what I do. And I actually think it's been a good thing. So, Paul, who among other people are there who has kind of this diverse community as we have that also doing those kind of things? Because a lot of people have fans, but I'm not sure they have what we have. They seem to have gotten frozen. Too bad. I still see you. Oh, look, it's that bar hotel. I thought I thought maybe the the new the new elite lions that didn't like this unsupervised conversation about them. What were you? What were you asking, Teddy? Oh, yeah, we're pretty diverse. The question the question is, who is among the people who is in the arc also have their own little corner, but not of fans, not of people who will cheer up, but of active participants, people who sit together doing meditation, doing book clubs, reaching to one another and something like that. Outside of church structures, I don't really know of any. That would be my guess, because there's two things. One is that once a channel gets to a certain size, you become part of a certain inner ring. So you could see all of the people that you see on Jordan Peterson's channel sort of hanging together. Rafe has been on George's channel, got a good bump from it. But, you know, Dave Rubin and all the usual IDW people are all hanging together. And that's absolutely fine and natural. That's the way that goes. But, you know, we, I think, have established more of a network that does more interpersonally than anything else. I know there might be others out there that I don't know about, but I think that's kind of what makes this special. If you can try to find it for the rest of the two days that you left, if there is another groups like us, it will be very useful if you manage to sniff them out. There are a variety of NGOs that have other little projects that are going on, but it's hard to get a sense of that in a trip like this. I'll take Mark's question. Would any aspect of the conference so far encourage people to get involved in their local church? There are definitely some Christian people there. But no, that's not really the focus of it. The focus is taking back the agenda from the current group of elites and putting it more in terms of the political and economic and social alignments that this group is in favour of. That's ostensibly what the conference is about. But it's a lot of Christians. Go ahead. So I was going to say, it is a lot of Christians. I mean, I haven't done the maths, but not everyone is talking about it openly. But it's a lot of Christians, isn't it? And that's what Jonathan said in his email, actually. He said something along the lines of this will, in his first meeting, he said early on, this will fail if God is not involved. And he was met with silence. But then found out quite later that a large percentage of people are completely on board with that sort of thought. My sense too. And my sense is that a lot of Christians here operate under the radar. They're not wearing crosses. They're not wearing, you know, they're not signaling that they are Christians. But a lot of Christians are under the radar. Have you got any sense that Britain is a bit more going towards post-liberal, stronger than the US? Or is that not the case? This group is solidly liberal. OK. And that's some of the tensions, because some of their prophet types, I mean, you have Mary Harrington out there. Yeah, she's not. And she's not someone who misses words. So, yeah. I watched her little video, her and Louise Perry and that other guy who I still don't quite understand why he's around as much as he is. But that was pretty interesting. I like that they're putting out clips in pretty, it seems like pretty near real time. Maybe there's like half a day of delay or something like that. But it gives the sense that I can keep up or something like that. And when I'm listening to you talk, I was able to watch some or part of the videos that I most cared about. So that's actually pretty cool for a conference to do that instead of protecting their wall or something like that. It's an invitation only conference. He's got a major event at 02 tomorrow night. So I'm not too worried. I think they're worried about that. They want to, I think as Ron said, they want to light a beacon and send a signal. So they're doing that through their channel. Question, is there anyone at the conference who would agree with you that politics is now, religion is always? Yeah, there are. But again, I think a big part of this conference is trying to build a coalition. And so they're not really teasing out distinctives or processing in that way. They're trying to build a coalition. So they're smoothing over areas of disagreement. How much has religion been discussed? If at all, very little. Every now and then you'll hear some. It's it isn't that it's avoided, but you have a bishop on stage. Yet a few people make direct religious sayings, but it's definitely meant to be non exclusive with respect to religion. And, you know, Peter Bogotian's there now again, once that video comes out, you're going to want to watch it. Peter and I had a lot of fun. Thank you to Taiyo. Thank you to Taiyo. Taiyo's work in the work in the comments for me. I really appreciate it. I have a staff. I don't have to look both ways. So thank you, Taiyo. This is exciting. What's Joe Rogan's guy who you never see, but it's always asked? Jamie. Jamie. Oh, it's high. Paul, you say they're trying to build a coalition, but isn't it just a coalition built on showbittest views of Christianity as a Western religion? What about Palestinian Christians? I don't know. What about African Christians? What about Asian Christians? You know, I guess there's a war, but I'm not going to have that war become everything's going to be through the filter of that war. So if you do that, then, you know, so did you hear Russell Brand talking to Jordan Peterson about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict? They sounded like premillennial dispensationalists in their view of it inaugurating some sort of eschaton or something like that. It was like, man, well, that's weird because I see the dispensationalism is sort of dying and that sort of viewing Israel as the focal point of eschatological hopes a little bit waning in Christianity. And then I'm listening to Jordan Pearson and Russell Brand and it's like turned back up except it's over there. It was bizarre. Yeah, yeah. I think we need to continue to have a, you know, one of the videos I wanted to make before I left was part of the difficulty is how to regard the nation of Israel. And Teddy is actually super good with this. Teddy, you know, I had some great talks with Teddy about Israel and the Ukraine and Russia with respect to this little corner. So Teddy's no bunker squirrel. Teddy goes out and watches the rockets go overhead. Yeah, I caught a rocket just when I arrived in the airport and entered to my train and the train stopped because of the rocket. So we watched it a little bit and then continue on our way. If religion is not a central focus as a source of solutions, what seems to be? Yeah. And in that way, it's not at all a church conference because in a church conference, religion is the central focus. Conversion, discipleship, that would be a church conference. This is applied in terms of economics. There's a lot of energy policy talk. Look at, listen to Schellenberger's thing. So, yeah, it's politics and economics and that's culture. Right. So most of it. All right. What do you think African and Asian Christians think of Ark and its implications? I think that most of it. All right. What do you think African and Asian Christians think of Ark and its implicit paradigm that regards the Western civilization as superior and what applies for them? There are some African delegates to this. I was on the cable car with someone from South Africa. I bumped into another African delegate here. They're mostly NGO types. They work in development things or think tank things in Africa. I don't know, Ty, you're African. I've never been to Africa. How would you answer this question? It's. Yeah, there is a thing I will answer by pointing to the fact that the Anglican Church, the Orthodox Anglican parishes are looking for leadership from the African Anglicans, not the bishops in England. So as far as the church is concerned, orthodoxy drives alliances. So the African churches will align with the churches in the West, I think. The orthodoxy lines up. That sounds right to me from my experience with the Nigerian Anglicans in California. Nigerian Anglican Church rents our facility. So that sounds so amazing to me. It's true. I can imagine the services. I bet you can. It's quite a mix. Sometimes they sing Anglican songs, sometimes they sing Nigerian songs, sometimes they sing contemporary praise and worship. Yeah, I attend a church in East London. That's it's an Anglican church, technically, but it's very much, much more in the mode of the Ilsum, mega church type and mostly fill with songs of African immigrants. And it's just very interesting. We're in this glorious building and we've just put chairs in a circle in a very non liturgical way. So yeah, the church, especially in England, is very, very mixed up. And with regard to Latin American churches. So I talked to Diego at the conference at the festival. I suspect a lot of Latin American churches just completely steer clear of politics because the politics and a lot of Latin America is deadly and corrupt. And they have zero hope that politics or business in the country will be in any way an ally to justice or broad prosperity. And so many countries in Latin America, it's politics and business. It's about theft and a tiny little group of people getting enormously wealthy. And this group of people is not about a tiny little group of people getting enormously wealthy. They want everyone to get enormously wealthy. What can happen? But that, I think, would be a very different perspective of church and the broader culture in the developed world from, let's say, at least Latin America. And would that be true of Africa as well? I can definitely speak for Nigeria. And that's exactly right. It's politics is just disregarded by the majority of the population. I mean, the current president of Nigeria was vice president when I was eight years old. So it's like a musical chair, about five people that just go around. And get enormously wealthy. Exactly. Because what's really funny is that there are, you know, I noticed this in the Dominican Republic. If you go to graduations and elite colleges in North America, you know, they have all these diversity programs. But wealthy people from the developing world driving amazing cars in, having multiple homes. And, you know, they're there. They're there. Who's funding the conference? No, I don't think anything like that. I think they have established, I would imagine they've established some kind of organization or foundation. And, yeah, this wasn't a cheap conference to put on. And I think they did it well. But I think so the Strouds, Peterson, I would imagine they've got a handful of wealthy backers who contributed significantly to it. But I don't think it, I don't know that it's funded by any big political interests that we could name. Judging by Constantine's speech that they released, it made a joke about how wealthy a lot of the people in the room were. And the room feels wealthy. When you walk in there, it's like, I don't have suits like that. I don't have shoes like that. I don't fly in private planes. Peterson flew there in a private plane, you know. Yeah, there's some money in the room. But nobody was a jerk about it. Paul, what passage of the Bible do you think in relation to the Ark? What a question. What's that? I feel like I've been too negative. I don't mean to be. You know, I've been having a great time. I think many people are having a great time. I think part of just the natural. And I don't think we're critiquing in a way that any of the organizers would find. I think I'll welcome. My sense is, again, that they are they are looking to establish a movement, not just of Jordan Peterson, Buccos and Randos, but of something that can actually make a difference at certain elite levels. So I don't know, maybe pray for the king. Do you think it will work? I think a lot of question is, what do we mean by work? Now, if woke ism is as dysfunctional as I think it does, you could potentially set yourself up for the the people that inherit the kingdom when the woke collapse. An example of this might be, in a sense, the mainline church in many mainline churches. There are elements who continue to be. Orthodox and conservative and evangelical who hang in there. And when everybody can just totally abandons the church altogether, those people inherit the institution. So in a lot of ways, when you're running a cultural survival game, the most stubborn and durable and long lasting inherit. And so that, I think, gives these people a real shot. Paul, just do the televangelist thing. Crowdsource of private jet. We can do it. After I get the jet, I'd have to buy fuel. So no, thanks. I'll I'll ride in the regular airplanes. Thank you very much. Let's see any more questions. Just going back to the the Asia and Africa question. I mean, I just assume that. The center of Christianity will shift very quickly away from Europe and to Africa and Asia in my lifetime. But I wonder whether if the West can. At least the West majors decline, but at least if we can figure out what we are or what we were. It will maybe help us to respond better to, you know, what does come from Africa to have a better relationship. You know, if you know yourself, you can have a better relationship with someone else, can't you? In that sense, so. If there is, if there is a new Christianity, if you like, coming out of Asia, coming out of Africa. Western Christians might be able to relate to that better if they can understand themselves. Maybe. You know, Britain will never reestablish its empire. That the there's not going to be the kind of hegemony that there was in previous centuries. You know, I was again, I was talking to Diego about corruption in Venezuela. I think I think the only thing in many parts of the developing world that is going to finally lead to good governance and a lot more justice where the wealth of these nations is more evenly distributed and shared by the people. I mean, Nigeria is a fabulously wealthy petroleum state. And I think it's going to have to be the mass evangelization of the people. Because the corruption gets so rooted in. That you're going to have to have. Really a revival that. That makes a critical mass of people. Population corruption resistant. That's the only way you're going to change. Turn out those governments. And like it or not, as much as Christians want to sort of be otherworldly. Good governance. If you don't have good governance, you're just going to have a lot of misery. And so if this effort can help improve governance and you know the developed English speaking world, that will certainly help the rest of the world. But I think in the rest of the world, too, there's going to need to be a religious movement and an educational movement to and more development. I'm not against that. But corruption in so many of these countries. Just destroys even how many good faith efforts from abroad to try to help. Without corruption being addressed, I don't know where you go. I don't know what you think. Yeah, corruption is baked in in a way that it's. It's part of the fabric of being Nigerian. Anyway, there's a. It's just another assumption. There was an assumption when I was a kid and when my parents were kids. It's from the from the moment we got independence. It's been. It's been a very specific elite in the way that the West speaks about elites now. There are actual not just only got very few people that control lots of the resources for the entire country. So when I was younger, it was a case of waiting. It was waiting for the for the people in charge to die out. That was sort of the hope that people had. But now it's not even that it's just Nigeria is what it is. And your best hope is to get out of the country and go make it somewhere else. That's how it's seen. But interestingly, even the religious movements, Christianity in Nigeria suffers a lot from prosperity because the circumstances create that desperate people in dire poverty and they'll be people that want to take advantage of that. So all of that plays plays a role in that. I think Christianity in the West has so much more to give than a lot of Western Christians think, I believe, because of just what we see around us, especially in England. But in churches and the majority of the church going people in the UK are immigrants. So there's already some kind of gel and that's going on. And I think the more that continues, then you get a lot you get more natural assimilation going on. That's my hope anyway. By the same time, it's it's it will be naive to not look around and see the threats that created. Yeah. Do you think the diaspora from the developing world that has lived in the developed world and maybe seen that in also better forms of government, you think maybe in time they might help the countries that they left from and say, hey, you know, everybody's leaving the country because partly just because of governance. I don't know. It's. The once you leave, you almost elevate to becoming one of the elites because you you're now you're for the opportunity. And the people you left behind, look, you're lucky now you you've made it. You you've left the base and going back, you're treated the way you describe a lot of the agents treated as a source of wealth. OK, what can I how much you've got resources, how can I benefit from it? So there's navigating playing those games. OK, he's trying to use is actually trying to help. So I think I'm not sure my dad's currently back in Nigeria is involved in the government somehow. But I don't see I think it's just the game is so the system is so big in that there are all these little games. And I listen to Jordan, who just had this lady, I don't remember her name, who's like an entrepreneur Senegalese, I think that spoke about the difficulties she had in trying to set up a business and navigating all of this loopholes where it's just everything done gets done by bribery. And I think that's the biggest challenge. You can you pay off and I'll quickly can you get that done and trying to change that system? It's not an easy task. I don't think a lot of the people in the past, I think it would be more of the people on the ground back home that change and not ask a lot that escape and want to come back and preach at them. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That makes sense to me. Somebody was making someone was using the illustrations of truth and reconciliation in South Africa back in the Mandela Desmond to two days. Another person then just next to me made the point that, you know, they had that for a little while. And there's real questions about, you know, where South Africa as a nation, again, South Africa, another nation with enormous mineral wealth. Whether, you know, these Venezuela to Venezuela, a nation of enormous wealth, these should be wealthy nations and the people should they should have a large thriving middle class and it's not happening. So. All right, so I was looking at. Does anyone care that 80 percent of France's electrical grid is uranium from Niger or 90 percent of Niger has no electricity or that France has a ton of gold but no minds and Molly has minds but no gold. Does anyone care? Well, I don't know how many people know it. I didn't know it until you said it. It's. Just sort of putting things next to each other. You have to ask the question why? What has led to this? And okay, so then you recognize it. How can it be remedied? So France stops buying uranium from Niger. Does that help Niger? Now suddenly they have uranium and no hard currency. These are really difficult questions. Just to comment on that, not on France and Niger, but Nigeria like you said are swimming in oil. But the refineries that were built, three were commissioned and two are still quote unquote under construction and this was done from like the 70s. And every government that comes in just sort of say, yep, we're going to bring the wealth of the oil back to Nigeria and it's just not that. And then the corruption is so big and it's not just one person that will change. It will require a lot of the systems failing to the point where we need to build a new one, in my opinion. Do you think that the messages or ideas that are will translate to a simple person? Do you think the idea scale or for an agency? I don't know that the messages at are are aimed at. I think the messages that are aimed at the elite. I think that's that's who they're appealing to. And I think the most important and telling in terms of what is arc about, listen to David Stroud. His talks, when I hear him, when I hear Peterson, Peterson's talking about the stuff he usually talks. All these other people come on and talk about their little shit. When David Stroud talks, I say, oh, this is what you're doing. And I get it. Has there been any announcement about what might do next after this this big conference? Not yet. If they make such an announcement, it will be tomorrow. I very much doubt they will. I suspect they're going to let this settle, do a postmortem, figure out next steps, which is why I, you know, I'm making this video. I might make another video because I think these people are open to feedback and I. I think they have goals and so depending on what their goals are and whether they think they can reach it, they'll pivot and adjust. For example, next question would be, would the next one be in North America? Because one in North America would be very different than one in the UK. So, I mean, you could hold something like this in New York. Or Toronto. Or Los Angeles or San Francisco or Chicago or Silicon Valley. I mean, they've got the resources to do it. So I wouldn't be surprised if the next one was in North America. But I think the baby is between the Strouds and Jordan Peterson. With Peugeot giving his talk tomorrow. Do you think that they managed to nail down the symbology of the whole event? No. Elaborate, please. I think Peugeot's. I think a lot of people won't understand Peugeot's talk. I don't know what he's going to say. I don't know what he's going to do. But most of these people are straight ahead modernist, rationalist, doer people. And I don't know what Jonathan's going to say. But I think Jonathan is valued. A lot of people there clearly watch Jonathan's stuff. When Jonathan comes down to the floor, there's usually a good number of people around him. But here's the question. How much do Eric and Brett Weinstein really understand Jonathan Peugeot? And in some ways, Eric Weinstein, if Eric Weinstein were a Christian, he would very much be the kind of person that was here as someone from the business world. He was here because he started in the ITW space. But if you listen to Eric Weinstein, he's used to hobnobbing with billionaires, not me. Peterson's reached into some very elite circles. And there are other stories that I know. Peterson has reached into some very elite circles. Okay, what do you do with that? What do they do with that? I think they're trying to figure that out. Well, he's boosting the signal of Peugeot tremendously. And Peugeot will remain an obscure figure if Jordan will not say in the end of 2017, he will say, oh, I'm speaking to this icon carver. And we're talking about symbolism. It would be very interesting to be in on the Arc leadership teams for me and just watch the dynamics in the room. Because some of the names of that committee are on the website. And some of them spoke. And again, like I said, the artists are kind of an odd, bohemian, tiny little group there that don't quite know where they fit in. And I think they're certainly welcome there and they're wanted there by the rest. But I don't know that the artists quite know how they fit in. And so to have something that helps integrate the artists better would, I think, probably pursue more of what Peterson wants. Paul, do I see any combination of interesting people mingling that usually don't seem to cross Internet paths? So my hosts, I'm not going to mention them here because I don't know if they want their names mentioned. They're two brothers. One very much set up my last trip and is involved in this. I'm staying with the other one and his family. They were on the floor as their day job. They have a media job. And I was talking to them today and they said, it's been really interesting watching the minglings. And Mandy, I think you are exactly right. There are some unusual minglings that have surprised my friends. And my sense is when I sit there and talk to them, they point out people. And this is so and so and this is so and so and this is so and so and this is so and so. So they know people partly because they work in media. And so here basically they were running the cameras for all kinds of political interviews. And they're fairly politically informed. So they're just watching it. And they said, yeah, there were some surprising minglings going on. Rick asks, where is Freddie? I don't know, Rick. I didn't take him with me. I saw he was on stage at Living Stones. I hope you didn't lose Freddie. When I get back to Sacramento, I expect Freddie to be there, Rick. And if he's not there, I'm holding you personally responsible. Do you know if everyone I'm going to be there at the O2, what is it tomorrow night? Is everyone who's been in the main session is going to invite it to Wednesday night? No, I think I think it's a loyal Wednesday night. Yeah, that'll be art for the rest of us. I think it'll be the same. What's that? On that note, I've got to go. Really nice to speak to you. Great to see you, Gregory. I will be leaving as well. Thank you, Paul. All right. Maybe it's a good time then to land the plane. So any announcements we want to make? Okay, so announcements. But before we do, I do have one last question regarding art. What's the role of the people like myself, you're paying attention to your work. And also, how do we bridge the gap between what we're doing and what they're trying to accomplish? I think we're doing our part. We're paying attention to them. We're learning from them. And what we're doing right here is we are some people that are will watch this live stream. Hello, Art. Hello, elites of the United Kingdom. We're watching you. We're sympathetic. Don't squish us. Where's the Wi-Fi goes now? I think continuing to have good faith conversations. So when I talk about them being elites, I don't mean that in a negative way. Aaron Ben and James Davidson Hunter have convinced me that there needs to be, for society to really gel, there needs to be collaboration between the hoi polloi and the elite. And from what I've seen, these elites are gracious and wanting to do good things. And generally speaking, the good things that they want, you know, we can quibble about progress and technology, but they do want to lift all boats. And I think probably at this place, there are a lot of people who are Christians quietly and they've got a vision for the betterment of the world. And they see this as an opportunity to pursue that. So I see it as good faith. Does it feel like an anti-woke conference or are they trying to do more than just? They're definitely trying to do more than just anti-woke. I think the anti-woke fever, the height of that fever has passed because I think the height of the woke infection has passed. That doesn't mean that a lot has passed. So I think now in some ways, they want to fight the slower institutional battle to continue to push back that stuff. But this group is definitely aimed at leading a counterrevolution to turn back society. And everybody has their hobby horses. So Schellenberger wants more nuclear power. Other people are looking at other aspects. But they're concerned that the climate change narrative is not healthily construed. I didn't hear a lot of this might disappoint someone, I didn't hear a lot of conspiracy thinking. I think for the most part, most of these people are clear-eyed business people and some political people who are saying a lot of damage has been done in the last 15 years. How can we undo it and set up a better world? Are you pushing the concept of estuary left and right? Are you pushing the concept of estuary left and right? Am I pushing it as hard as and in the way John Van Donk would? Probably not. But I don't think few people would do that. So John will watch this probably. You'll all be happy to know I walked through what estuary is to probably two dozen people. One of the things you do at a conference like this is you very quickly realize you need your elevator speech. So then I have to figure out what elevator speech I want to give. So I gave the estuary elevator speech. And I even gave it to Oz Guinness. So there you go. Gave it to Oz Guinness, gave it to... I didn't give it to the Weinsteins, they didn't have enough time. And they were also still trying to figure out what to do with me. But a lot of other people, I gave the estuary elevator speech. And if someone would ask me if they do an ARC meeting again, and if they would say, Paul, we want you to even just have something that people can try, I would go and help ARC use some of the estuary tools to broaden out and strengthen that network between the various factions. Oh, hey, Kale. I still want to... Yeah, I am wearing denim. But yeah, I'd love to have you at these events too, Kale, because I think I've had a lot of conversations with Roman Catholics. And Kale's sort of my... Kale and Father Eric, I'd love to have them both with me. They're sort of my Catholic translators. And another thing, as I mentioned in the speech before, I think if they would do it again, if they would ask for my opinion, I would say a little bit more awareness of post-modernity, not post-modernism, of what comes of the liberal critiques. So that if you're really committed to the L word, let's work on improving it, because some of the reasons for the abandonment of liberalism by post-modernity are viable, unless you address them. Was Peter Thiel there? No. I saw Greg Hurwitz. I had a lovely conversation with him. Saint Dermantus is running his agenda there. Hello. Announcements. Yes, announcements. Yes. Thursday, myself, Paul and John will be attending... John who? Oh, John. Okay, that John. Okay. That John Van Doink. He ain't here. Unfortunately, John Van Doink is in there. But yeah, we'll be going to the Ian McGill-Chris Eastgarden event on Thursday that we'll be going to. But as far as estuaries and anyone going to that event, Paul will be there. So that's the announcement for that, for Thursday. And a number of other people from the Art Conference will be there too. Good networking, if you so wish. And then on Friday, you'll be in Edinburgh. Liam is putting together an estuary type event for people. I've had a few messages from people around Edinburgh asking about that. Once Liam's got a venue, I'll post that on Twitter. But that will be on Friday in Edinburgh, Friday evening. On Saturday evening, you'll be at Manchester estuary. Again, the venue that we had is temporarily closed. So venue to be announced Saturday, 7pm, there'll be an estuary in Manchester where Paul will be at. On Sunday, there'll be a meeting, small meeting, for people in the area in Oxford. Sunday evening. And then Monday evening is the London estuary at 7pm. Venue nearly decided, but all the venues will be announced on Twitter. And then, yeah, that's it. Those are all the dates. Why don't you type your Twitter into the comments here so people can find you. So that's Twitter. And then when I, now that I'm, I'll be less busy once this conference is done. And then just make sure you at me on Twitter so I can retweet them. And then when I retweet them, I think I'll also try to post them to the channel. Oh, wait a minute. There was a star question that someone asked. Oh, yeah. Do you, what do you make of the news that Tammy Peterson started? I'm not surprised. She was heading that way. Michaela's joined evangelical churches. I think Jordan, like Mark LeFaber, is going to stay away from the church in order to let the atheist in. He's going to hold open the door. I think that's what's going to happen. And another way, I think, Arc, again, for me, because I am a clergy, church is what I lead with. I think for Jordan, because, you know, before he was a psychologist, he was really like politics. Oh, yeah, he was, wasn't it? And as you. So I think for Jordan, I think Jordan feels that this way is his more natural way. So that's that's what I imagine. So, yeah, I'm not I'm not surprised Tammy's going that way. And, you know, that's and they're there. You know, if you go to the at the German estuary, there are a lot of people who are coming into the church. So, yeah, yeah. What is RCIA, Rights of Christian Initiation? Thank you, Cale. See, that's why Cale is so handy. He knows these things. I don't. Oh, see, Corey knows them too. For adults. All right. Very good. Well, under two hours, it's not too bad. Oh, very well. Thank you, Tyle. I appreciate you. What's the name of Jamie? I appreciate you being my Jamie. Jamie for the day. Happy to be here. All right. We will end transmission. One love. When you come to America again, going to get you on the Freddie and Paul show. That would be a dream come true. You hear that, Freddie? Dream come true. And stream.