https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=idDLb_yHuAE

 Hi, this is Paul. I was gone when this video dropped. I was out in Trinidad, California having a lovely breakfast with my lovely wife and a friend texted me and said the Verveke Peterson video just dropped and it's like nothing I've ever seen from Peterson. And I thought, oh boy. And well, my wife was very gracious and so we listened to about the first hour and a half on the drive back to Sacramento because my wife is a school teacher during the school year. She works Monday through Friday and I work Sundays, meaning we never get a weekend away. And so summer times we try to take some weekends away. And this was sort of our first attempt at taking a weekend away. We do it because I leave after church on Sunday and we drive to some remote location and then we take the Monday together. And so today is Tuesday and I'm back at work. This was I'm going to call the manic dialogue and we'll talk about that in this video. I've wrestled. I kept telling my wife yesterday while we're driving in the car, I can listen to things while we drive because I'm an auditory listener so I can easily drive and listen. My wife has a harder time. She's much more of a visual learner. She has a harder time driving and being able to capture things carefully. But at that point it was her turn to drive and so she was driving and I just kept telling her, I don't know what I'm going to do with this video. I don't know what I'm going to do with this video because I'm hung up. Well, we'll get into that. There are, there are, I don't know what happened with this video. I don't know what's going on. And so the friend who texted me said, I've never heard anything like this from Peterson. And I'm like, what do you mean? And he said, when, after you see it, tell me if I'm wrong. So yeah, I was really anticipating this video. This was not the video conversation I was anticipating. So I'm not going to do a lot of commentary in this video. I've only watched this video once and I don't know how I'm going to approach it entirely. There are a few sections that are going to be fairly straightforward to tackle, mostly towards the end of the video. But I, and, and, you know, Peterson family, Inc, whoever's managing his stuff. So this, this video was about a month in the can before released. And, you know, obviously Peterson and or his family who is sort of being his managers, his daughter, or whoever's doing this had some understanding that I was frankly surprised it was released at all. I really was. We'll get into that. So as John had mentioned, their last talk was in 2015 and that talk is available on YouTube. I'll put the link down in the description. That's a, that's a talk I've watched three or four times. It's a great conversation and it's pre C 16 Jordan and John and Jordan's got some of the light humor that he sort of lost in the grip of his blue church heresy trial and blue church exile and blue church persecution, but not like this video. Now, as a disclaimer for everything about to say in this video, it should be noted that Jordan Peterson is at best an acquaintance of mine. He and I don't really have a personal relationship as was obvious by it from the video when he and John verve, John Vervecky mentioned he, me and Peterson, you know, acknowledged that he knows who I am. All. How could he not know who I am? Every time he turns on YouTube, he's got to have his wall plastered with how many videos from me. So, but he's, he's an acquaintance and I care a lot for Jordan. Um, I do. I care a lot for him and this video raised concerns for his wellbeing on my part and I don't know again, and we'll get into that because I may be completely off base. I do not have a personal relationship with Jordan. I have no insider information about him. Um, John, both John Vervecky and Jonathan Peugeot have personal relationships with him. John Vervecky was of course a colleague for many years. John Jonathan Peugeot has been a personal friend of his. Um, I don't have that relationship with Jordan, which is, you know, which is fine, but I do care immensely for him. He has been a real blessing in my life. Uh, he's been a teacher via this YouTube. Um, and I've learned a ton from him and you know, with respect to how Jordan changed my life because I began talking about him a lot and that cost me in terms of my career and my reputation and my own denomination to a degree. I don't know how significant, but I know that for a lot of people in my church, I am, I am a disappointment. Let's say it that way. So in 2015, they had a terrific talk and John had told me that they had actually had another significant conversation to sort of a debate type thing. Uh, it was a public event. It was a public mutual lecture where they talked about some of the work that they had both been doing. And John had actually said he thought that that other unrecorded one was, was an even better talk than this one. And this one was good. And so there's a lesson in there. You never get a second chance to make a recording. And so whether or not you're going to publish a recording and I say that also knowing that once you record something that changes the conversation too, as Jordan Peterson and Barry Weiss mentioned, it's too bad that there's not a recording of that other conversation because I would have loved to hear this. I became aware of John Vervecky by Strawn, who is a listener of mine and he was listening to some early copies of Vervecky's Buddhism and cognitive science if that is the title of it. And Strawn can be a very persistent person. Uh, he hasn't been on the channel yet. I hope to have him on the channel at some time. He and I have been talking for years now. Uh, we've had a number of private conversations via zoom. He has not wanted to be recorded and that's, I totally understand that. And he has certainly not, not wanted any of our recordings to be published. And that's, that's, that's absolutely fair. I'm not going to, I'm not going to dox anybody, but Strawn sort of saw the connection and said, you really got to study Vervecky. You really got to pay attention to Vervecky. And so I started listening to Vervecky and then especially when awakening from the meaning crisis came out, those, the audio was far better. And that's when I began to appreciate John's work and get a chance to know John. But again, when I started making videos about John, certain elements of my Christian audience sort of howled, don't, don't spend any time with him. Don't talk to him. Um, it's Buddhism, it's new age stuff, yada, yada, yada, but I don't really, um, I, I'm going to say this in a very pagan way. I go where the muse leads me baby. And, um, I began really seeing a lot of value in John's work and John saw that I was paying attention to him and he asked for a conversation and we've done a series of conversations and, and I, I, I also care a lot for John. And even though most of our relationship has been in this strange space, you know, I really count John as a friend. He's a man that I trust. Um, he seems like a man of high integrity, good faith, um, tremendously well read, very intelligent. And, and I, I really care for John too. And so I was really looking forward to this conversation. I was looking forward to this conversation a lot. And then I was, as I was playing it in the car, I was like, what is going on? And you can see that in the comment section on Jordan's video. What is with Jordan? Now again, I'm again, this conversation happened towards the end of May and it's towards the end of June now. And there seems to be a significant lag from the recording of the conversation on Jordan's channel and the release of these conversations. Um, there's obviously a fair amount of post-production work that goes on in these, uh, the recordings are recorded either from zoom or Skype. And unlike the way I do my conversations, which is just recording and zoom and letting him fly, I do almost zero editing. Someone behind the scenes is putting in the chapter settings for Jordan. And because I do YouTube, I have an understanding of, of the amount of work that is going on behind the scenes. There's coordinations in terms of the, the audio version. And again, I have an audio version of most of my videos, but, but there's, there's production going on behind the scenes for Jordan and Jordan is getting help, which means that other people, I would imagine his daughter, his son, his wife, cause Jordan's always sort of approached this thing sort of as Jordan Peterson, Inc. And, and the way he's been treated, I just wouldn't blame him. You know, he he's working with people he trusts. So again, I was surprised this video was released at all because after the introduction, which Jordan read just fine, the way he was in this video, I, I, I'd never seen him like that. And that's exactly what people have been writing me emails and texts saying, I'm worried about Jordan. Is he okay? Is he healthy? Now Jordan wasn't off topic in this video. It's chaotic. It's manic, but his comments are, were pertinent. What seemed to be lacking was impulse control, which is, I, again, I'm not a clinical psychologist. I do not have a degree in psychology, but I have years of experience of relationships with manic people. One just walked by my door right now. I just saw his shadow and he's going to be banging on my door in a little while. He's kind of talked about it before for him kind of 12 o'clock noon is mania and 6 PM or 12 o'clock is mania and six o'clock is utter depression. And this individual with bipolar cycles about, he's about a 10 day cycle, I'd say. And I've known him for 10 years. He, I mean, this guy literally slept against the door of my office so that I had to walk over him. And, and, you know, I've seen a lot of mania. Was Jordan manic? My wife had a very interesting observation. She said, you know, express much of the same frustration as many of the people who, who left comments on Jordan's video. And she said, I'm, you know, they keep opening up interesting stuff that I want them to follow on and expand and do work with. And then, and then Jordan keeps pulling them away. It's like, you know, going to a dessert, having the dessert tray brought to the table and we'll have this. And then when they start to bring out the pumpkin pie, Oh no, I want cheesecake. And then so poor John Vervecki goes back to the kitchen to get cheesecake and to bring cheesecake. Oh no, I want apple pie. And poor John goes back to, and John did this for two and a half hours. So hats off to John. But, you know, and my wife, I thought she really nailed it. She said, and she, she's listened to, she's, she's been with me on some of the Jordan presentations during the book tour. And she's listened to a couple of Jordan Peterson things with me in the car. And she's listened to zero, zero, John Vervecki. She's of course her, John Vervecki's be talking about John and telling her about John. And she really, she, she, she has a great deal of admiration and for both of them. And she really loved John. John came off very well to my wife, which is interesting data to me. And she really likes Jordan, but she was like, what's going on with him? Every time Jordan asks a question, John follows up, Jordan redirects in a totally different direction. But again, it wasn't, you know, I also have a lot of conversations with schizophrenics. It wasn't like a schizophrenic schizophrenics. Having a conversation with schizophrenics is a, is a, is a very unusual thing and trying to do so, especially with some schizophrenics that I know that are, they're completely untreated and they're deeply haphazard in terms of their associations. I used to have one schizophrenic that when we were running a men's group here at the church, he would come to the men's group because you know, he'd just sit down in the men's group with everyone and we'd just be going on with our Bible study and some word would sort of trigger him and he'd have an association with that word. And then he'd talk for two or three minutes about his association with that word. And in most cases it wasn't on topic. It made sense to him, but it didn't make sense with the rest of the flow of the conversation. You know, one of the things that I think about when I talk about the homeless crisis is for so many people, why are they homeless? What, what mental illness really, and many different kinds of mental illness, what they really do is reduce a person's capacity to form stable, productive relationships with other people. That's the crux of a lot of it. And so now Jordan's comments were on point and sometimes brilliant, which as some of the commenters on Jordan's channel on that video said, gave the, gave the entire conversation something of a dance and which the title, a conversation so intense it might well be, you know, it's sort of like a psychedelic trip. So did Jordan, I cannot believe Jordan who is requesting photographs for thumbnails of people more dressed up than they usually show up for the conversation with would in any intentional way do a psychedelic before having a conversation with John Vervecky. If he did do that, that would say a lot. So I have no idea what's happening in this video, but it's not like any other video I've ever seen from Jordan, which is exactly what people have been writing me and saying. Now again, most of these people are saying this privately and I thought, should I even make a comment about this in this video? But it's out there in the public. So people are saying, people are commenting. And so if it's out there, we should have a productive, tell the truth and love the apostle Paul, a productive loving conversation. And many of the people who watch this channel are big Jordan Peterson fans and really care for him. He's helped a tremendous number of people. There's a, there's a huge amount of goodwill and support and love for Jordan out there in the world. So, and again, this video was a month ago. Did he have a bad day? Was he unwell that day? Did he lack sleep? Was it just exciting for him to revisit with an old friend? Because now, now you've got to think about, and we're going to go into this in some of this video, you have to think about everything that Jordan has lost over the last five years. Yes, he earned a lot of money. Yes, he's now a household name. Yes. A lot of good things have happened because of what has happened in his life, but he's also suffered tremendous loss. He had a life threatening condition. He, that continues to plague him to one degree or another. His wife almost lost her life and has had a near miraculous recovery, if not miraculous from a very serious form of cancer. His daughter's health has been an issue for years. Jordan, as comes through in this conversation, in number place, Jordan is a man who sees visions. Now part of my frustration with modern, with contemporary secularity, with this keeping up appearances of the naturalism lab leak. What do I mean by that? Well, watch some of my old videos. Has to do with covering one eye or the other. Is because people are not allowed to speak honestly about their experiences and I have known people and it's not, it's not mental illness. I've mentioned, I've mentioned that the people who are suffering from this have been living with a wild God, Barbara Erin, right? Very interesting book she wrote. She wrote, she got famous by writing nickel and dime and then she's living with a wild God, life with a wild God. Look it up, Barbara Erin, right? Where she talks about the fact that especially when she was young, she had a tremendous number of visions. People have visions. It's not mental illness. It's a function of humanity. The apostle Paul had visions. I've been talking about it in my Sunday sermons because I'm going to be doing a deep dive into the apostle Paul for a while. Having visions is part of the human condition. Sometimes they are associated and prompted by ingestion of certain substances, either intentionally or unintentionally. We know this about human beings. Why can't we talk about it? I would imagine given everything that Jordan has been through and I don't know what kinds of drugs that he's been on, obviously why should I? I'm not his doctor and I don't care to have, you know, I'm not the kind of person when you visit a house like you see on TV, I'd see this on TV where people would visit a home and snoop in their medicine cabinet to see what kind of drugs they take. And that had never occurred to me until I saw it on TV and I'm like, on a movie, I'm like, why would you open someone's medicine cabinet and take a look at their prescription drugs? What kind of an immoral person do you have to be to do that? Anyway, was he unwell that day? He's lost a lot and I'm going to go into that. And maybe seeing John was just, you know, remember his earlier conversation with Brett Weinstein when he so thanked Brett because he got a chance to do something that he hasn't had a chance to do for five years and that was not ripped voluntarily from him. He said, well, if he hadn't made such a big stink about C-16, yeah, well, that's blue church, dirt church discipline. And I'll tell you, people got a lot more to fear from blue church, church discipline than they do from regular church discipline. Ask Brett Weinstein, he's going through it now. And that's another video I wanted to, topic I wanted to treat, but this one came up and for the next two weeks I've got weekend trips coming and I've got church obligations and some channel things going on. So, so if you're hoping for a whole lot of videos on this, well, I don't know if it's going to happen, but so was he just excited to see John? People have different relationships with people. Is this part of his relationship with John? Is there a rivalry? Is there, because he mentioned, you know, John is a very popular teacher. Jordan was a very popular teacher. These things play on people's minds and they, they leak out again, Jordan in this video didn't seem to have a lot of impulse control. And he doesn't necessarily, I don't know him personally to know what was it intentional? Was this his goal for this video? That could be too. And if that's the case, I don't know what game he's playing, but it certainly was an interesting video. Let's talk about the waves. One of the videos that I was thinking about making before this thing dropped was more of an analysis of the second wave. Recently, Justin Briarly had a good conversation with Andrea with the bangs and Andrea brought up wave one and wave two. And of course that was new. That was new terminology for Justin, but I've been using this terminology quite a while. So what was Jordan's life before C16, before his status rocket ride? You know, he'd always been frenetic and enormously productive. Frenetic was a word that my wife used about him in this video. And I thought too, I also thought manic, you know, he's a university professor, a very, very popular unity university professor taught at Harvard, tenured professor at University of Toronto. He has published an enormous amount of scholarly work. And this is something that in all of this sort of left wing, left wing media takedowns of Jordan is almost always glazed over the amount that professor has published is often sort of an indication of, it's an indication of some things, an enormous amount of published material. No one can really challenge Jordan's academic credentials. Very popular professor, almost a cult leader in terms of a professor. I'm sure his classes were always full. Now if he went back, it'd be impossible. So, and you know, such an and again, we've got video recordings of his college, his lectures and his lectures, even before C16 were quite popular. And there's a lot of college lectures out there on YouTube and some good, some bad, but Jordan is an exceptional professor. He's a remarkable human being. Worked with grad students. You know, I've spoken with some of his grad students over the years and you know, he just, he mesmerized students and there was always sort of a cult around him. And I don't mean that in a bad way because he didn't abuse that. Real cult leaders usually abuse their power and I have zero indication he ever abused his power. He just is a magnetic, magnetic and gay. I mean, John Vervecky at one point said to me, you know, listening to me or to someone else, I don't remember, I've listened to so many videos, you know, listening to Jordan is like, you know, looking at the sun and it's true. I mean, he's that good. And the conversation that, that David Fuller had with Roussen. Yeah, there's, there's a reason he went viral and a reason we all deep dove into his videos like crazy. And on top of this all, he always, not only did he have, you know, a daughter whose medical situation I'm sure cost him and Tammy a lot of time and money, he had all kinds of side gigs. I mean, he's, he was always on Ontario public television. You can find him all sorts of recordings from that era of his life. I mean, his life is quite well documented, which is really quite nice. He talks about his consulting, consulting with business and with the UN, you know, founding business, founding his own businesses, collaborating with other individuals in his field, the self-authoring program, you know, spinning off businesses. And on top of this is clinical work. Jordan is a workaholic and he's, he's, he's just a high energy, high productive, brilliant guy. That's who he is. And that was all before wave number one. And so as I'm watching what's going on now, I'm just always trying to get an assessment of and get, gain perspective on this. Well, what's going on? Where's this going? What's, what's happening? So the chronology of the first wave, of course, C16, he tells the story in a variety of videos where, you know, C16 is, is, is rumbling through the Ontario parliament and he, he gets a chance and you could find that video. He gets a chance to testify before the parliament and he, this is really bothering him, compelled speech because of all the work that he had done about tyranny, about tyrannical societies from a, from a psychological point of view. You can find all of that in maps of meaning and in many ways that's what launched maps of meaning. So it's really bothering him. And as the story goes that I heard in one of the videos, his wife was away and he couldn't sleep and so often when he couldn't sleep, he would get up and he would write things out, but he had been playing around with YouTube. So he wrote something out and so he thought he'd just say it into YouTube and put out the video and see what happens. Well, I learned something about that and I'm just going to make a video about Jordan Peterson and see what happens. Well, here I am. So student protests, petition from his colleagues that he be fired and you know, that's not only threatening loss of a job. That's a tremendous, I mean again, Jordan, the part of the conversation about, you know, you know, Philo Sophia versus Philo Nikkei, he's not a disagreeable guy. He likes to live in harmony with other people. He likes to live in harmony with other people. He likes people. You don't become, you don't do the kinds of things you do in your life if you don't like people. Jordan likes people. He was a clinical psychologist. He deeply cares for individuals and he deeply cares for people. And so he doesn't like confrontation. He doesn't like polemics. He does and he doesn't. I mean, he likes a good, he likes a good debate. That's obvious, but at the end he wants to shake hands and leave his friends. And that's exactly the right way to be. And so now he's got all of his colleagues demanding that he be fired. That's, that's not good. You don't like that. That, that, that is hard to take. It would be hard for most people to take. Some people who are low in agreeableness would exalt in it, but not Jordan. And he mentions that, he mentioned that regularly about that petition that went around. That hit him hard. And then the warnings from the U of T administration. So now his livelihood is threatened and then suddenly his Patreon just blows up because he's, you know, worried about taking care of his family and there's this huge groundswell of support for Jordan. And that's overwhelming and, and that fuels his status rocket. Basically Blue Church Discipline Heresy Trial. They go after him. You know, New York Times, major newspapers. I mean, there's just, it's just an all out assault on Jordan. That impacts a person severely. That can destroy people. That hits him. And he does the biblical series. And so you see Jordan in the middle of this enormous, on one hand it's, it's a war on the heavenlies. It's what it is. It's the best way to think about it. And he's right there in the middle of it. And world's best timing to release a book that he had been working on for a number of years, 12 Rules for Life releases January 2018. Woosh goes that book. More Blue Church attacks. Kathy Newman interview. You know, G, GQUK interview. Australian TV. Monk Debates. Goes to Liberty University. Again, someone's got to make a movie of his life someday because it's one of these stories, I was listening to the rest is history about Jeremy, not Corbyn, Jeremy Corp. Astounding story. Astounding story. If you're not listening to the rest is history, Tom Holland's podcast, I don't know what you're doing with your time because every episode is just a delight. Anyway, more Blue Church attacks. The book tour. 135 cities in 150 days. Something like that. It's like, I, you know, I looked at his schedule at one point and then when he comes to Sacramento, you know, I meet Rick and Mike, Rick's brother and my wife, the four of us do dinner before the event in a little restaurant next to the place and a bunch of other Petersen fans are there and someone tips us off. There's this RV in the parking lot that Jordan's in there with his wife and he just went and you get the sense of what is he doing? Dave Rubin, it was so funny too, Dave Rubin was, you know, pacing out in front of the theater and nobody talked to him. But if Jordan had been out there, it would have been swamped. I mean, I mean, just, just imagine for a moment what this would do to your life and then how he managed it. And even Tammy talks about that, you know, that wasn't a good idea. And then when you look at, so of course he's doing little interviews when he goes into a new city, you know, especially when he went into L.A. he'd been on Rogan and something and, you know, radio interviews. I mean, he's hyping the book. That's what you do. Sell the book. Boy did he, boy did he sell it. And so then you roll into town and then the event starts maybe at seven or seven thirty. So you're probably, you got dressed, you're in the green room, you're meeting, you know, the local, the locals, you know, people who are managing this. Dave Rubin warms up, you go on stage. And of course every lecture was Jordan sort of stream of consciousness, what he'd been thinking about, somehow connected to the book or one of the twelve rules. And he'd do that for an hour and a half. And then there'd be questions from the audience that Dave Rubin would handle. And then you dismiss the other crowd. But that's only half the event. Then you have the VIP event. So for a hundred or a hundred fifty dollars or something, you get the VIP treatment. So then Jordan comes out again and he works a hundred fifty handshakes and photographs for a minute. And this is where James Frazi and I were just aghast at the energy it took for him to do that. Because I know what it's like to work a line because as a preacher I'll preach in a church and the tradition is in the CRC you'd go to the back of the church and you'd shake people's hands as they left. And so, and I, you know, if I'm guest preaching in another church and it could be big churches bigger than Living Stones and so you'd shake hands with a hundred or a hundred fifty or two hundred or two hundred fifty people. And there'd be a little introduction, be similar to that, not a photo. And Jordan works that line for like an hour, hour and a half. And then he goes away again. And then he comes back and takes a special VIP Q&A. And that goes for another hour. And so it's like ten thirty when the night is done. And I'll tell you, as someone who's worked nights various different kinds of jobs, at about that point you're not ready to just fall into bed probably. And Jordan was sharp the whole time. I just watched him in these things and I was like, it was nearly superhuman. So then what do you do? Then you unwind. You know, I think at this point he'd given up alcohol. So you're, you know, a lot of people at the end of the night they'll, if they drink, then they'll use some alcohol before they go to bed, which is not a good idea. But so he wasn't doing that. So what do you do? You sit down, you read, you talk to your wife, you watch some TV, you watch some YouTube until finally, you know, the adrenaline is out of your system because doing those kinds of events, same with preaching, it's a big adrenaline rush. So you've got to let time to get the adrenaline out of your system. So then he probably falls asleep at like one or two in the morning. It was what, he's in an RV with his wife and his daughter. So then maybe you sleep till eight or nine or ten and then you get up and you get something to eat. For him it's going to have to be beef, beef, only beef and water. And then you drive from Sacramento to Portland. You do the whole, you do the same thing the whole next day. And think about this. And think about doing that for months on end. Or if you're not doing the RV thing, then you're staying in hotels, then you're catching air, then you're doing airfare. And, you know, think about that. That's in a lot of ways even worse. Going through airport security, you've racked up so many freaking file miles, you're at least flying first class. But I know people that live this kind of lifestyle in some ways. And so if you just sit down and think about what the daily life is of that kind of being on tour, it's exhausting. Hundred fifty, 135 cities in 150 days. It's insane. But, so his last classes are in, you know, 2017 on YouTube. Then he has a sabbatical or leave of absence or something. He doesn't get fired. But he's likely not being paid. He probably doesn't need to now. You know, he's got the book income and he's got the income from the VIP things and he's got income from other sources now. So money fortunately isn't an issue. And then we start to watch in the spring of that year, he starts crying in interviews and things are happening. And now of course we know that his wife's illness, the benzodiazepine and all of that is happening. And then the last event that I saw Matt was one of his last events in San Francisco was a private event with the Independence Institute. Some people that I know in San Francisco. And we had a special meetup and you've seen that picture of myself and some, you know, we did a group picture with him instead of just me with an individual picture and then cancels everything. That's June of 2019. And he basically disappears for a year and a half really until January 2021. And now we know the story. He tells that story, Russia, withdrawal, COVID, Croatia, Florida. I mean, that's insane. And then he describes the kind of pain he's in, how he has to walk 10 miles, how, you know, the amount of pain he's in, the withdrawal from this. There's the first wave and then the trough of the first wave. And then the second wave comes. And of course he had the London Times thing and it's like, I'm not doing that anymore. I don't blame him. But that's going to impact the wave because a big part of his fame and his reach, because people write powerful books, but they don't necessarily go too far. And part of the ironic collaboration of the Blue Church is that the Blue Church made him in many ways. And so his avoidance now of the institutions of the Blue Church or the cathedral, however you want to phrase it, are going to keep this wave lower. You know, you can set Google to just send you daily updates of articles on keywords. And so for a long time I've had Jordan Peterson, of course the pace of articles. And that has to be, you know, an impact on the sales of this book as well because he's not in the news anywhere near like he was. His health isn't great and of course we have no idea about the state of his health. So releases 12 more Rules for Life January of this year or was it March? It was March. You know, obviously his physical recovery, but we've watched with these dialogues him definitely getting stronger. You know, at first he was with his daughter doing some joint interviews and he was doing interviews himself. He had the Matthew McConaughey interview, had all of this. But again, he's not engaging with major mass media. He's sort of picking who he talks to and who he doesn't talk to. And fair enough, you know, given who he is and how he's been attacked, I have zero blame for that. And so, you know, he did some of these dialogues in the first wave, but that has sort of become the bread and butter of the second wave. And that then begins to, okay, Benjamin Boyce in my recent conversation, so what are your next steps? He says, I don't do a lot of planning with these things. How much planning is Jordan doing? I think he's much more of an intentional planner than I am. And it's very clear that he's talking to people who interest him, often books. So let's take a look at the videos that he's been releasing. So part of what I did was, I don't need these yet, part of what I did was I went in reverse order. And obviously those of you who know YouTube well, you can sort of bring up all the videos in chronological order on the video tab and just took shots of these. And so you see six months ago, it's January, rule one beyond order, he starts doing, he has a New Year's resolution video, he's doing videos with his daughter, he's starting to promote the book, and of course the big conversation with Matthew McConaughey. Now Jordan is a social scientist, and you'll notice it's in the Vervecky video, it's in the Barry Weiss conversation, he will often ask questions about analytics, YouTube analytics, Twitter analytics, book sales, Jordan pays attention to this. Now part of this is obviously status, Jordan pays a lot of attention to status, as do we all. He doesn't mask his paying attention to status, he uses these kinds of status indicators as indicators of value and importance. And that's a valid measurement, because it's very difficult for human beings to evaluate importance and value, and value as of course Sevilla watched this and left a comment on Twitter that she might do a commentary on this too. And I'm really curious that maybe I'll send Sevilla a note and find out what her thoughts were, because she is a clinical psychologist, and I'm not. What her comments are, I'm anxious to hear her thoughts on this video too. But the Matthew McConaughey video, I did some commentary on that, it was a very interesting conversation, but there's a status check, there's a heat check, so McConaughey was a fan of Petersons, and that makes sense. Petersons on Twitter reached out to Elon Musk asking for a conversation, and there was a conversation, and that was interesting. And that was sort of a, you know, in basketball you get a heat check, you just keep sinking threes, sinking threes, and you just keep throwing up threes, and I don't know if he ever secured a conversation with Elon Musk or not, that would be one to watch, but in terms of status, Petersons big, Musk is bigger, Petersons wealthy, Musk is healthier, Petersons famous, Musk is famouser. So there's levels of status, and so McConaughey though, that was a biggie, that was a biggie, and it really sort of kicked off the dialogues. And then of course Greg Hurwitz, who is a friend of Petersons who he's spoken with before, Douglas Murray, who of course Petersons has developed a relationship with, and then of course four months ago, the Times interview, I did a commentary on that, that has a million views. But if you look at sort of the metrics, it's interesting to see what videos get a lot of views and what videos get fewer views, and of course I pay my own attention to these. My videos where I talk about Jordan Peterson get more views than my videos with Rando's and my sermon videos. It's a function of the attention economy, and there's a lot of different variables that go into a video with a lot of views, with a lot of attention. And this gets into a video I wanted to make this week, more talk about spirits and principalities. Anyway, and then the Mark Manson video was an excellent one, I did commentary on that. He wasn't putting out so many then that I couldn't sort of keep up and not also pay attention to other interests that I have, but then the pace picked up. The Matt Ridley video was interesting, I only touched on that one briefly. Gadsad, I'm not a big fan of Gadsad. Nothing against him personally, just, if the percentage of culture war versus other things, I can tolerate a fair amount of culture war. A little bit of salt in this estuary is always fine, but Gadsad's pretty salty, so I didn't really touch that video. Some interesting elements in the Ayaan Hershey Ali video, I thought that was a good conversation. Of course the Peugeot conversation, but again, look at the metrics, 1.4 million with Saad, but again Saad has a pretty significant YouTube following and that would grab a lot of culture war attention. The conversation with Peugeot, 1.6 million views, that was interesting. Now of course Peugeot's YouTube following is not insignificant, but on YouTube, 100,000 subs is moderate sized, a million subs is good sized, multi-million subs is big, so that's why I keep saying I have a small channel and some of you are like, well it's bigger than my channel, well that's true, but there's a lot of, less than 20,000 after three years, not terribly successful. Successful enough for my purposes, and in many ways I'm glad it's not more successful, but peanuts in terms of YouTube stakes. But 1.5 million views with Peugeot, that's a remarkable conversation and Peterson noted that. That conversation I think changed Jordan in a number of ways. And then Advice for a Young Man, that's sort of Jordan's bread and butter. And then you've got the illustrator from his book, that was interesting, but not a lot of views, 200K. Conversation with Brett, of course now Brett also has a big following, that's a big culture war topic and so you're going to gather, and I see this in my own analytics too, any video that gets a little bit salty with the culture war always gets a lot of views because in Patterson, New Jersey, when there was a fight on the street, everyone would come out to watch. I learned that as a kid. So and So's Mama's fighting So and So Mama because So and So did something, and out there, there on the street, there in Patterson duking it out and the whole neighborhood is all around watching. Nothing draws a crowd like a fight. And so all of these culture war issues, they draw attention, nothing draws a crowd like a fight. Abigail Schreier, about a half million, that's a culture war video. And his conversations with Russell Brand, which I thought were quite good. Those are little clips because those are mostly on Brand's channel. Jaco Willink again has got a big following and Peterson really likes Jaco and Peterson. I actually didn't watch that. I've never watched any Jaco Willink. I just, I'm curious, but it's just not high enough on my on my hierarchy. And there's so many other things that are sort of out competing it. And in some of these videos, you can tell just exactly how much of them I watched. And so Mike Lee, I'm not so interested in the politics. A little bit of rehashing from the from his his conversation with Zizek. I did a commentary on that conversation. And then of course, Bishop Barron, which was a biggie. And I did a significant amount of work on that. 800,000 views. But now pay attention. Peugeot has 1.6 and Barron has 800 million. And a lot goes into these communities. A lot of Peugeot's community is online. A lot of Barron's community is online. But there's lots of subtle dynamics that go into whether or not a video is going to be popular. Yom Longberg, I thought that was interesting, but again, not a big interest of mine. Didn't do any commentary on it. The conversation with Paul Rossi was very interesting. I thought that was a good conversation. And then he started doing his question and answer videos, which I find also quite interesting. 10 Global Trends. Didn't watch that at all. I think I skipped to the end of that. So that is I did some conversation commentary on the Randall Wallace conversation. It was a good conversation. Really liked the whole conversation. Just didn't do a lot of commentary on it because sometimes the conversation is so good. It's like I don't have anything bad. And that was very much how I felt about his his conversation with Theodore Dowrymple. That that was that that one was right up my alley. Conversation with Roland Griffiths on psychedelics. I did some commentary on that. Very interesting. And again, very controversial, sort of, especially in my side where most of us religious folks. Let's see. Yeah, most of us Christian religious folks, little suspicious of psychedelics. Some of you in the comments section, very dismissive. Some of you in the comments section find me too dismissive. So there we have it. This conversation with Nicole Arbor. Found it distasteful. It was strange, not as strange as those one with the Fervecki. I don't know, just just wasn't my cup of tea. I still have to get back to Ian McGochrist. That was a powerful conversation. And that was but that was not like this conversation with Fervecki. The conversation with Stephen Fry. I did a lot of work on that. That was interesting. And then some of the more recent ones. I looked just briefly at the Russell Peters one. Temblay I didn't look at at all, but I'm still curious. I might go back and look at that one because this gets into again. It's not the culture war stuff, but you know, 100 almost not quite 200,000 views on that one. The conversation with Yomi Park. I listened to that one. The conversation with Yomi Park. I listened to about half of it and interested in the conversation, but that's sort of a different area. And I know some of what she had to say about her. About her interactions with Christians, I found interesting, especially because 10% of the Christian Reformed Church is Korean. And most of them are in California. And so I in my work life, I have a fair amount of contact with Korean pastors and it's it's a whole different ballgame, baby. It's a whole different ballgame Korean pastors. This conversation with Rex Murphy didn't watch much of, but interested in I've you know from from the some of the columns I've read of Rex Murphy sounds like a terrific terrific journalist. More Q&A. Conversation with Dr. Rima Zahar. Again, he referenced that in a previous one. Of course, the Barry Weiss conversation found really fascinating. And I still want to go back and look at what he had to say about systemic racism. And then this after school reposting of best lessons learned a compilation. And then the Michael Malice I spent some time on and that's 800,000 views again. Malice has a big YouTube following. Scott Barry Kaufman. I did a little bit of background research on him. Grad student. He's a YouTuber. You know, a little bit of interest, but not enough. And then then it also depends on my schedule. And then the Andrew Doyle conversation I thought was really good. Very targeted towards culture war stuff. But Andrew Doyle is is is tremendously interesting to listen to. And what he did with titanium or graph. Fascinating stuff. Haven't had a chance to listen to the music one. And then conversation with John. It'll be interesting to see how this goes, because again, having my part of the reason I got into this is I wanted to figure out what on earth is going on with YouTube. And I've learned a lot about YouTube over the last three years. Because YouTube gives Google gives you a lot of very interesting, very relevant metrics. And. A lot of people start a video and a lot of people. Duck out of the video very quickly. And this video was very hard to listen to. And so I would imagine a lot of people gave up on this video. Very early and it would be very interesting to look at the metrics for this video. His conversation with Burbaki. So as I mentioned before, Justin Briarley and Andrea with the bangs had a good conversation. They talked a lot about Peterson and. Andrea was sort of pushing Justin and they had some very interesting conversations. I actually thought about making a video on it, which I think is a very interesting conversation. On comparing and contrasting wave one and wave two. And again, what does this do to do with the Burbaki video? I'm trying to gain perspective on that darn thing. That's what I'm doing. So I'm thinking out loud and I'm reasoning through it. And some of you love reason. Well, this is a whole lot of reason. Wave one was expected to be a very interesting conversation. And I think that's a very interesting conversation. Wave one was explosive. It was big. Fueled by the culture war. Fueled by the Blue Church and their their heresy trial. The Blue Church's heresy trial of Jordan Peterson. What will the second wave be like? Well, these dialogues are critical. And those of you who know, we're going to go to dialogue. Dialogos Dia through. I mean, Verbecki uses a lot of Latin and Greek. He's an academic. Dialogos. We're going to talk about that. And that's actually the clip I'm going to play of that video in this one. So what's going to become of Jordan? And again, this I, you know, I he'd been getting stronger and successive interviews. Everything looked good. And then this video hit and it's like. What is going on? What is going on? What is going on? Now, John, of course, is no stranger to this channel. John's been on my channel a lot. John is his own channel and this little corner of the Internet with the symbolic world and the bridges of meaning and awakening from the meaning crisis discord. We do a lot of conversation in this little corner of the Internet. And another friend texted me and said. After this conversation, Jordan might pay a lot more attention to this little corner of the Internet as well, I think would benefit him because I think actually. I'm biased, of course, this is the most productive. I think this is I think this is the most productive and most interesting aspect of Jordan's work. The intersection of religion and life. The politics politics come and go. But the same. These are much more enduring issues. Politics is now religion as always. So John is no stranger to the channel. And I said before, you know, I really consider him a friend. He's someone I deeply trust. I have a world of respect for him. And he's key in terms of sort of pulling together this little corner of the Internet. We all sort of have our own. We all sort of have our place in this these dialogues that we're doing. I mean, I'm the Protestant and Peugeot was the Orthodox. And, you know, we're waiting for Bishop Baron to jump on, but he's a bishop. So he's busy with lots of things. But, you know, we've got Kale and we've got Brett and, you know, we've got a lot of other Catholics out there. Mary Mary's the Catholic Mary's the Catholic seat. You know, we've got Sevilla. We've got a nice group of people and each of us sort of have other people sort of around us. And it's a it's a nice community that's formed. And, of course, John is the you know, he's the he's the bona fide academic. Peugeot is an icon carver. I'm a pastor. I'm not an academic. Peugeot is not an academic. We read books. We think about ideas. Yes. But John Vervecky is the bona fide academic. And he brings all of that into this into this space. One of the things about academia and I've read a quote out of Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves to Death. And if you never read that book, it's a it's a very important book. It's it's dated. We could use an update now for the Internet age. But academia is a world of books. And in order to be successful in academia, you need to be a fast reader and a fast processor. And books need to be and written writing needs to be your native language. And you find this with academics. To have Peterson be such a star on YouTube is a very unusual thing. Again, as we talked as as David Fuller and Richard Roussen talked about. YouTube is a different thing. And I blogged for years. A lot more of you listen to what I have to say. And again, now I'm a preacher. Preaching is much closer to YouTube than academia. There's tons of lectures out there of professors and anybody who's gone to university knows some professors are good teachers and some are not. Why do universities keep professors that are lousy teachers? Because they're good academics and some colleges major in teaching and some colleges major in research and some colleges major and prioritize graduate education and some colleges and universities major and prioritize undergraduate education. And so my advice to people thinking about a university is don't justify it. Look at the high status Ivy League elite schools. If you want to get a good education, you will often get a much better education at a lower status school that majors in education. Think Calvin University. My alma mater is one of those many. Calvin University doesn't have graduate programs. They don't have graduate programs. They don't have graduate programs. They don't have graduate programs. And so the professors there have for many of them a religious motivation to form the lives of undergraduate students. And that's a very important thing to think about and to work through. So we've seen already who are these dialogues with now a lot of these dialogues are with authors. And if you listen carefully to the conversation, they they they're usually by the way, the authors. And if you think about what Peterson's life must be like at least a little indications that we have he does some interviews on YouTube spends a fair amount of time in that chair in his office. And he also spends time reading the books of the people he's interviewing. John Vervecky, unlike many of the people that he's talked to, doesn't have a major reason to be a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. He's a writer. And John Vervecky, among the people that he's talked to, doesn't have a major piece of work out there. His relationship with John is mostly pre-C-16. And that was evident in this video. So part of this video is just getting to know each other again. And John Vervecky has been working over the last five years continuing to do research and to publish and to find. One thing about John Vervecky is he's a big collaborator and he is very upfront and very much promotes his collaboration partners, which is a tremendous thing. And this is all part of John Vervecky's integrity. And so if you've listened to enough John Vervecky, you've seen him in action. He's humble. He's deferential. I know he's going to complain that I'm too... I get... Tom Holland sent me a note one day and said, You say things that are way too nice about me. And I said, well, I'm sorry, Tom. I'm that kind of person and I'm not buttering you up or doing anything like that. If I honestly hold a person in high esteem, I am going to sing their praises because I think that's what should be done. Because there's a lot of people out there that are not as praiseworthy and I do not praise them. I might not speak negatively of them in public, but when I meet somebody and when I have a good conviction of someone who I think is praiseworthy, I am going to sing their praises because that's what should be. Because you all should know what a good person John Vervecky is. And I don't know Jordan as well, but the qualities that I see in Jordan that I admire, I'm going to speak highly of those two. I'm going to do the same thing about Tom Holland. And I might, in fact, be less vocal about aspects of individuals that I don't find as laudatory. But why should I talk people down? There's enough people doing that in the world, especially in the culture of YouTube and YouTube comments and Twitter, et cetera, et cetera. So why do that? And so anyway, so Vervecky's been he's been a busy academic the whole time that Jordan's been sort of pushed to the side against Jordan's will. By everything that Jordan has said, he enjoyed being a university professor. He enjoyed interacting with students. He enjoyed his old life that was taken from him. And it was taken from him. Now, you might say, well, he's got a lot of money. Yeah, but after a certain amount of money, it's just numbers. And he misses his old life. And I don't blame him. And so that could be part of this conversation. Now, again, Peterson is always paying attention to status, and he often has high status people on his channel. If you want to grow a big YouTube channel, climb the status ladder with your guests. Keep reaching for higher and higher rungs. But in my experience, those things do not a good dialogue necessarily make because status binds and blinds and high status people probably won't know who you are. And they probably won't know your work because when you're climbing the ladder, you're usually looking up. And when you get to a point, you only see the status because you only have 24 hours in a day. You only see the people who are of status above you. And even in my relatively low status, I still I mean, there's tons of channels out there with three digit subscriber numbers or maybe a thousand that that are doing phenomenal work. You know, Mary's channel, Karen's channel, Sevilla, Sevilla's up over a thousand Sevilla's channel. These people are doing the randos. I think these people are having outstanding conversations, but I simply don't have time to listen to them all because you know, it's the same issue. So that's what happens with status. And but I've also noticed that Peterson and now this is much more nuanced. And this is natural to you. Talk to people of different levels of status differently. Jesus pays a lot of attention to status in the Gospels. And when I was, you know, years ago, I was working through the Gospel of Luke. And as is my practice, when I sort of work through a new book of the Bible, I usually pick a commentary to sort of try to read through as I to major on as I go through that book. And so I picked Joel Green's commentary on the Gospel of Luke. And what Joel Green's commentary really opened my eyes to is the way that status is talked about in the New Testament. And once I saw that, I couldn't unsee it. And it has been tremendously helpful. As I study the Bible, because Jesus pays a lot of attention to these status questions. When someone comes to your. When when a high status person comes to your synagogue, do you put them up front? Now, part of the reason I know this is because I always knew that parable. And then when I became a missionary in the Dominican Republic, they would always sit me up front because a high status person, I had real issues with that. I didn't like it. But then I had to eventually understand that I was playing a role that the Haitians understood better than I did. And they needed me and they used me in that role. And it was for their benefit. So I decided to just shut up and play the part for them because they needed me to. And I've talked about that in past videos. So status isn't necessarily a bad thing and paying attention to status isn't necessarily a bad thing. But Jesus warns against it because we naturally do it because we afford preferential deferential treatment to high status individuals. And so if Jordan Peterson gets his way in as a conversation with Elon Musk. Jordan Peterson will interrupt less and speak less and listen more because of Elon Musk's status. Now, it's not just fame and money that Jordan is sensitive to in his dialogues. It's also people he really wants to hear from because they have information that he really wants to get. And so then he's a better conversation partner and a number of views. I know I've mentioned this in various other videos and the second wave, he's been less interruptive in the dialogue. That was true for his conversation with Ian McGillchrist. But now, where does John Vervecky fit into this? Jordan, I don't think has read anything that John Vervecky has published recently at all. And that's not a sin. Jordan's been busy trying to survive. He's been sick and his wife's been sick. And so why did he interview John Vervecky? Because Jordan said, who should I talk to? So he's listening to the people are listening to his videos. I do that, too. Talk to John Vervecky, talk to John Vervecky. I'm sure he was thinking, John Vervecky is a colleague. He's not going to treat me like the New York Times or the London Times. We're going to have a good faith conversation. And so but he didn't have a book to read before this conversation. And when he has a book to read, that sort of focuses the dialogue along the path of the book, even with the Michael Malice conversation. And Jordan does his homework before these conversations. And individuals like John Vervecky, you know, John has hundreds of hours of video conversation out there. Jordan does not have time to digest all those videos. If, in fact, Jordan ever decides he wants to talk to me, he's going to have exactly the same problem. I have Jordan at a disadvantage. I've listened to thousands of hours of Jordan Peterson. And I've had thousands of hours of conversations with people about Jordan Peterson. And he will know almost nothing about me. And that will hurt the conversation. And because I'm low status, he will probably. And this is where you get into. OK, to what? And this is where I was so looking forward to this conversation with John Vervecky, because John Vervecky has done serious work on this question of dialogos. And how that and again, he's an academic, so he's doing this technically as a social scientist, but it's cognitive science. And so it's this integrative approach. And so it's philosophy and it's science and it's it's all these things. And Vervecky is a scientist. And so when John Vervecky is talking about dialogos, he is using it as a technical term. But, of course, Vervecky is one of these rare academics that is really paying attention on whole life. So he is he is he is wrapping this up in a serious way. And so John Vervecky is approaching dialogos in a very serious way. And Jordan Peterson is having conversations with interesting people in some ways like I am as sort of a part of his own learning. And and I think partly as part of the the loss of his other careers. And again, I don't think for a minute we should. Forget that Jordan has suffered incredible loss in the last five years. And as a pastor, I know people who have suffered loss grieve that loss, whether they do so consciously or unconsciously. And it will impact everything they do. He has lost a life that he loved and cherished, and it has been taken from him. It isn't just lost. It has been taken from him. And that is not a small thing in this whole metrics. And that is a part to play in this conversation with John Vervecky. Part of what goes on in this whole thing is what I call the mics, the mooks and nights shipping game. Now, January 16, Vang. Venkatesh Rao wrote this must read article on the Internet of Beef's. And that's where I get my mics and my mics, my nights and mooks language. And I get the shipping language from, you know, a number of years ago, my kids were shipping people. I'm like, what? What do you mean you're shipping people? Oh, you know, Ben and Jennifer, I ship. You know, so they're just imagining the romantic relationships between people and they're using this word ship. And I thought, all right, you learn something from them kids. But this happens all the time. You should talk to this person. You should talk to this person. You talk to this person. You talk to this. Paul, you should get these people on your channel. You've got just enough status that maybe you can get some of these people on your channel, yada, yada, yada. And for the most part, I don't like this game. And that's part of the reason I don't I don't really sit there and try to reach out for high status people to talk to because it's not going to be a great conversation. And even, you know, I even ones that, you know, like Tom Holland, I really wanted to talk to. And yes, of course, I will I will I will do whatever I can to talk to Jordan Peterson. I would love to have a conversation with Jordan Peterson. And but a lot of other people, it's like, I don't know why it's not going to be a great conversation because they don't know me and I don't know them. And you say, yeah, but Vanderklaai, you do conversations with randos. Yeah, but I'm also a pastor and they're zero to no status. And if you watch enough of those videos, you know, I have a formula that I'm using. I want them to tell their story because I want more people's stories out there because stories follow patterns and you all know each other's patterns. And I especially did this in the wake of the the Jordan Peterson thing, because I knew that part of what needed part of what people that Jordan was transforming, part of what they needed was community. That was only going to happen if they started sharing their stories, stories and building personal relationships with one another, because I'm a pastor. I'm a shepherd. I gather people into churches and into groups so that they can care for one another. That is what I do. I'm a YouTuber. Yeah, I do. But I do this in order to serve the other. So we become fans of these avatars. We want to see them talk together. And then the conversations often disappoint because they don't know. John Vervecky knows Jordan Peterson. He knows his work quite well, partly because Jordan Peterson status, partly because he's a colleague, partly because a lot of us found Vervecky because of Peterson and certain at least an element of Jordan Peterson's work overlaps with John's work. And so I was super stoked for this conversation. But one thing that was evidence is Jordan just doesn't had time to have much of a view on John's work lately. Again, if you go back to the older conversations, Jordan knew John's work because they were colleagues. They were both teaching. They had an opportunity. And that's what you do as colleagues. And Jordan didn't have he wasn't he wasn't, you know, sought out hunted down for heresy by the Blue Church all the time. And he didn't have bestselling books and he didn't, you know, want to talk to Elon Musk and and and and and and and. We imagine that, well, if only Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson would talk new revelation. But Tom Holland hardly knows anything about Jordan Peterson. And I don't know how much Jordan Peterson knows about Tom Holland. And so in many ways, a conversation with a good journalist would do better because what journalists do, good journalists, is they keep themselves in the background and they forefront the host in order to bring things out. That's what good journalism does. It's sort of a compression mechanism so that instead of reading the whole book, we can listen to this interview and we can get the gist of it and it can be helpful to us. It can be interesting and entertaining. That's what a good journalist does. These dialogues that Jordan Peterson is doing are not journalism. So then we have to ask the question, what on earth are they? And Vervecky is thinking about D'Alogos and he is thinking about distributed cognition. He is thinking about all of these things. Jordan isn't up to speed on that thinking. And that becomes apparent very quickly in this conversation. And so a lot of the questions of the second wave is. What's Jordan doing with these dialogues? Yeah, they're interesting to watch. Yeah, people are going to watch them. Yeah, they're worthwhile. Yeah, I'm going to do commentaries on them. But but what's going on here? And to one degree, I think Jordan is doing him. Phyllos Sophia. With these dialogues. In sort of a native way, and they're fun to do and they're worthwhile doing. I'm not saying you shouldn't do them. But but this question about what are we doing is an important one to answer. And part of what this video provoked is what are we doing? What is happening? What did we just see? What do we want to see? Because once we figure out what we want to see, and this again is what John Vervecky has been intentionally working on on his channel. And you can find voices with Vervecky, you know, lots of conversations. Partly part of that was because of covid because unlike me, John was working with a team of people to produce his videos. And you can find that from Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. I just do mine myself. So covid didn't pause me a bit. I already sit in a room by myself. I might as well make a video. Something like that. The coffee break ladies out there. So I got to handle that in a few minutes. So I don't I don't want to don't get get into the commentary thing until I resolve all their things. So John Vervecky has been working intentionally via disciplined way and developing the logos. Both parties come away with more. And this gets into logos. What do we mean by logos gets into distributed cognition. So this is where I'm going to do some commentary on the video. And again, some of you are like, I was looking for a big commentary video or you would just dive in. And I I gladly would have approached this video that way, but I just simply could not because it was too manic, too haphazard, too chaotic. But it's also too important not to treat. And there is good stuff in this video. And there's the question of, well, is this sort of like this? Dea logos dance of psychedelic envisioning where it's sort of dreamlike and makes no sense. I found it more frustrating than dreamlike. I was wanting them to slow down and pursue a topic and listen to each other. John was listening to Jordan. What was Jordan listening to? So that's what we'll have to get into. OK, so here, Jordan just asked him, what are some current projects you're working on? One was a project on consciousness on called Untangling the World Not. And in that I was experimenting not only with new theoretical material, I was experimenting with a new way of presenting material. So I presented the material rather than monologically. I presented it dialogically with a friend of mine, psychologist Greg Enriquez. And so the material was presented dialogically, which was very interesting for me because I've well, hopefully we can talk a bit more about that. I've been my core project is a project of trying to understand more deeply the process of dialog and what it does in distributed cognition. The other thing I'm doing. So do you what do you think is the difference between dialog and thought? I mean, is it's thought and inner dialog or trial? And so prime example of OK, it's an interruption fairly early in the interview. No big deal. I mean, I'm from New Jersey. I don't have a problem with interruptions, just not too many of them. And when it's too many and when it's too much and when's the right time and when isn't, you know, depends on where you're from. There's a lot of subtlety with this. So OK, so first redirect in terms of the whole thing. Log or quadrilog? Well, that's a really good question, because one of the things that I think we are playing around with right now in the culture is a consideration of whether or not the monological model of thought, which has been very predominant and the prototypical way in which you present your thought is with the treatise, for example. And we're now opening up to the idea that perhaps thought is more dialogical in nature. In fact, the idea that thought might be even reason might be more dialogical nature is coming into sort of the mainstream of cognitive science. I think that's a tremendous thing. So Protestantism. Who would have thought a Protestant minister would start a YouTube channel and so much of his work would have to focus on Protestantism, a lot of it critical. No, I'm not turning Greek Orthodox. No, I'm not turning Roman Catholic. Yeah, there's a certain attraction to the Anglicans, but I'm not going there either. But that but but but John's point right there is a really critical one, and it's critical in terms of my tradition of Protestantism that, in fact, has been very treatise oriented. In fact, so if you think about, let's say, the history of development of Judeo-Christian practice, first you have the temple where you go for ritual. And then you have in some ways after the destruction of the temple by the Babylonians, you have the book, the Torah replaces temple. And in the synagogue, the the people hear from God and relate to God and connect to God, not through animal sacrifice, because by virtue of what happens in the book of Judges, you can no longer sacrifice in your backyard anymore. And the temple is destroyed. So what do you do? So synagogue worship develops and that is about prayers. Just visit a Jewish synagogue in many ways in some synagogues practices remain fairly unchanged. You have prayers, you have, you know, recitation, you might have a little homily. And so you can find that in both Roman Catholic liturgy and Orthodox liturgy, where now in a sense, the Roman Catholic in both you you sort of have a symbolic reenactment of a sacrificial service, but nested within prayers recitation, very word oriented, very logos oriented. OK. And part of what happens in the Protestant Reformation is that gets displaced and communion or maybe once a week. But it's the the sat the tie to the sacrificial element is demoted and the sermon becomes the prime show. And we have writers talking with one another. But now the the elephant staging and the elephant communication of the of the service is not totally displaced. But you can see the change of that. And now what? Oh, oh, it's OK, Nancy. Just hang on. I'm just going to pause this. Let me throw an idea at you and tell me what you think of it. Something I've been working with. We might as well dive right into this. It seems to me that thought has two main components. There's a revelatory component and that manifests itself most remarkably, I would say, in flashes of insight. But those may be spread all the way out to religious revelation along a similar continuum. And to tie this in with the verve, he Peugeot, Rafe Kelly conversations, a revelatory would be sort of emanation from heaven versus emergence. So there's a revelatory element to thought. And that's the thought that in some sense springs out of the void. I think the way that you manifest that thought is by consciously or unconsciously, posing yourself a problem. And I think in some sense, I'm not sure how to unconsciously pose yourself a problem. You might put yourself. I really like the way this conversation went into affordance later on. How you unconsciously pose yourself a problem. I think about that more. It's akin to prayer, although we don't notice that. And maybe that's now a lot of this conversation got into religious stuff, which was very interesting. Because we've been since posing yourself a problem. And I think in some sense, it's akin to prayer, although we don't notice that. And maybe that's because we've internalized prayer so deeply we don't even notice we do it anymore. And I think that's I think that's actually like I said, I know you haven't gotten into some of the real crazy parts of this video. But he's still brilliant. It's a brilliant insight. One of the one of the questions I continue to wrestle with is the whole Tom Holland aspect here of to what degree does the Protestant propositional truth frame? It's not just a mental frame. That's also a societal framing. And that's deeply because of Protestantism as opposed to Christendom, which is just sort of the water you swim in. Protestantism is Christian, non-Christian based on profession. And in some ways, Tom Holland's work sort of blows away that and says, Sam, Sam Harris is a Christian. It's similar, again, to what Peterson had been saying. I mean, people have been praying for a long time, right? So you have a problem. You want a solution. You ask yourself, well, what do you think of this? And then you wait. And then at some point, sometimes when you're sleeping, sometimes when you're awake, I mean, sometimes so powerfully when you're sleeping, it jerks you awake. The answer appears and you think, well, I thought that up. But that's a strange thing to think. Now, this, of course, is the very famous prayer conversation that he had with Sam Harris in Vancouver. I also suspect that something like this is for him describing what's going on in his life. If he continues to be in the kind of pain and suffering that he has been in, trust me, that kind of pain and suffering will lead to prayer. The old saying, there's no atheist in foxholes is because, well, some atheists are really annoyed by that phrase. But when you get to your extremity, when all of the other options you have to make life work are insufficient, when you have worked with a medical establishment and discovered that the medical establishment is part of the problem. Trust me, you start to pray. This is this is what people do. I regularly work with people who show up out of the blue. I've never seen them before. I haven't seen them for decades and they come in and they're desperate. And they've got a problem. They've got a problem that they have tried to fix. How many different ways and there is no fixing it. And so now I'm going to try God. Well, how do I try God? Well, it's going to be prayer or church or both. I mean, one of the things Jung said about thought was that most people encounter thoughts. Nobody will ever find this quote, of course, because I'm sure I've modified it. But like they find a table when they walk into a room, it's just that now part of what makes this video and I listen to I've listened both to the video on YouTube and listen to the audio podcast. And I've noticed this in some of my own conversations. This mic is too close. And so sometimes if I pull a breath, it really the mic really picks that up because you want the mic close because that does some things. Now, throughout this conversation, the mic is picking up his breathing and it sort of adds to the question of is he not well? And I think this works sort of unconsciously in us because when we hear someone breathing hard, we when we're used to hearing them breathe hard just a normal. Oh, they're really working, laboring to breathe. But when you have a mic up close, it picks up on it. It, of course, amplifies it. So that's part of what's going on in this video. They thought was that most people encounter thoughts. Nobody will ever find this quote, of course, because I'm sure I've modified it. But like they and also there are a number of places in this conversation where he. It's total. And again, I do this. Peterson does this. This is not I am not pathologizing stream of consciousness, low filter conversations. I do this all the time. But there are limits to this filter and there are a lot of little tells in this conversation like that one right there. When I hear people talk this way, it's like, wow, their filter is really off right now. Why is someone's filter really off often? Again, as a pastor, usually people, their filter is off because. They're at their extremes. Now, it could be that Peterson just had a bad night. He could have just didn't get any sleep. Is that Cthia or whatever was bothering him was bothering him. He was in pain. He was anxious. He was worried. He woke up the next day at a conversation with John Reveke and his filter was down because this is what happens when you're in pain. And those of you out there and I know there's a lot of you out there who have chronic pain. Because, again, I'm a pastor of a church with a lot of old people. And so I work with a lot of people with with chronic pain. When you're talking to people with chronic pain, they will tell you exactly what's on their mind because they are the filter that you maintain takes energy to maintain it. And when that filter is gone, you let it down. And that also can give a sense of mania. So, again, a big part of this question is what on earth is happening in this conversation? That's a strange thing to think. I mean, one of the things Jung said about thought was that most people encounter thoughts. Nobody will ever find this quote, of course, because I'm sure I've modified it. But again, no filter right there like they find a table when they walk into a room. It's just there. And then we attribute it to ourselves. But then there's the dialogical element where we take. And again, I mean, this is brilliant stuff. It's just coming at you so fast. It's like, it's like, OK, the filters down. It's sort of like taking the exhaust system off your car. I mean, it's loud and it's all coming through the pipe. That's what's happening in this conversation. Now, why is this filter gone? We have no idea. But what he's saying right here is brilliant. And he's exactly right. And, you know, fortunately, John can keep up with him. But it's a little crazy. Take a look, they modified it, but like they find a table when they walk into a room. It's just there. And then we attribute it to ourselves. But then there's the dialogical element where we take a look at the thought or there might be the dialogical element. And sort of self-transcendence, which is, you know, a term that Verbeke likes to use. You're further along in the development of your thought. You take the thought and you subject it to a critical dialog or trial logger with that with inner avatars. So, OK. And even, you know, so OK, you see him do this all the time in this video. And so he's realizing it. And I have this thing. I interrupt too much. Sometimes I don't let my guests speak enough. I don't know what I'm doing with a lot of these conversations. Awful. Even but OK, so a little member of his consciousness, God says, Jordan, you're going on too long. Time to shut up and let the other people speak. This is sort of a normal part of a conversation. But his filter is gone. And so, OK, who are you talking to? He's talking to himself. I guess we all talk to ourselves. Let's be honest about that. Again, my big critique of modernity is that people are not allowed to. They're not they're not allowed to talk in public about what's going on with them. And there's no filter on him here. But what he just said there, I think, is really sort of self-transcendent. We run these little programs. You run these little things. This is his experience. This is our experience. And so then back to the question about, OK, what is that? What are we actually doing in the second wave? What is he doing with all these dialogues? And this gets into a video that I will probably not have time to make this week. But usually what happens is I make videos fairly early in the week and then I kind of release them throughout the week. And then over the weekend, after I preach, after I have a day off, I gain a little bit of perspective and I say, OK, this is something that I've been talking about and it's kind of distilling and I want to make a video about that. And a lot of it has to do with this question of individual agencies, personalities, principalities, powers. How does this work? And in many ways, if you know, I thought a lot about this in my Gingerbill conversation Friday, which I thought was a really good conversation. Gingerbill is an excellent conversation partner. I mean, those of you who were just introduced him were quite impressed by him. I mean, he's very well read. He's very smart. He's been paying a lot of attention to a lot of the kinds of things that we're doing. So, you know, I might embarrass Gingerbill too by how many good things I say about him, but I don't care because Gingerbill, I've, you know, gotten part of the reason we have a community and we establish a community is actually so that the spirit can land. What on earth do I mean by that? That's some of this crazy religious talk that these two are going to do through this. You actually establish a community so that the spirit can flow through the community. And part of the reason I want an estuary, not just a church community, is so that the spirit can flow through the dynamics of the community and we can listen well to each other and we can learn from each other. This is part of the reason you establish a community. And we naturally do this. We naturally do this. You can have it with friends. But if you do it a little bit more intentionally, then you can you can gather this up. And so, well, spirits are working through us. And so part of what we're doing with our Consciousness Congress and our inner monologue and our inner dialogues is we're processing these things. And we're actually processing the spirits that are flowing through us and the spirits that are in our communities and the spirits that are at work. So, OK, now I'll shut up. Your turn, man. That's great. And the man, the T-shirts. All those are just little manic things. And could it just be that he's really happy to just be with John Vervecki again, just be a colleague and it's like, oh, I lost. He's grieving the loss of his old life. Oh, it's so good to be with John. You know, and I've had that, you know, if I'm back with missionaries that I used to be with or old schoolmates. And it's there's just sort of a mania that takes over. It's like, oh, my old friend, I'm so good to see you. And there's sort of a a blue collar, rough neck element to Peterson that comes through here. And so part of it's just happy to see and mania and happiness are really close. But sometimes it's like, dude, find the filter. Can we can we can we slow down and get into this? And this is just the beginning. So, you know, and again, I have nothing but good things to say about how John managed himself in this conversation, because, wow, John had to be incredibly patient because Jordan just keep keeps interrupting anyway. With that with inner avatars. So, OK, your turn, man. Yeah, that's great. So I think that's an important note. I do a lot of work on the nature of insight, and I think the theoretical argument and the empirical evidence, I think, is converging on the idea that in the insight processes, perhaps we'll just say the insight process makes use of cognitive machinery that's very different from inferential machinery. In fact, there is times when they can even be opposed or interfere with each other. OK, so I have a comment about OK, so for Jordan interrupts, I'll interrupt and someone might say, well, who on earth are you, Vanderkley? Talking about interrupting and some of you who will watch this video, and this will be the first of my videos you will ever watch will say, you know, the only problem with this video is Vanderkley keeps interrupting them. But I think there's a difference when I'm interrupting a video that I'm playing and when I'm interrupting a real person in conversation. OK, and I do it all the time. Again, I say I'm from New Jersey. You can interrupt me. I'll interrupt you. We'll try and keep it at a certain level because that's how you talk when you're from Jersey. So, you know, this this whole thing of the last 10 years of, oh, pardon my interruption. We're supposed to actually wait for certain people to finish their sentence like me. No, you should interrupt me because otherwise I'm just going to talk on and on and on and on. And apparently some of you like that because you watch my videos. But here we are. So Verveckis comment inferential from insight. Verveckis is hard sometimes because he's he you know, Job calls it fancy Verveckis words. And of course, inferential and insight aren't terribly fancy. But noting that there these are there's a distinction between insight, which is sort of a flash and an inference, which is you've got it. You've sort of got it. It's kind of like an insight, but it's sort of in between. And so I think that's the difference. It's kind of like an insight, but it's sort of in between. And so insight is sort of from above and inferences in between infer. I have to think more. And that's the way it is with listening to John stuff. You know, you sit and you listen. It's like, huh. And it's sort of like passing out assignments in my consciousness, Congress. And OK, you've got to read this. You've got to think about that. You've got to think about that. And after a few days or weeks, bubble something up to me and maybe I'll understand it better. About that. Opposed or interfere with each other. OK, so I have a comment about that. Yeah. You know that when people develop prefrontal dementia, sometimes they experience a burst of creativity. Of course. And it's like. OK. It's relevant. It's insightful. But it's almost as if. There's a lot that goes into a satisfying conversation. And again, I said earlier. I'm dealing with one of my dudes today and. You know, so we have this other church that meets with us and all of my peeps, At least the ones that haven't been driven off by the crazies. They're sort of used to the routine. And if I'm there, things are under control. They look to me to manage the stuff that comes up. And I do. But the other church, they're like, there's these people that are hanging around and they're scary and they're dangerous. And yeah, they are scary and they are dangerous. And. Either you leave the neighborhood. Because it has this population or you figure out what on earth you're going to do with these issues. But again, back to my point about mental illness. You find this with autism, Asperger's. Bipolar depression, schizophrenia. Why is there why is there such a large segment of homeless people who are struggling with mental illness and or substance abuse? Part of it's because it is. It is so difficult to actually have a meaningful, satisfying, productive, healthy, life giving conversation. There's almost nothing that we do which is more difficult than actually relating to other people. Because as Peterson says again and again, there's nothing more complex in your world than another human being. And so and that makes something like if you're able to manage a marriage successfully. They should give you a medal. And this is why in our church, at least you'll often have it's our 60th anniversary. Give them an applause. Sometimes we look at the people. It's like you could be married to him for 60 years. You deserve a medal. And believe me, there's plenty of people in our society that's I'd be better not to be married. Ah, really? Because when you're inside the marriage, grass is greener. But I talked to a lot of people who are no longer married, who are getting up in age or in their second or third or fourth marriage. And they understand the grass isn't always greener and that living in this world involves difficult compromises and difficult exchanges of problems. And so what it actually takes to conduct a satisfying, pleasing conversation is no small thing. There's a degree of mind reading. There's a degree of rhythm. There's a degree of dance. And Peterson can do this. I mean, we've seen him do it again and again and again. Why can't he do it now? Now, why isn't he doing it now? We have no idea. Can't answer that question for him. And what this really shows is that in many ways, Vervecky is an outstanding dancer when it comes to this because back and forth we're going to go. I don't know how much of this I can go through because it just goes on for a long time. And after an hour and a half, my wife was like, I kind of paused and I've had enough. And she's like, yeah, that's tiring to listen to. And even that dynamic itself, we are even when we don't have to participate because we're listening to a video or recording, we have to we participate in that in a strange way that we might not be aware of. Yes, and it's sometimes they experience a burst of creativity. Of course. And yes, and it's because the editor module goes down. And in some ways, Jordan's editor module has gone down in this conversation. And that's associated, I think, with the cognitive module for thought. That's Vernecke's area rather than Broca's area. If I got that right. Yeah, you do. You also get similar things if you get sort of minor damage in sort of right prefrontal. You'll also get Riverberry did some experiments where people who had that kind of damage also show increased facility with insight problems. Right. So, you know, I'm building this writing app right now and we're going to launch it in about a month. But I'm suggesting to people that when they write, they separate out the editing process entirely. And he said this before, and I think this is excellent. And so those of you who watch my videos, you know, I don't edit. I have separated out the edit processing entirely. In fact, most of the time, it doesn't happen at all. You just you just get the low filter me not no filter. I do have a filter. And those of you who are careful watchers of my video know that there are certain things I do not talk about here. At least I don't talk about much because I do have a filter. But Peterson is right that this no filter thing is important versus the editor because what this affords is sort of an insight download. And now if we're thinking about distributed cognition and dia logos and trying to find ways with each other, this is where having a relationship of trust, of intimacy is so critical where you can remember my wife and I are first marriage counselor. Said to said to us, my goal for your marriage is that you two will be able to say anything to each other. Wow. Is that a good thing? You can debate that in the comments section. I've got thoughts about that, too, because sometimes even in a tremendously intimate relationship, there are better things that are left unsaid. And there are often things that are left unsaid that should be said. And so, I mean, we're incredibly nuanced, subtle creatures. But back to this. And so they try to rely on the non critical revelatory process to generate ideas. And that means they can't try to write a perfect sentence to begin with. They just have to let they have to restrict the editor. And now my wife, who teaches elementary school, she's a Waldorf teacher, so she loops up with her students. She knows this. I mean, it's often she'll have a little battle with the parents because when kids first start to write, just write, just write. When I first learned Spanish, you know, again, one of the pre language coaches that I had said, you need to make a million mistakes to learn a language. Might as well get started. And so when I moved to the Dominican Republic, I butchered the heck out of that language. And my wife, who was a Spanish major, looked at me like you're doing violence to these people's language. I got to make a million mistakes. I'm getting on with it. And boy, did I make them. That's a critical part of development. And ask the revelatory system to step forward. And so what do you think about it's a kinness to prayer? I know that's kind of a radical idea. Well, it's a really radical idea. The filter. I don't think it's that radical. Well, you're a radical. So that's why. And again, now what's happening with a statement like that? Is it because Jordan is just so happy to be back with John? It's like, gosh, remember before C16 when, you know, we were colleagues and when we could, you know, we could debate and we could discuss and we could try it ideas and we could fight and we could. And, you know, you saw in his conversation with Brett Weinstein, his hunger for that at the end of that conversation, he said, oh, Brett, this is so good to talk to you. I don't get a chance to talk about ideas. He's grieving a life that has been taken from him. Now, whether or not he could ever actually go back to University of Toronto, I'm sure there are many universities that would love to have him in a minute. But he's in Toronto and he doesn't want to move. And he's at this age in his life and he has all these other possibilities and and and. But again, that little moment right there. What's going on? Well, you're a radical. So that's why. And Vervecky is. And that's one of the things I love about Vervecky. He is an academic and he's a serious academic, but he's he's also in many ways a practitioner. Now, again, part of the reason that I got so much grief from Christians when I first started talking about him, a lot of that is subsided because he's he's earned their trust. But because he is a practitioner, because for John, John is a very well integrated individual who his head and his heart are well integrated in that sense. He's a very religious person. Now, he's he's very respectful of Christianity. He, you know, look at my conversation with him and Rafe. That was a very interesting conversation. But so John's working out this stuff. So in many ways, John is a terrific conversation partner with Jordan. And, you know, here's here's another element to this is the relationship between the two of them. We don't know what that's like. I have relationships with colleagues that are for the most part great, but there's always little things have happened in the past and, you know, little, you know, little little wounds that I might have from them, little wounds that they might have from me. Do they really go away? Do we sort of overlook them? You have these things in marriages. You have all of these things in relationships. Radical. Well, you're a radical. So that's why that's why it's fun to talk to you. Well, the idea, I think it's only radical if you go in with some presupposed epistemologies of what's going on in thought. You I mean, you may be an empiricist in which you think your relationship to thought or any knowledge acquisition process is a purely passive, receptive one. Or you may be in a romantic where you think that thought is literally, you know, you hear it literally in the expression and expression of pushing out an act of imposition on the world. But what I think the phenomena of insight does is reveal that a lot of our thinking is neither active nor passive. It's what I like to call participatory. It's the same kind of thing like, you know, now a big win from this conversation is Jordan. John getting to share with Jordan his four P's ways of knowing. And sorry for the sound problems in the last video I released Monday. I don't know why that happened, but. And John's four P's, there's some debate with Mark and Manuel and the awakening from the meaning crisis community. And Strahan has some of his own ideas in that. So again, around John, he has gathered a learning community of his own that could sort of test and filter and and and work through these ideas. But Jordan is is sort of Jordan hasn't had any opportunity or time to get into any of this stuff. And so by the end of the conversations, one of the big one of the big wins of this conversation, however chaotic it was, was John getting an opportunity to really communicate his his four P way of approaching things. So that's a way of approaching language or knowledge. Participating in a conversation. It's not just a sequence of actions and passive receptive. There's a co-collaboration. We're co-creating. We're making something together. In fact, that's one of the defining features I have for what I call the Deologos. I try to use the ancient Greek word rather than the modern word. Deologos. Yeah, because. Yeah, well, that's awesome. Now, again. Instead of sort of. John just introduced a new substantive term, this Deologos. And those of us who follow John closely know this is a big deal. And this is very relevant to what they're going to do today. And so John is in some way sort of setting up the rest of the conversation. And now Peterson sort of does a word association thing to it and is going to derail this in a whole nother kind of in a whole nother way. Rather than the features I have for what I call Deologos. I try to use the ancient Greek word rather than the modern word. Deologos. Yeah, because. Yeah, well, that's awesome. My word I use frequently. We haven't talked about why people want us to talk. And the reason they want us to talk is because our ideas dovetail to a substantial degree and also diverge interestingly. And so now, again, this is something that this is this is a kind of thought that you have sort of in the back of your mind when you're having a conversation with someone. You've got them in front of you. You're keeping them in front. You're prioritizing them over this thought in the back. And there's a switch. So the other thought comes forward and status is involved in this. This thought is more important than this thought. And again, a conversation is sort of a dance. And so what you do sort of in this dance is an abrupt move change. And my wife's in my wife's term. Oh, we had just settled down. We had just put some some pumpkin pie in front of us. And now it's like, no, I want Apple. Oh, OK. Well, let's, you know, take the pumpkin away and bring back the apple. And and it's oh, logos. Oh, logos. Yeah. People want to talk to us because and what I would suspect is going on in Jordan's mind is that he is oh, so in the back of his mind the whole time. Well, why why are why does everybody want John and I to talk? Oh, we're both talking about logos. And in fact, for the first half hour of this conversation, this is kind of the question that's in the back of Jordan's mind, but it doesn't stay in the back of his mind. He isn't managing sort of the conversation and that he's got a consciousness Congress. So so you delegate certain parts of your consciousness Congress to manage certain things as you're managing things. So so my my conscious, the guy who's moving my mouth, he's going to be up front. So I'm going to maintain all of the things that I do in a conversation. I'm going to smile. I'm going to maintain eye contact. I'm going to keep focus. I'm going to listen, at least partly listen with some partly formulating ideas. And we all do these things while we're doing a conversation. It's a very, very sophisticated complex thing to have a conversation with another individual. And just because it's so common, we think it's easy. But no, to do it well. And again, Jordan. To go back to the the VIP working, visiting with one hundred and fifty people and making them think at every given moment that that person is the center of this conversation and not losing focus. Both Dr. James, who, of course, teaches psychology at a junior college here and myself, both of us watch that understanding full well. What it takes to do that. That is. That is absolutely elite. Very few people can do that. Jordan people, Jordan Peterson can do that. And I've seen him do it two or three times. I've seen him sustain it. And I even see I even saw him trying to do this in June when not only was his wife. In. Under threat of dying, but he was in the midst of this whole Benzo Diaz of pan thing and he was trying to keep things together. I mean, to manage that is an astounding thing and he was doing it. And now in a conversation like this, the filter is sort of on and off, back and forth. And OK, is he in pain? Everything he keeps telling us he's in pain. Did he have a bad night? Did he have a bad night? He's not managing it in this conversation. He's not managing it well. And now his friend is going to manage it well for him. And again, I struggle with should I should I should I know should I point this out in this video? Well, only a few thousand people are going to watch this video compared to the millions of people that know him. And so the harm is in it. And my point is not to take anything away from Jordan, but to say at least on this day, because we haven't seen this in other conversations that he's done and he's done a lot of them. He was struggling and that or it's maybe something else. He's playing another game. And maybe he doesn't even know the other game he's playing. I don't know. Human beings are like that. So and all that goes into making this conversation. A conversation so intense it might as well be psychedelic. Yeah. I guess they want us to talk so that we can think. Yes, that is exactly why we want you to talk. We want you to think out loud because we respect both of you as a thinker as thinkers and why we're sort of as mooks and nuns nights shipping you. We know that there will be things to harvest from this conversation. Well, that's it. And they see that's what I was going to say. That's one of the defining I would say one of the defining. It certainly seems to be the case as a defining criteria for Socrates that if you and I can get to places in the deal logos that we couldn't get to individually, then real deal logos has has come into existence. And that's Phileas Sophia, the love of wisdom, as opposed to Philea Nikea, the love of victory. And so I didn't know those phrases fire. Again, Philea Sophia, which is the Philea Sophia. So the wisdom is the feminine essence of God. Again, more association. And again, there's absolutely nothing around. And usually we make those associations sort of in the back of our mind silently as sort of a memetic trick to try and OK, I'm going to have to capture this word. But now he's really going to struggle to get and I get this stuff wrong all the time. Usually Philo Sophia, Philo Nikea. I'm just using a different declension of the Greek verb, but it's probably the wrong one. But but again, he's struggling in this video. Yeah, well, the Philea is, you know, it's itself a collaborative love. Did you say Philea? Yeah, yeah. Philea and Philea Sophia. So Philea Sophia. The three loves, Eros, Philea, Agape. This is Philea and Philea is the love that is done, is expressed and shared in community. And then Sophia, of course, is the word for wisdom. That's where we get philosophy from. I mean, Phila, Philea, Nikea is the love of victory, like Nike victory. And right. Yeah, it's interesting because the it's tell me what you think of this. I think the YouTube. Tell me what you think of this. And when you watch all of his conversations, we all have these little stock transitions. That's one of his favorite ones. Dialogues that we undertake our character as by Philea, Philea, Sophia and YouTube dialogues conducted in the main by the. What would you call it? Legacy Media are Phila Philea. Nikea. Of course, partly because like in Patterson, we are fights sort of hack our attention, our salience landscapes, because if there's a fight, it's danger. And as Jordan Peterson has said many times, we are constantly on the look for on the lookout for opportunity and obstacles or threats and fights or threats. When people around us are fighting, we naturally pay attention to it. And so in an attention economy, YouTube. Is going to pay attention to the fights, which is why a lot of Jordan's culture war videos are his big videos. I can't. I can't. And I think people will appreciate Philea Sophia much better. You better believe I certainly appreciate it much better. I did. I just did a I did two two of these with Bernardo Castro. One was three hours and one was four. And I haven't had a chance to see those yet. Now, Peterson could ask about status in just a minute here. Four hours and the accepted wisdom is nobody's going to listen to those. And these are extremely popular. People are willing to hang in precisely how popular. He's a social scientist. I want to know the numbers. How popular are they? And in the back of his mind, you know, well, you will watch him do this. And in some ways, it's sort of like the filters gone. This is this is this is just Jordan. This is the Jordan download. Well, I mean, they you know, there's been I think 20,000 views for the first one and it's been up for like a week. And there's been like, I don't know, 8000 views of the second one. It's been up for a couple of days. And this is for a four hour video. Yeah. I mean, people came. Ten thousand people came to see Tom or Sam Harris and I talk in in Ireland. And that was primarily Phylia Sophia with a hint of Phylia. Perhaps I forgot it again. Nika, Nika, Nika. Yes, of course. Niki, the shoe. I just have to picture the shoe. Nika, Nika. Yes, I'm accused of loving Phylia Nika, but I don't. I find that distasteful and I'm much more comfortable with Phylia Sophia. And in my way. And again, it's fun listening to other people. And so, you know, because we're in the car and my wife was listening to it, she says, yeah, but but a sense of him seems like he likes Phylia Niki. And that's right. And that's an impression. And that's a part of him. But, you know, I think he's I think he's being honest that we're all conflicted and complex that way. And I hope that's evident. Well, that's that's very much. And, you know, little tells that he's feeling weak and vulnerable. I mean, right there. And we pick up on those. We're very human beings are very sensitive to those little cues. And if we are. If we wish the if we wish better for someone, those are cues that help us come close, embrace. If we wish ill to someone, they're accused to OK, there's a weakness. Go after it. Sophia. And I hope that's evident. Well, that's that's very with Phylia Sophia. And I hope that's evident. Well, that's that's very. And so, again, to me, he's he's in pain. He didn't get enough sleep, didn't get any sleep, perhaps because we know insomnia has been an issue. He's struggling. And so, you know, my heart goes out for a minute. I think John's is to just John's very sensitive and John is a very generous conversation partner. Much. I mean, it sort of started with my projects, my major project right now. And this is why I'm doing these other things in this manner, is I put together an anthology for publication. And that's probably a good place to stop for now, because I'm about out of time. So I'm not out of slides, though. So just a few other general comments about it again, a lot in this video about logos, logos and arrows carrying. So skip some of you might know him from one of the young channels. I mean, one of his ongoing critiques of Peterson has been too much logos, not enough arrows, not enough attention to arrows and young logos in the Trinity. The Trinity keeps coming on and off in this video. I want to get some of these things in because we'll see. We'll see what more videos I make and what videos I have time for. Peugeot comes up often in this conversation. And I think especially with such a low filter on Peterson, I think it really shows the depth to which his relationship with Jonathan and Jonathan and Jonathan's influence on him is was profound. And as Vervecki said, and I agree 100 percent with what what John Vervecki said, very few people appreciate just how radical a Christian Peugeot is. Now, what do I mean by that? Well, he manages a marriage and he manages a home and he goes to a church. And but. You know, people, they all it's just about symbols and stuff and art and fun stuff like that. Oh, no. What Jonathan is paying attention to it, actually, Julian just sent me an email about an idea for a video. Maybe maybe I'll have a conversation with Julian and someone else about this, because Julian said Julian, of course, is a Hutterite. So Julian is a very committed Christian, but from a very different tradition. And I I consider myself a very committed Christian from a different tradition from the both of them. You know, there's in some ways there's a lot of the attention to Peugeot's work. But OK, but maybe in this estuary, we haven't really gone into it with more thinking about the entailments of Peugeot's contribution to Christianity and more assessment and evaluation of that. And again, among friends, we should evaluate ourselves and evaluate each other, hopefully in love with some from critique. And I'm sure Peugeot has plenty of critique about my tradition. And so, you know, this is this is how we grow together. But a lot of the stuff came up in this conversation. Attention, worship logos again and again. So Peugeot's influence. Lots of potential fruitful deal logos between these two. And I hope that this is just the beginning of a whole lot more because, you know, John is sort of at the center of a whole wing of this stuff. My conversations with him and Peugeot, my conversations with him and JP Marceau, we're going to have another one soon. My conversations with him and Rafe Kelly. I hope we can. It would be really fun to have part of what's difficult to have Jonathan Peugeot in there, too. But part of what's difficult with many of these conversations is the more partners you bring into the conversation, the longer conversation you need to have and the more difficult it is to sort of channel that conversation. And and as with many things with this, hopefully this distributed cognition that can happen via deal logos, the number of partners is really tricky in a particular with a particular goal and with a particular outcome because there's just that much more you have to think about in order to actually achieve it. And again, for Vickie is a terrific conversation partner in this astoundingly well read, knows Jung in context really well, very open, humble, generous, is a practitioner, careful about political pitfalls, which is something that I think he's exactly right to do. Bring some diversity into it, theism versus non theism. Yeah. Peterson was onto something in the degrees to which over the last five years. Peterson, what one of the things that Peterson noted was, well, john. You're probably a lot more keeping Christianity at arm's length and and there's a lot more Christian stuff coming through you and john noted that and so this is this is part of how we grow together and I'm sure I'm not only sure I am sure that for some of you, my ongoing conversations and speculations and thinking out loud in the way I do you find as a threat. Because, well, no, Paul, we want you sort of in your Dutch Calvinist box or we want you in our Orthodox box or we want you in whatever box that you're in and all of this thinking is a very dangerous business. It's basically like Bilbo going out your front door. You never quite know where that path is going to take you. But that is that is part of the adventure. One of the things that was not at all dealt with in this video just basically because it couldn't be. And one of the things that a that I would love to see Jordan and Jonathan and John. Jonathan in that queue too. But you know this is something that rave brings up regularly because rave Kelly is, you know, a big, you know, part of this little corner of the Internet where there's a lot of attention paid to both Peterson and verveky is. How are we to assess the heroic? Because it's a huge part of Jordan's theory, but also his practice and verveky has some pretty strong critiques of hero narrative and verveky has really strong critiques of narrative and he's got really strong critiques of. Of the telos of let's say telotic dynamics and Jordan is deeply into hero and telos and narrative and part of what I was hoping from this conversation was maybe that was too much to hope for was spending. Half hour hour on their differences on those topics, but I think before that Peterson would have to get up to speed on way more of what John verveky has been doing. But again, giving the status differential at least right now. You know, Jordan doesn't have anywhere near enough time or I don't know if he could have the attention or again he's an academic. If verveky would distill awakening from the meaning crisis into a book, then Jordan could read it and sort of upload it quickly. It's sort of video is a very slow download, but part of the beauty, I think of video is that when you're listening to a video you can work with your hands and and there's a lot of interesting science about integrating information while we're doing it. While we're doing embodied things and of course verveky is a master at all of that stuff because a deep part of his work is embodiment and I think that's part of the reason why he's such a special partner in this because for myself who is a practitioner. These questions of embodiment are key. I am not an academic. I am dyslexic and so reading is in some ways not. Would I be an academic if not for my dyslexia? Possibly. Dyslexia doesn't trouble me in auditory but auditory is slow. But I've also you know I can read well enough and can listen well enough that I also am sensitive to the difference of a book read and the difference of a book heard. And that's critical in this too. I mean we're very subtle complex creatures so I very much want more of this and that's some of what I want from it. And again one of the successes and depending on how I figure out what to do with the rest of this video which I'm still not sure. I'm perhaps leaning a little bit more towards the possibility of a long commentary on it. Just to sort of the difficulty of a long commentary on it is there's just so much in this video. Because you're always changing speeds. But I mean John's 4p knowing I think is absolutely integral and I think it's absolutely central to what I think will be beyond Protestantism. And I say that as a Protestant and I say that as a Protestant too. I expect to be a Protestant for the rest of my life. And I say that as a Protestant who believes wholeheartedly that Protestantism will have its impact on both the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic churches. But I you know I appreciate Mark and Manuel who are working hard on these 4p's and saying can we refine them? Can we make them better? There's the parabolic that I've done some videos about. So there's a lot to go through there and to have Jordan's participation in working on a bunch of the things that we're working on in this little corner of the internet would be astounding. Because again I think for me obviously these are the most interesting aspects of Jordan's work because the culture work is going to come in. The culture war stuff is going to come and go. Politics is now, religion is always. This is the much more enduring stuff that I think are going to be formative and subtle and shape the world and church and this is hope of distributed cognition which I think is in many ways spiritual work because that is what spirit means. So hopefully this can happen and also key to working through the naturalism lab leak of the religious secular questions because those are also lurking beneath how to, these are both very spiritual individuals but to say that in a secular space kind of paints them in a particular light that both of them are highly sensitive to. And that has been quite integral in both of their works because again I followed both of them quite carefully. So we'll see where this goes because this is a quagmire of a conversation and we sort of have to wait until probably Wednesday or Thursday which has sort of been the release timing from Jordan's channel. And if in fact the releases are sequential, part of the reason I don't like having too much delay between the conversation or the monologue or the commentary and subsequent videos is because part of what I think you're instinctively doing is tracking with me. And when there's a long delay between them and I appreciate Jordan's channel, it's a much different status channel than mine. He's got, it's far more complex because he's talking to high status people and they are going to have influence on release dates and disclosure and all of these things too and there's a lot more post production that goes into Jordan's work than goes into my work. See now I'm conscious about my breathing because I listen to my own video and I hear that now and so when I breathe in loudly I think, oh did I just, into the mic, see there's low filter on my part. I interrupt myself. That's what low filter does. And sometimes I forget what I was talking about before I have my low filter. It'll be interesting to see what on the next video Jordan looks like. And again, I always get the comment, and I understand completely when you say, well you shouldn't pay any attention to Jordan you should just be patients of the content. Yeah, but this is some of the modernity embodiment questions because Jordan is a living breathing human being that we care for. And so again, should I talk about this in this video. I'm going to risk it. I'm going to talk about it. I understand the downsides. I understand where sometimes it's better if someone is struggling to have everyone just give little knowing glances around the room and act like nothing is happening. We do that with grandma, don't we? Mom, I didn't mean you because we don't do that with you because my mother would never tolerate that. But someday if, as she loses strength, we might do that because we did that with her mother. And we do that with people we love and respect sometimes because they're struggling and we don't want to embarrass them. Hopefully, this was a bad night or a painful day or something like that, which sort of inhibited his filter. And again, part of the reason I do these videos is now at the end of this video after watching a little bit more carefully. My thoughts are a little different than I had at the beginning of the video. That's why I do these videos for the insight. So, yeah, isn't incoherent. He's tracking and he's distracted on these topics. And they're just as seldom enough run away. Run. There's there's just there just was seldom enough runway thrown another metaphor. Given to any of the given moments to actually get mutual deal logos lift off. That was part of the problem of this video that there were one cliche in homiletics. That's the science of preaching is the failure of most sermons are too many disconnected thoughts. And that's the quagmire and the failure of this conversation. But we'll see what can be salvaged. And again, like I'm warning you, I've got. Vacations coming up, I've got weekends away. We'll have to see what video production looks like for those of you who made it all the way to the end of the video. After just saying, I don't know how much time I'll have making videos. I'm also thinking of starting a new channel, which is going to be very different from this one. It could be something like Vanderclay Tech and travel. My wife and I actually made a video together on this little trip. Sort of evaluating China Creek cabins where we stayed up on the Trinity River. And I didn't bring any equipment with me or not much. And so the video I should have brought mics with me because I really needed them. So I don't think that video is going to see the light of day. But I've I love tech videos and I love talking about technology. And when my wife and I travel, it's kind of a little fun project we could do together. She's not sure she wants to be on camera in terms of her face, which is too bad because she's got a beautiful face. But she's off camera in terms of her voice and she was open to this. So there might be a new channel and some of you might say, hey, well, what about your clips channel? Sort of abandoned that. Sort of on the shelf. Might get revived depending on what happens. You sure you got enough time for another channel? I don't know, but I like hobbies and I usually bite off more than I can chew. And if I let that stop me, you probably wouldn't have this channel. So don't complain too hard. So there's a little advertisement. And for those of you, you know, I'm always annoyed when people are like, like and subscribe. Three minutes of like and subscribe in a video. But it really does make a difference. And I know I've had complaints from some of you that YouTube isn't dishing up my videos to you. And so I know some of you because of privacy reasons aren't subscribed to YouTube at all. That's fair enough. You can watch. I noticed that Brett Weinstein now is his videos on Odyssey because he got. You got demonetized on YouTube and some of his videos blocked. And I wanted to do a video about that this week. I don't know if it's going to happen. So he's on Odyssey. I'm on Odyssey. Jordan Peterson is on Odyssey. If you're annoyed by my commercials and you're worried about the YouTube algorithm, go over to Odyssey. And you can watch my videos there. They'll get reposted there automatically from here. You can also listen to the podcast. But if you are a YouTube user and you want YouTube to surface these videos and you want to share them, like, subscribe, hit the notification bell. I certainly will not say that every video because I'm nowhere near that disciplined. Nor do I care about it enough. But yeah, I hope again, this is sort of a risky video to do. And if Jordan watches it, which I don't think he will, because he's an academic and he's a reader, not so much of a listener. I want the best for him. And I mean him well. But the question of whether or not I should talk about what was so obvious to everyone in the comments section, I really weighed that. And I thought, no, in this case, it's better off putting it on the table and Jordan can talk about it or not talk about it. It might just have been a bad day. You know, this is always what you have with individuals. Jordan is a very intentional, very subtle, very smart guy. He could be doing something totally different with this video that I'm not aware of. I could be totally wrong. I'd be happy to be wrong. But I thought it needed to be talked about because it is being talked about. So here it is. Let me know what you think.