https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=N030yZGvDbg

 one. Talked out yet today? I've done a lot of talking today. I've done a lot of talking today but sorry for the rude dismissal out of the other room. I often forget to lock the room and then people, they get the link and they try to, well let me figure this out. Hop in, it's like, I'm not supposed to be on. I knew exactly what happened at that moment. He'll deal with it. He's okay with that. Yeah. So anyway, so here I am. How are you doing? I'm Jim. I sent you that one email. That's all I was able to kind of put together and I appreciate you letting me join in on this circus you've got. It is a circus. No, I really, I mean, it's, who would have thought that you could just have kind of an open-ended invitation for conversation and have such an interesting group of people self-select and have all of these fascinating conversations and most of them first-time conversations. It is the coolest thing. Yeah. It's cool and you can see the diversity. I can just see the diversity of people that you talk with. It's just crazy and interesting and I kind of consider myself an anomaly in that sense, but I'm not an anomaly because everybody's an anomaly, right? But I do think it's, I think it's more interesting than that because kind of why I'm here is that there really isn't a venue for this kind of conversation, at least structurally in our culture and that's noticeable. In fact, when you started doing these conversations, that's what struck me as interesting was that even in a church culture, there doesn't seem to be this kind of comfortable environment to commune on these questions and I just, I think that's what you do and I really respect that and it's kind of neat in that sense and it's kind of why I jumped in too because I've been, I'll give you a quick bio at one of the things that goes on here. I'm 58 or will be 58 in a couple of weeks. I've been married for 30 plus years, have three kids, grown adult, doing well, thriving, kind of smart, interesting people, kind of on their own now. Been a church, raised the kids in the church, started United Methodist because we had that tradition in our family 15 years ago or so. We switched to a more evangelical kind of church just for reasons that aren't very interesting right now and have been in the church community for all that time and I have a kind of, and I'm a physician, I'm a cardiologist, so I've been practicing here in Idaho, I'm in Boise, Idaho for 20, 21 years now here so you know blessed life really. I love my job, my family's solid, everything is good with me and I couldn't be more thankful but I've had a history of moving from a kind of secular youth that was kind of uncomplicated and un-worried, secular, you know my family, my parents were kind of United Methodist, they went to Albion College, maybe you're familiar with that? Yeah, yeah. Back in the 50s, yeah but they moved away from the church as they were having us kids and we really never went to church at all and my entire, you know growing up was secular in that sense and went to kind of liberal arts college, went through the science stuff and ended up getting into medicine, obviously had an aptitude for that, followed that, that was great but I also had this side kind of demand on me or interest to kind of seek out ideas and have done that ever since in the form of a liberal arts kind of concept, searching out the western tradition writ large and yet through all of that with kind of this, you know kind of spell out some of the intensity of my trolling of content that seems similar to what your life has been like, infrequently find a good, calm, charitable environment to have a conversation that works, that and that's crazy that all those years would go by and it's fairly rare. Yes. I don't know that's you know. Yes. So. I just finished the conversation where we just made exactly that same point that. Same point yeah. And that this. Why is that? And why wouldn't churches be places for this? Not just for the church people but for people outside the church. Yeah I think that's a real good question. I wouldn't be quite critical in the way that I think your comment maybe implies because I think about that when I go to church and I have people who are my fellow congregants and I think do I want to get in that conversation with them and I think the answer is no. Yes but why? Well I kind of like the you know you remember Jonathan Peugeot. Jonathan Peugeot is my you know my simpatico. I love that guy but kind of like his comment about the old Russian lady remember that comment. Yeah. Old Russian lady. It's like you know do I want to and this is maybe an instinct that I have do I want to deconstruct my fellow congregants view of the world or view of the Bible. I really don't want to do that right. Yeah yeah. And so it would be nice if there was some way maybe in the basement kind of like you guys do it over there in the basement you do this. But anyway so I don't necessarily think that's bad about the church but it is interesting about it. You know. Okay. Anyway. Well I just wanted to be able to have these conversations. I wanted to have these conversations all my life. These conversations are fun. Yeah and they're meaningful and they're meaningful. I do have a conversation partner that I that I really value and that's my son. He's grown up with me around him and influencing him and he's he's taken off on his own and this stuff and we really do have a good you know kind of conversational style together and that's been really wonderful for a long while. And just to show you how much I've trolled in the past I have teaching company stuff on cassette tape. I and I even went so far this is going to sound crazy but I even went so far as to contact the assistance organization organizations for the blind back in the 80s to try to get them to sell me books that they would read audio. Of course they they wanted me to be blind. I don't know who to find but just because I wanted you know because you couldn't get stuff. Yes it's true. And that leads kind of maybe to how I bumped into Jordan Peterson because I think I'm I think I'm a real early kind of I think I bumped into him in the 2015 time frame maybe. Oh okay. I was I was kind of trolling for courses on psychology. Yep. And I bumped into the psychology course. I think before a lot of stuff had happened and I didn't kind of engage it. I just maybe watched two or three of them and then moved on and then he did the C16 thing and I watched that. I said that's that guy. And then I dropped it immediately because the because the politics stuff is just not my thing. And I was like oh that's the way this guy is. I'm not going to I'm not going there. And then something else happened. I don't know if he did some more mythopoetic content before the Bible thing. I don't know what and I kind of realized he was going to do the Bible thing and that what's piqued my interest in it. Then I was on the trail at that point. That's not too uncommon a story. It's maybe more your story a little bit. Yeah I didn't find him that early but we have a guy in our meetups who he like many of the people who listen to my channel he worked in IT and he had he has certain certain things that he can do that he just has to do and he wants to listen to something. So he listened to pretty much every university lecture he can find who put their content on YouTube. Right. And in 2014 I did sound out with Peter Tom Peterson and listened to all his stuff. Wow. Yeah and oh yeah I found great stuff like that. I mean I found I don't know who you know who Hubert Dreyfus is. No. He's a philosopher who teaches Heidegger and he had an entire course all outlined on Heidegger and I think you can still get this but he had taped that. This was probably 2010 time frame maybe 2009 time frame. The iTunes U was just getting started and there's just all that all that stuff out there. There's anything you could. Oh yeah I have watched Hubert Dreyfus videos. I have. Yeah so where did I want to go with that? What do you want to know here? Let's see. What do I think here's what I was thinking. One was why I think Jordan Peterson's interesting. I mean that's kind of an overworked comment but I can give you that one and then move to maybe some sense of some problems I see with him. I mean I'm a deconstructor in my in my brain and I wonder about him in terms of in terms of whether he gets some things right even some core things but let me give it a try here. Okay. So Jordan Peterson is well I live in this world I already kind of described it on the spectrum between a secular world which I don't really reject with which I participate in and have respected and honored in my upbringing in the liberal arts sense of that in the good version of that not the contemporary version of that but what I consider to be the good version of that and on the other end of that spectrum is kind of a conservative Protestant evangelical Christianity which is my faith and so I kind of feel a little bit like a stranger in both lands a bit but I think about let's say the biblical text and I noticed that if I want to have that conversation and I choose that on purpose. No no no because of the video pause but you're back. Oh okay the you know if I have that conversation with a secular person you know they might be able to be eeked towards getting some underlying message from it but they dismissed it before we've even started the conversation. Yes. And so that's totally dysfunctional and you can't get at what might be there in that context but the sad thing is I think there's a similar thing going on on the other side on the kind of Protestant conservative evangelical side because the text seems to appear even at a theological level as something that needs to be that apologetics is the approach that the that the that the worry is and there seems to be an intrinsic worry is that it needs to be defended as the main approach to the interpretation and that and that then skips over the content as well. Yes yes and that and and so that's a weird conundrum right I mean the the the people whose text it is have started to fold into the theology of that text a kind of alienation from the text itself is my way of thinking about it and then Jordan Peterson pops up and he just appropriates it and then talks about it and he has because of that probably just through chance he's created a circumstance where when he talks about it he doesn't deal with those ideological those that the ideological baggage he can honor the text and not have to defend it because he's not a defender of it right and not you know and not have to dismiss it because he's not of the mind to do that and so then he's able to say hey look what's here and you get to see and that's my passion about these kinds of things that mythopoetic notion and he can stand up then and with his enthusiasm and his charisma and his just he's just an interesting guy just to look at you know when he talks and he can honor it in a way that I so I don't know if that resonates no I think that's really good and I love your observation about the what what has happened to the text in in evangelical circles there's a there's a a built-in defensiveness that has come about with respect to it and it's I I I love the way you put it because it really sort of in gives me an inkling into this your I think you said it very well in that they they themselves have lost the text so there's this there's this little hidden thing part of the dirty little secret about I don't get to get out and hear a lot of preaching in evangelical churches but when I do get to get out I find they don't pay much attention to the text anyway they a lot of preaching is they've got their agenda which is maybe to make you a Christian according to their little framework of what that means or to get you to have stop doing certain things on a moral spectrum or to get you to see the world a certain way within a political political frame and that's what the sermon is that you've got bible studies that kind of go on the fringes but those can kind of get to be kind of bible trivia type things or or loose just conversational things yeah so I I think you're right and so Peterson just comes in a very fresh way he doesn't have to defend the text although he does a he gives some reasons why he's fascinated by it and says this is this is what I think it's saying and it doesn't matter if it relates to any particular tribal warfare that Christians are always doing between each other it doesn't matter so much about the other tribal warfare with the celebrity atheists that's just what I think and everybody's like oh the text right and so that that's that's where I put him and I and I love that about him and in a weird way it's almost okay that he's not always correct about his interpretations because he's honoring it and that we don't see certainly the secular world doesn't honor the text and and so I don't want to over diss the preachers that I've lived with I mean they are they're smart people and they they've they do lots of application they talk lots about it but it's it seems to be framed you know the the bookend on one end and the book end on the other end is is the way I think I was describing it but anyway so that's where that's what I like about about Jordan Peterson but I do think there's some problems with Jordan and maybe I can kind of ask you this question and see what you think I had a great quote from maps of meaning but then I have lost it right at the moment so I can't exactly oh maybe I got right here here it is societies is from somewhere early in maps of meaning and I don't I can't give you the line but how is it the comp that that complex and admirable ancient civilizations could have developed and flourished if they were predicated on nonsense if a culture survives and grows does that not indicate in some profound way that the ideas it were based on were valid if myths were mere superstitious proto theories why do they work is it actually sensible to argue that persistently successful traditions are based on ideas that are simply wrong regardless of utility regardless of their utility and the and the question I have for you is that middle sentence if a culture survives and grows does it does that not indicate that in some profound way the ideas at its base are valid can we can we buy that and I tell you right off the top I don't think we can buy that yeah and it's it's interesting that a pragmatist would make that statement because wouldn't a pragmatist have to say at least some of those ideas to the degree that they actually were applied in the civilization were close enough that is the standard of pragmatism close enough and when you say valid your that's a different that's a different criteria it goes maybe to one question which probably has no answer than that what is an archetype or what is a pattern I mean what are we talking about here but but you know the Egyptian civilization lasted grew was stable I mean if that was a quintessential stable culture that was one for multiple thousand years and it had lots of mythopoetic archetypal stuff that they dressed their culture with and I'm not sure we admire what the Egyptian culture looks like yeah so how so what is that conundrum that I'm seeing there how do we how would you talk about that it's it's a fascinating question and and I you know was there so you know obviously Egypt Egypt flourished because the Nile flooded and the question then would be how because if you ask the question okay but how exactly does mythopoetic how does myth how does mythology function in a civilization we might argue that mythology functions in the civilization to the degree that it allows a and it allows community participation to scale because it's okay so the Nile floods and people figure out irrigation you can feed a large population you've already gone through the you've gone through the the agricultural revolution the the the agricultural revolution but what Egypt managed to do was was well well here's the question flip it around Egypt scaled so did the Soviet Union did the Soviet Union collapse because its premises were invalid Peterson will certainly say that Egypt lasted very long but you know Egypt did Egypt did fold under you know hit tight aggression it could be that Egypt just didn't have any enemies if their their structure was good enough to at least resist the the local people nearby contrast that let's say with Israel so so you have Egypt you have the great Mesopotamian empires and you have Israel now we might we might argue that Israel's mythological structure was superior because it has endured beyond the Mesopotamian and the Egyptian but that certainly didn't you know it didn't help Israel survive Egypt or Mesopotamia on regular in regular instances that was a function of geography you know geography so obviously he's making a claim world is far more complex than that claim right and you know what's your what's your longevity criteria I mean how many years is enough to say that it's stable because the you know you know that's going to be a problem right because long you know long longer how long and and then what I take from this really is that that can't be the criteria for for adopting or honoring or recognizing some archetype as valid or one that you want to embrace or the one that you want to use as your as your model for some sort of a lesson a moral lesson or whatever a metaphysical lesson it can't just be the culture itself that embodied it because you're always going to find that those cultures are flawed in ways that from your perspective today you're not going to want to admire and therefore the relationship between the the archetype or whatever this thing is that's kind of running at some lower level the relationship between that and its manifestation in the world that is to say it's historical reality that you look at is mysterious and ultimately you're going to have to use some other criteria to adjudicate your archetypes it's not going to be just survival or tried tried and true and this is kind of a deep problem with an environment a darwinian kind of idea because you know species emerge they thrive and then they go extinct you know and and the future is always something different right than the past and so again I don't necessarily the reason this is interesting to me is that it seems so central to jordan peterson's kind of philosophical construct and yet it just it needs something else for me it needs something else and I I don't know that I have the answer to what that something else is but it but it needs something else in my you know adam from think club he and I have had a ongoing he and I had a conversation about world war ii and his assertion was that the nazis had to lose world war ii and the soviets had to lose world war ii because to take this argument their mythology was less it was was less competent than the the than the mythology of the west the difficulty that you have is again exactly what you articulated that well but the nazi mythology was sufficient to give it what it did and and the soviet mythology was sufficient to give it what it did but they were also in competition with other mythologies and it it also isn't to say that the nazism won in germany and communism won in the soviet union because it was superior to all of the mythologies they were fighting against internally that that you just can't scale this argument up partly because again with many things in the secular world you lose your you lose your guiding stars as it were when within your darwinian perspective all judgments all judgments are all judgments are dependent upon their time frame and so you might perspective they are prospectival that's right so you might say that animals of a certain period were enormously successful until they weren't that's right but i'm going to show you my deconstructive instinct here and i saw that conversation you had concerning world war ii and world war ii and i'm going to deconstruct that again because and and this will allow me to bring up one figure that i'm a fan of and that's t.s elliot kind of in the same generation as c.s lewis and tolkien and and he was grappling with this question of what did the what did world war ii world war ii mean and for him uh what was happening there you would not for him you would not have called the nazis separate from the western tradition the problem in that era for him was that was the apotheosis of the western tradition because in living it it was it was born of that tradition and that was the the kind of crisis of that moment was that the western tradition itself was was was you know kind of self-immolating and the question for t.s elliot was can we save the tradition in the setting of the tradition itself seeming to show itself as so deeply you know corruptible and so he's seeing and i think a lot of people in that generation saw this that things like the soviet union atheist be not be it or not and and the nazis atheist be it or not they were outgrowths were outgrowths of the western tradition they were you know and so yeah and that was their crisis and i think we still live for sure for sure in the shadow of that of that crisis because we don't really have you know i think that's an excellent point and and part of again if we want to critique peterson some more um the soviet union marx is a product of judaio christian civilization as as is are the roots of of the nazi party we're all part of the same family and right one i forget who laid this out oh it was it was harari in in one of his books you know he made the observation that you you had maybe you didn't make this observation this is maybe this is an observation i made after reading him what you had in the in the 20th century was a competition between three forms of progressivism that that so that one one take of marxism is that it's a progressivism of class another of nazism is that it's a progressivism of of race and the progressivism of the west is a little bit more market based so um and that was it was an internal war between these between these ideologies that we fought and i so so so what of you know what what are some of your go-to what are some of your go-to resources on t.s elliot oh good question and i'm not i may not be able to come uh up with that i've read a couple or three of his biographies this the sentinel the kind of central poem is is the four quartets which is his later work he's a guy who came from a unitarian background and was not a christian in his youth and wrote the wasteland which is kind of held up as the you know the kind of highest form of modernist poetry and has a deeply kind of nihilistic core to it that poem does and it was kind of adopted by the generation as their voice and he became the voice of that modernist alienation in the form of some other figures like ezra pound and then and he had a conversion he can he he converted to anglicanism in his 20s and he became a elder in the anglican church in in london for the rest of his life and in that conversion and that's worked out in his poetry he then put that in its highest form for him in this poem called the four quartets which is really a kind of stream of consciousness working out of this problem of the tradition and its impact on the individual and it's impossible to kind of describe what that poem is all about but it's a philosophical musing in poetic form and with i believe all of this kind of stuff worked into it in a way that's poetic not what's the right word argumentative or not logical or not discursive it's not a lecture or an argument for some position it's a it's an evocation of kind of emotions around this stuff so in terms of you know there's there's jeremy irons reads the poems on a relatively recent release and and so you can get that fairly easily and you um and resource that's a good question i don't have one of those for you a resource to explain it you know yeah because i you know i i know you know i know a lot more about tolkien and lewis and i know that lewis for a long time did not like t.s. elliot and then something changed lewis's mind at some point and i'm i'm foggy on that better lewis scholars out there would would would know that but he um but that was always interested in in whether there was a connection there because they were in the same place and they were in the same you know kind of sphere of ideas right yes elliot rubbed a number of people the wrong way because his biography is that he came from america came st louis and he played the english dandy i mean he dressed up as an englishman and he adopted an english accent that would that would annoy louis well i had to get over that to to ultimately be okay with him because he was but he lived there since he was 20 and so later i mean he turned into a londoner at the at the end of the day but that rubbed a lot of people the wrong way and then he he ended up taking this pose and i think he was this as well as being the the arbiter of literary of the literary age because he he had a magazine that he edited and he was in basically in charge of who got published and who didn't and he was a literary critic so he described how he thought everyone should read literature and and certainly a lot of literary figures didn't take to that that well so that might be why that that was how did you find t.s elliot what got you on to him well in my philosophical bent in college i read four quartets and ended up falling in love with it and i i had a philosophical bent even then and i ended up gravitating to things that ultimately match up with my christian faith now so kirkagard was something that i was really fascinated by at the time and then nichi was always a yeah when you're young the cheek and seem like he's he's interesting and and then and then t.s elliot came out of that and he's very philosophical he's very he's very smart and you know and so that that attracted me so why did you do medicine instead of letters yeah good good question and i almost did i majored in english in college actually in a weird way so i went there doing pre-med i was doing physics and then i got burned out and realized i hadn't read a book you know and so i i switched to english to an english major which was a total rash decision and created angst in my parents but ending up i got the english degree and then i realized oh i can't make any money doing that and um or i can't get stable i applied or i began to apply for a postgraduate english program and then faltered and i needed to make you know i needed to get a job and then and then i changed my mind basically and i'm thankful and i did because where i'm at is clearly the right the right place for me career wise you've enjoyed doing medicine um yes it it it started out as the idea of matching up my you know my kind of scientific bent but also my intellectual bent with a notion of compassion a notion of of coming alongside people and caring for them and um and also a kind of you know kind of interesting dynamic group of people to work with always with all sorts of variety of things from technology to to you know kind of pure clinical research and applying that directly to patient care it's it's just got basically everything to keep you interested and it has done that and um i've i've enjoyed every minute i'll be honest with you no wonderful that's wonderful yeah yeah very very what are your what are your thoughts here what are the other things that uh interested me here do you have any questions while i talk about well so um why so so you found peterson pretty early on because you're a you're a consumer of audible philosophical stuff here's a fun question um 10 years from now of course it's pure speculation what will be jordan peterson's contribution to the um to the decade yeah that is a good question because i that reminds me of a of a direction that i was i was wanting to go in which i think dovetails into your question pretty well i think the starting point um of jordan peterson was the response to the new atheists and their claim that the commons the kind of secular commons had a metaphysical basis that everyone had to adopt in order to unit to create a unified vision and that's and that secular their vision was that the secular foundation was reductive materialism and naturalism and their proposal was that we needed to do away with the transcendent and get on board in seeing the same world as a unified you know world consciousness in order to get rid of these crazy religious types who were doing crazy things and that didn't wash partly because the um partly because the argument that what the guys who flew those planes into those buildings did was reprehensible had already been agreed to by everybody so the fact that they were making that argument in a very caustic and angry way you know kind of gets you a splash initially but it's like well but we all agreed to that we all agree with that so that doesn't go anywhere and then in the back of it was this metaphysical claim that is to say before the secular commons was respecting everybody's individual metaphysical commitments including transcendent ones and it was allowing those to exist i mean the puritans didn't come to america to give up their puritanism no they did not right so so so that's the wrong vision of the commons that is to say that we need to go to the to tyson the guy who did cosmos very explicitly says this in that in that series that yeah what we need is is the common vision and and that and the and the source of that common vision is science is scientism let's say yeah that's that's the common vision that will unify us that'll allow us to have conversations together and do good things and um and that didn't wash because because reductive materialism naturalism and a non-transcendent worldview can't be sustained in any kind of you know in any kind of way and so jordan peterson stepped into the breach of that and then all of the believer all of these metaphysical commitments that have their own version of a transcendent element to them religious spiritual philosophical types they all said hey he's our guy so what you've got is a kind of a pluralistic group who are standing kind of facing the new atheist in a certain sense and saying no you're wrong about this and that's a unified sense so that's the first phase here that that people feel unified around jordan peterson but the question that i have as we as we move forward is what are we going to do with the plurality of that group of people who are looking to jordan peterson as their as their voice as their unifical as their you know singular voice and and i don't have an answer to that but that's something i look for is what do you know not to dis my own religious tradition but i mean there is plurality in in protestantism and we can't offer the thing that the new atheists were offering and that's singularity of viewpoint right i'm not saying that's a good viewpoint i'm just saying we what are we going to how are we going can we i don't know what do we do with that i don't know well that's where i think that's a really helpful observation and i think it it helps answer a question that jonathan peugeot was pondering a number of months ago when peterson was spending all that time talking to sam harris which is why why talk to sam harris and i really love i really love how you laid out this this vision which after 9 11 the the atheist had this the problem is the problem is you know the problem is religion if we get rid of religion then we'll all be rational so on and so forth the difficulty that they face is in many ways that that that's simply not that's simply not going anywhere for many number of reasons but it's also interesting to to note that it was you know the spark that launched jordan peterson status rocket was not new atheism but it was the gender conversation and the the he set off a war against what i call progressive liberationism which was this other vision of the reason i call progressive liberationism is that we we continue to be liberated from what what are imagined to be arbitrary constraints arbitrary religious and traditional constraints and that you know bit by bit you know minorities we will liberate each minority as they come so we'll liberate the gays and we'll liberate the women we'll liberate the transgenders and it will liberate the black gay transgenders and you know on and on and on as it keeps going down intersectionality so but and and when you look at so in a weird way then suddenly he becomes sam harris's ally because of course harris harris wasn't going there with all of that even though there was some similarity between the new atheist version of liberation from you know superstitious religion so they had that similarity but the but when the progressive liberationists begin to embrace islam well then you have sam harris and and ben afleck on tv going at it so but but i really like your i really that you know what you said here really clarified for me why sam harris and the different visions and then also i think you articulated it very very well how then suddenly you had all the not the progressive liberationists because the the media did a hit job on peterson early on to inoculate to try to inoculate people from peterson oh he's you know he's he's not on he's not on board with us he objected against the you know the the pronoun urging morality of bilse 16 and everything that is in keeping with that so they didn't like him and but then why deal with sam harris because and i think you're exactly right so then one of the things that was amazing was okay so not the progressive liberationists but even but he's not terrible he's interesting to the sam harris crowd because as that mouthy buddha video made the case of i think in june or july last year he's been pretty he's been eating into sam harris's fan base and so peterson has been making progress on that front but then your question of really which is something that i've benefited from because what my interest was is i would like to have conversations with atheists i would like to have conversations with pantheists i'd like to have conversations with christians of different stripes and interestingly enough under the banner of jordan peterson all of these people that happens make themselves available and are interested in conversation so i really love the way you put that because that kind of showed that to me why this very interesting mixture of people have been attracted to peterson and we get as people say this roar shock dynamic with peterson right he is you know node the network was just i mean he just that's just for me locks what jordan peterson is i mean he he just represents a centerpiece for so many different people distract detractors haters acolytes of various types it's incredible what he's got going in terms of a conversation and you're yeah but anyway you asked this question of what what's down the road and i don't have any idea but i do none of us do but it's fun to speculate yeah i but this this question of the plurality and what do we do with with plurality or you know i asked that question before and it's kind of like how do we adjudicate our archetypes or how do we how do we make judgments about about the plurality of descriptions of our experience that are that are on offer and and i've already said that i don't feel comfortable with a kind of notion of you know tried and true or evolutionary fitness and so and what i really come to on that is it's the same situation we've always faced that is to say if you watch humanity through history what you're watching is each generation with a kind of ungrounding of their of their core possum you know possibilities grappling with that fact of that ungrounding and trying to face the uncertainties of their present circumstance as it moves into the future and you see that's the story of human history the whole story of human ideas this is is is that grappling and to look back and say that you're going to find some grounding that you can it's uncertain for me so and and then that's going to play out in this conversation i think in a way because people are going to come and take the moment to to to project their metaphysical commitments and try to defend them yeah yeah yeah yeah well it's it's interesting so so when i think you know what i've been doing all this thinking about what i call neo-sacramentalism there the question of well what is this this physical layer what is this matter verse what is its function in the in the scheme of things it is you know as lewis notes in the book miracles it is it is it is so easily common it is so easily colonized and it so easily accommodates different minds attempts to form her it almost seems to me that this this this material layer this physical layer is in some ways the the the the medium through which competing competing idea verses you know actually come together work themselves out work themselves out and you know plurality you know continues to be you know as a christian pastor i see that you see people they're they're they're they're here in their silo this is the only world that they've known all of their systems seem to work and you know they're they're they're happy and their insularity of course until something opens and you realize oh there's all these other cultures out there there's all these other world views out there this is these other religions there's so on and so forth and and obviously we try to we try to organize ourselves in hierarchies of all kinds of kind of all things so that we can function productively in the world but the pluralities always scramble the hierarchies and then now we're having to compare and and it's it's near infinitely complex so right we keep so then we keep breaking down our hierarchies and constructing new ones yeah the sacramental is is is a i think i like your emphasis on that in recent weeks or your your gesture at that and it's my it's my way of thinking about my religious faith is is that it's even though i'm not in a sacramental christian community we don't really do that but i kind of turn it into that i kind of envision it as that for my for myself and because i think that's just a real quick story about my youth when i was 20 my aunt killed herself and this is long ago so it's you know distant memory but but i remember it as a very pointed memory because what happened she wasn't she was definitely closer than an acquaintance but she wasn't the closest of my aunts and she lived across the country so it had great impact but it wasn't you know it wasn't like right next door and month a month it talked to my family about it my parents you know i was at college at the time and i found later and this isn't to diss my family but i found a month later that my two sisters and my parents had flown back to the funeral and i hadn't even known about that and now that sounds kind of shocking but it really isn't i think i was not someone who would have they would have thought of being interested in it but i really did and so i don't want to i'm not dissing them on that as much as i'm reflecting on the experience that i had of that which was that you can you can live your life without experiencing it authentically you cannot experience the life that you're having and you have to do something to to make it authentic to make it real and something like a funeral is that and and if if my religion my religious faith turns into anything or is anything i hope it is partly this now it's a it's the venue for sacramentalizing the real meaningful experiences of of my life and and that's how i hope it works because as i said a minute ago i that really kind of like oh that's a real deep alienation to have something happen to you and not and and not have it be yeah i don't know validated or whatever experience yeah so i i i don't know if that resonates with you but that's how i see the relationship between our kind of embodied experience which is the real pattern in my opinion yes and the the the um the elevation of that the the the sacramentalizing of the imminent the the the sacramentalizing of the imminent if you will yeah well the the i like c.s lewis's approach in his book miracles where he he says you know his argument is that the the incarnation and he he goes from incarnation to resurrection and ascension that's the central miracle to the christian story and what the the reason you know it fits and it's true he argues is that you had the rest of the symphony with except for a middle portion where you had the whole book and not the central chapter and suddenly once you place it within the entire frame everything makes sense and the symphony now works and the book now and so unfolds that unfolds and so you have the word becoming flesh and it's been so interesting how of all of peterson's of all of peterson's idea this this holds central that he takes you know from from whatever he remembered from being a kid in the united church of canada he remembered to take john one and put it into genesis one and say there's something here that is really essential and if this gets lost anything that we've achieved and can be grateful for in terms of how well stuff around us works it'll it'll fall apart and you think well that's interesting and and so he picked up on that that's very good yeah yeah and and and people who listen to him pick up on that and and you want to and you see it in the in the fans of star wars that dress apart to line up and go to the movie you see it you know a generation ago with the rocky horror pictures oh yeah i was one of those and and and you begin to say this is this is where the story and the matter meet and and this is finally where joy can be found and and i think finally the answer to the the question of plurality because you know if i were born no i wasn't born in another century and i wasn't born to different parents and and i am here right now and in this moment things are real and i want this to connect up with every other moment and scale out so yeah and i it's it's it's you know kind of just completely deconstructing brain of mine but uh for for bakey's meeting crisis i love that and and actually i want you to look at the 16 this the section the one that he did recently number 16 yep because he because he jumps right into the middle of it at that point yeah and he really does a good job with that i don't know if you saw it but i think he really does a good job with it but um but now i forgot where i was going with that but um oh but i lost i lost the train there because i went to verbecky well i'd for me oh no here it is here it is okay go that that there isn't a meaning crisis by that i mean meaning is all over the place i have lots of meaning i mean you know i'll go with the positive but you know i had children and that is meaning and it's right there yes okay yes and so we don't have a problem with meaning what we have a problem is that we we naturally alien our say alienate ourselves from our very our meaning we we distance ourselves from that which is right with us um and that so and that may be a crisis so i'm i'm picking nits there but but uh but meaning is all over the place that's it is it is it's it's littered about all over that and peterson is right yeah i've i've got a you a guy actually a guy actually canceled his slot and then you got in and then yesterday he sent me an email says i can do the time is my slot still there i said no it isn't all right so you you got a bail i got a bail but james this was this was so much fun i will send you this video and let me know if you're willing to appreciate it let me share it too much fun and i'm i love everything you do and keep doing it and just by the way i'm going to see jonathan pageot two weeks hopefully he's in seattle so hopefully he's going because of his situation but yeah yeah yeah i i to have that kind of thing happen to you turn your whole life upside down i feel for him but he's safe and healthy so that's all right all right james all right my friend bye bye bye