https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TZWtFA9PjIM

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to keep going on the video I did yesterday about the gods within. I got a really good letter from one of my, one of you out there. Hi Paul, I see what you're doing. We actually, yesterday's video had kind of been prompted by my ongoing email conversation with this individual. Hi Paul, I see what you're saying. But does that not delude the meaning of God, capital G, to the point of non-existence? If God is the value between my views, then he is simply the sum of unfounded opinions, of my unfounded opinions on life. The sum of all the things I believe for no good reason, like that I love my wife, I cannot quantify that. It remains true in my mind, but it does not really base itself in facts other than can be observed. This actually is very much the conversation. If you go all the way to Jordan Peterson talking to Sam Harris, the first few minutes of Vancouver 1, this is where Peterson starts. He says we need to have our values based in reality. And in fact, Jordan Peterson's whole thing has been how can we imagine that our values have over great distances of time emerged from this world, this interaction with a real world beyond us. I know this is a gap in my understanding, but why call it God? Is Jordan Peterson making the God of the gaps argument? God of the gaps argument is a little different. God of the gaps argument was the argument that whatever science couldn't explain, you just fill in with God. And then it's pretty much the subtraction story. The more science grows, the more God recedes. That was the God of the gaps argument. Because I must say that this is the least compelling argument of them all. That to me sums up willful ignorance. Something I don't know, let's call that God. Correct. That is the God of the gaps argument, but that's not really what we're talking about here. I know that communal beliefs are important, as well documented in science. You cannot have a community without something shared. Whether it is God for the religious or sports for the sports fans, communities do not emerge without the common shared belief. When communities consciously organize themselves around a deity that is named, now in the Bible you have the Lord or the Tetragrammaton or Yahweh is the name of the Hebrew God. That's differentiated. So in a sense, as I was saying in my video yesterday, the God that Brett Weinstein is talking about is kind of out there. And so they're going to evaluate him. But this a priori filter that acts like personality, that is indistinguishable by us from human agency and personality, this is kind of the God behind us. This is the God within our heads. This is the God in between us. And one of the things that I've thought of for years is I would read the New Testament and look at the Holy Spirit. You very much get the sense reading the Apostle Paul that the Holy Spirit is at least as much between us as he is within us, even though Christians like to talk about the Holy Spirit being within us. So this is something much more a priori than an overt religious community in a God or a sports or the Oakland Aids or whomever. If God is the expression of the collective minds, then God, in quotes now, because now we're doing, see God, capital G, and my argument yesterday was pretty much the God's within us. And we're going to talk about how that connects up with history. Then God will still exist even if no one is referencing him. That's where we start to hit the questions about ontology. Are the gods or God, in quotes, the products of our mind? And if at some point in the future where there is no more human life, there are no more beings capable of, let's call it, third-party consciousness, will this God remain? Well, that depends on are we alone in terms of what we can do with these amazing nervous systems that we have. I must say my understanding of the word God is vastly different from that of what Peterson is portraying here. Yes, and that's the fight between him and Sam Harris. Peterson is calling all of this God, in a sense, and Sam Harris is saying, no, you're cheating. And Sam Harris says, oh, this is, you're using God totally different from how the word God is always used. The problem Sam Harris has is he doesn't, he hasn't met enough Christians. He's, I was watching Mr. Reagan yesterday, and Mr. Reagan called him an evangelical, an evangelical atheist. And that's very much who he is. He's very much the counterpart to a certain kind of Christianity that rose to its ascendance that I think that the transition is most aptly expressed in Charles Coulson's book, Born Again, where he goes from kind of a nominal Anglican into a vibrant, born again Christian. So God number two comes full flourishing in Charles Coulson, but God number one was always there. And so when Sam Harris says that's not God, it's no Sam, that has been the majority definition of God far beyond Christianity. Someone wrote in the comment section to the video yesterday, is this pantheism. Not exactly, because the issue with pantheism is that you have to ask the question, is there something that is not God? And pantheism says no by definition. Christianity always says yes. And so you can read David Bentley Hart and some of these writers, and try and get in. And Augustine, Augustine actually goes into this quite a bit in his Confessions to get the sense of, okay, what is, you will know, you will have a better sense of who God, talking the Christian God here, who the Lord is if you figure out what is not God. And so Peterson, I don't, Peterson isn't really a pantheist, and I can understand the relationship with God aspect one and pantheism. They're sort of there, they're sort of similar, but for a pantheist, there is nothing that is not God. And then someone made a comment about panentheism, which I don't understand as well, but I think that would also distinguish it. If panentheism is everything plus something that isn't in everything, that still doesn't answer the question, what is not God? And that is a very interesting conversation because it gets into, I know some of the individuals who are watching my channel have some ideas about annihilationism, annihilationism or not being hell and so on and so forth. So those of you who are nerds about Christian theology, you'll ping in on this and the rest of you can just ignore it. I seem to find myself at a conclusion that the meaning of God has been diluted to non-existence. And for me, that means the word of God loses all. Not exactly sure what he means by that sentence, but I kind of think so because, again, this Sam Harris is fixed on God number two. And most of the, Adam calls them career atheists, Peterson calls them celebrity, celebrity atheists. Most atheists are really saying in their atheism, there is no God number two. But Brett Weinstein was very much tracking with Peterson and at the end of Vancouver One was saying, I understand what Peterson is saying in terms of, I don't believe in the supernatural, so I understand his framework, even though I have issues with his framework. And I want to get into that when, I've got so many videos I want to make. Because NT Wright and the Gifford Lectures really gets into this stuff. And those Gifford Lectures are, boy, if you want to nerd out and know how much you don't know, listen to NT Wright talk about this stuff. Brett Weinstein can understand God number one. And Sam Harris just wants to keep banging on that there is no God number two. Okay, Sam, I get your point. But you're not understanding the subtle ways in which God one and two, which God two really flows out of God one and how perhaps above and below can connect. Peterson is saying, God is real for some communities, it is a collective of their minds. Yes, that is God or the God, small G, all right. And then Peterson would go God with a capital G and I usually put that God in quotes. That's right. Expressed in another way, God is a community. We'd have to talk more about that. Then why not simply call it community, that and leave God out? Well, because it is the, and Sam Harris at one point when they're talking, talks about the intersubjective, when they're talking about values, values in the Elton John glass and values in the Elvis guitar. In the intersubjective world, you can understand that relationally these value connects to items and that value is immaterial. You cannot, you cannot wash the Elton Johnness off of the glass that he, that he, that he drank from. Now you might decide you don't want to wash it because you're hoping a little bit of his, this gets a little gross. If the glass is stuck to the glass, well, that would be a very materialist approach to the Elton John, the famous Elton John drinking glass. So, you know, this is, but that gets into that portion of the conversation and in, in one of the Vancouver, I think it's Vancouver too, where they're talking about where is value in the, in the Elvis guitar. So it's, it's in this intersubjective space. And if your word community had all of that, okay. But the reason, the reason we're using the word God in, and this is where spoken is less useful than written, the gods is that it acts like a personality. And that is Peterson's point. It acts like a personality and it acts like beings. And we'll get into some more examples as we go here. Why not leave God out? Well, partly because if we want to connect into the conversations with the ancients, which is a really good idea if we're trying to orient ourselves and get out of this tiny little bubble that we live in the now in 2018 and actually have useful conversations both around the world with other cultures, but also down through time with the ancestors of the thoughts that we're thinking. Peterson's actually dealing with the better words. I have no doubt both of, both you and Peterson have God as an integral part of your community. Well, as a Christian pastor, yeah, I mean, it becomes the subject. And again, as we get into this, we'll get further in it. That seems to be clear for my community. That is not the case. Religion and God is never discussed. Ah, and this is where Peterson, I think, has really disrupted the world. Because he's been making a compelling case that no, no, no, no, no. And this is why he's talking to Sam Harris. You don't get out of God that easily. And it's all shot through. Your gods are present. You don't go to the movies and your gods aren't there. You express your gods in almost everything you do that's relational or consequential. You can't make a movie. You can't, without expressing your gods. It's the axiomatic assumptions out of, that you use to filter the world and that you use to, and that any expression you have is, you know, should be footnoted by. That's a long rack. Perhaps you could give some insight into what you think I'm wrong. So, I thought it was a great letter. I'm not going to name who sent it to me, but I told him I was going to use it and I was going to anonymize it. And so, and so that my correspondence with him over the last couple of days has really been helpful. Now, if you look at biblical series one, the introduction to the idea of God, and if you look at the biblical series, this is what Peterson is delving into. This is what he delves into in his Easter address. When Jordan gets a break from dealing with his, all of this more political stuff, he gets into what in my opinion is the far more interesting aspects of this. These are, these are actually the foundational conversations above which all the political stuff should be built. And so, when he goes into the idea of God, this is what he's talking about. Now, again, he's approaching it psychologically and as I'm working through this stuff, I've got a better, I've got a clearer and clearer, a higher and higher resolution of understanding what he's meaning by that. And a number of you keep writing me about Jung, same thing with Jung. And I, I'm, you know, through Peterson, I think I'm understanding Jung better and better. And, and so my picture is getting clearer and clearer. A path of incorp- now, now he says God in singular, and if you listen to the biblical series, as most of you have, he talks about the way his theories in which polytheism makes its way to monotheism. And if you look, now I have two channels. I have my, my personal channel and I have my church channel. And I usually put a link to my church channel down and I put a whole bunch of links under every video. And if you go back into my Ezekiel series, what, what I believe you see there in the book of Ezekiel is how Ezekiel and the other Hebrew prophets flipped the script on this standard assimilation process that Jordan Peterson has with respect to going from polytheism to monotheism, which is that you have a, you have a hierarchy and how the gods of the nations get incorporated into the hierarchy and it gets sifted out. And so slowly the, the, your gods get better as you assimilate and assimilate more and more nations and all their individual characteristics. And you have both the least common denominator and cherry picking the best of the gods. And again, in my, in my Sunday school classes on Ezekiel, the Hebrew prophets flip the script and, and, and they say, well, yeah, Jerusalem is destroyed, but our God sent, our God calls the shots in Babylon. And in my 11 o'clock sermons coming up before Advent, I'm going to get into the book of Daniel. And the book of Daniel is a very clear expression of, of that interchange where the God of the defeated nations of the, of the Hebrews overcomes the God of their victors, which is Babylon. But again, this is a psycho, Peterson is working on a psychological approach to God and the gods. Now I want to play some of this, this a priori structure conversation because this actually is very much pertains to this entire conversation. And this is from, this is from the Dublin talk. I wanted to, I got it fixed. Here we go. A little bit. If you don't mind for a minute about rationality, because the, the, we've already agreed, I think, definitely stop me if I'm wrong, that there has to be an intermediary mechanism between the world of facts and the world of values. And okay, this is his main goal throughout these four talks because Sam Harris, and we're going to see it here, says, no, no, we just interact with facts. And Peterson is going to basically make the argument that's scientifically wrong. That's not how it is. It's philosophically wrong. It's scientifically wrong. We know this, Sam. Sam doesn't get it. Well, since we've talked, I've been reading a variety of commentaries on Immanuel Kant. Mostly, these have been written by Roger Scruton, by the way. And this is actually the issue that Kant, what, obsessed about for most of his philosophical life. And what he concluded was that empiricism can't be right and rationality can't be right as philosophical disciplines because you need an intermediary structure and that we have an inbuilt intermediary structure. And that structure is what mediates between the thing in itself, the world of facts, let's say, and the outputs, the values. So then I was thinking... And we noted in my video yesterday that there's got a hard structure. It's built into our bodies biologically, the two hemispheres of the brain, all of this stuff we have. But there's also a soft structure. That's the interrelational. That's the stories and the socialization and how to act and all of this stuff that has developed over thousands of years. And we learn it as children and it's in civilization and expressed in the books. And now the argument I made that this is in a sense God, this is the axiomatic God that Harris says, well, that's not what we mean by God. Okay. I know you're an evangelical atheist, but this is this filtering thing. And we're going to talk about that a little bit later in the video. The truth is we don't quite agree on this. In my summary of your view of me, I would have agreed with that. But for me, it's just facts all the way down. Okay. So great. You're describing more facts. Glad to hear it, man. Why do you need a brain then? Well, a brain is... If I only had a brain, I just had to sing that. Another part of reality. What I mean by a fact is anything that is the case. What does the... And in this sense, you see Sam Harris's monarchical vision, which is this static, timeless world of objects in space where even he himself is not there, perhaps only as a couple of eyes, as he imagined he is simply apprehending everything. But this is where, again, this is right in the first page of Maps of Meaning. Peterson says, you can construe the world that way, but form for action. So a friend of mine who's been writing me for a while, who's trying to do some really interesting projects, he says, you have nouns and verbs and you need them both. And well, which comes first? And Peterson is in a sense saying, for us individually, experientially, even though we don't recognize it, this God, this filter that chooses comes first. But Sam doesn't see that. Sam's got a rather simplistic view of himself. ...brain do. It has to do something, because otherwise you don't need it. Well, sure, it does a lot. But the... I mean, you're concerned, to jump to where I think we're going in this conversation, is how is it that values can be another order of fact? That seems problematic to you. He's almost asking, how can verbs be another order of nouns? And Peterson wants to say, there are nouns and there are verbs. Now, of course, sometimes we take verbs and we turn them into nouns, and sometimes we take nouns and we turn them into verbs. But you understand the difference between a noun and a verb. And Sam lives in a world of only nouns. And Peterson is saying, you actually can't live in a world of only nouns. It is static. There is no movement. There is no time. There is no choice. There is no decision. It is only nouns. And Peterson is saying, you cannot...you must...you need a verb, Sam. You need a verb. And Sam basically says, all verbs are nouns. But as C.S. Lewis again pointed out in Miracles, you can't live that way. It seems problematic to David Hume. Well, it's problematic for me, for a technical reason, which is that in order to...and we can see if we agree on this. In order to perceive and to act, which I believe are both acts of value, to perceive is an act of value because you have to look at something instead of a bunch of other things. So you elevate the thing that you're perceiving to the position of highest value by perceiving it. So when I walk into my office and I look around and there's a snake on the floor, bang, it goes right to the top of the hierarchy. My conscious mind doesn't even see it first. The rest of my mind, the mind at the adult table, they see it and they jump into action. That's how we work. That's not really up for debate. And Peterson is saying something is doing that. And again, you don't need a supernatural for this. That's how we are built. ...trying to perceive it. So that gets translated in my brain into just more facts. And so he's saying, well, there's a snake in the office. Okay, Sam, does anything else move in the office? Does anything happen in the office? And you know, in monarchical vision, it's a picture. It's not even a movie. I say, no, no, no, it's a series of pictures. But there's no actual movement. You might say, well, the series of pictures looks like movement. Yeah, but that's an illusion, isn't it? Well, now we're again, getting down to the roots of some of his materialism. Facts of human perception. Well, okay, that's fine. That's no problem. I'm perfectly happy about that. And again, Peterson, you know, he's letting his stuff go so he can build his blocks. Okay, Sam, we're in night three here. Let's see if we can make progress on this point that we've been trying to make progress on since the beginnings of the first Vancouver talk. And then in order to act, you have to select the target of action from among an infinite number, near infinite number, close enough of possible mechanisms of action. And so, so when I walk in my office and I see the snake and I say, oh, there's a snake and I pick up my book or whatever I came into my office to get and I walk out. That's not what my brain's going to do. And that's what my it's not what my brain is going to make my body do. What a biological organism does is take the facts and translate them into perception and action. And the only organisms that do that with one to one mapping are organisms that are composed of sensory motor cells, like sponges, marine sponges, which are composed of sensory motor cells, they don't have an intermediary nerve. Now, again, notice when he's when he wants to, in a sense, talk down to Sam, this got to be a psychologist trick, when he wants to talk down to Sam and educate him on something or chastise him, he always turns to the crowd. He always turns away from Sam. This is fascinating. But but when I first listened to this, I would I was here, you know, what's with the sponge talk here, Jordan? I don't get it. But again, I'm I'm not as smart. I'm just I'm I'm using hard work to make up for what I don't have in brain matter. Okay. So what is the deal with the sponge talk? Well, what he's saying is we are enormously complex creatures. And so when we walk into the office, our eyes, even with the limited spectrum that we see our ears, even with the limited spectrum that we hear our other senses, even as they are limited, I don't feel the Wi Fi, I don't feel the UV rays, I don't see an infrared. So all the way down, even to the limited thing that I have, that is still hugely, hugely complex. And so what Peterson is saying here is that Sam's how Sam is imagining we interact with a world of objects, there are creatures that do that, their cells, because they've only got one thing that they interact with outside of themselves. And and it's and even those cells, we can't make ourselves. That's how complicated the world is. And and we probably only discovered them. But but these cells that only have out of the entire universe, one one tiny little thing that they interact with. What Sam is describing is true of that. But it is not true of us. Because we are. Well, let's have Jordan explain it. But I don't think Sam's going to understand. Service system. So what they do is they sit in the water, they make a sponge. They're so simple that if you grind a sponge through a sieve and in salt water, it'll reorganize itself into the sponge. So that's quite cool. The sponge sits in the water. Don't do that at home. And what it does and what it does is there's waves on it. And so it those are patterns. And then the sponge opens and closes pores on its surface in response to those patterns. So it maps the pattern of the waves right onto its behavior. Right there. It maps the patterns of the waves right onto its behavior. It is just one thing it's doing. It would be as if I walk into my office and I'm almost all blind, but the only thing I can tell is light or non-light. And that's it. And then the snake gets me. Because that's all I can do. But that is how Sam is imagining we interact with objects in space. And Jordan is saying, Sam, you want to be all about science? I'm giving you some science here. We've been working on these problems now for a long time. We've been working on them in philosophy. We've been working on them in psychology. We've been working on them in biology. This is what we know. You want to be about rash, reason, and stuff out there in the big world? Here it is, Sam. No woo at all. Just this. With no intermediary of a nervous system. But it can only map waves. That's all it can do. And it can only open and close pores. That's it. One thing it sees. One thing it does. Simple. It does one-to-one fact-to-value mapping. Now what happens is that as the complexity of a biological organism increases, two things happen. The first thing that happens is that the sensory and motor cells differentiate. So now the organism has sensory cells and motor cells. So sensors to detect and sensors to, sorry, cells to detect and cells to act. So then it can do, it can detect more patterns because it's more sophisticated at the sensory perspective and it can do more things because it has specialized motor systems. But then what happens is that as it gets even more complex, then it puts an intermediary structure of nervous tissue in there and that structure increases in the number of layers of neurons. And what that means is that as that happens and as the sensory cells become more specialized and as the motor output cells become more specialized, many more patterns can be detected. Those are roughly equivalent to facts. And many more motor outputs can be manifested. But a tremendous number of calculations have to, has to occur in that intermediary nervous tissue. And that's the structure that I'm talking about. Right there. So Sam, that's how you can find God in stuff. Now, I just, I almost said his name, who wrote me the letter. The guy who wrote me the letter, that's where you, let's, the God's capital G in stuff. Because now that you have to map on more than one thing and now that you have more than one action you have to do, a hierarchy must develop in order to, and Sam, now we're going to have choice, to choose what to do. And that takes incredible complexity. In fact, if you program computers, you have all these if-thens and you put the if-thens and you nest them in a hierarchy. Because if this, then that. And then you have to say, well, if I walk into the room and there's no snake, I pick up a book. If I walk into the room and there's a snake, I, well, now you've got a whole bunch of other choices. Do I pick up a book and try to smash the snake? Do I close the door and run away and try to get something to trap the snake? Do I, what am I going to do with a snake in my room? They're calling me. Don't they know I'm making a video? No, they don't. So what am I going to do with it? What am I going to do with the snake in my room? Well, you need an incredibly complex system in order to do this. Now, I'm going to have to differentiate between a snake and a kitten. Because if I walk in my office and I see a kitten, well, now I'm going to have to differentiate between a nice little tame kitten and a snake. I had to deal with it. Anyway, lots of stories. So I'm going to have to differentiate between that. And now maybe I'm going to take the book and I'm going to kill the snake. And right before I kill the snake, I noticed that this is a very rare snake. This is an endangered species. Now, suddenly I am connected to an entire world and I think, well, I, do I have to call someone special to trap the snake? Because you see now the entire world is out there. It's not just me surviving with the snake. I am now connected telemarketer figured. Now I'm connected to this entire world out there, which is enormously complex and decision making. And well, we've got persons. And we've got Uncle Sam. Remember what I talked about? Something sufficiently powerful, something sufficiently complex. We personify it. We do it intentionally. Does Uncle Sam exist? No. Then who drafts you into the army? Well, the government. Well, the government and Uncle Sam, they're two names for the same thing. Does the government act like a person? Every time you say, I want the government to stay out of blank, you're personifying it. Okay. It's become a God, small G. It's become an actor. It's becoming. And so Peterson is right here broken down why and how all of this developed and why Sam's, why Sam is wrong. He's just wrong about this. That structure exists and it translates the patterns into motor output. And it doesn't do it on a one-to-one basis because there are more patterns, more facts than there are motor outputs. So what has to happen is this tremendous plethora of facts that surrounds us has to be filtered to the point where you pick a single action because you can't act otherwise. And so the mechanism that reduces the number of facts to the selected action is the mechanism that mediates between facts and values. And it's not simply in and of itself. It's a fact that that exists, but it isn't a simple, that what it does isn't a simple fact. You can't explain it. You can't understand it. Why not? He just did explain it in a sense, but he doesn't exhaust it. He doesn't. Why not? Now, we'll give Sam some credit. He's sitting on a stage and I've had the luxury of hearing this a number of times and thinking about it and sifting it through. And even so, it's taken me a while to see through what Peterson is doing. What does Sam have his degree in? Why not? Well, for the same reason that you can't turn to the crowd. For the same reason that you don't know what a neural network is doing. Like you can train a neural network, an AI neural network. Did you notice that? An AI neural network, you don't know what it's doing and you're going to personify it. I mean, for Pete's sake, we personify the De La Honte talk. We personify our lawn mowers. We personify our phones. We personify our cars. We personify our government. We personify the universe. Verizon Lisa says, thanks. Thanks universe. There's a distinction between facts and facts that we know. There is whatever it is the case. So now Harris is going to say, it's just nouns. Any verb you throw at me, I can make it a noun. Okay, Sam, but that isn't helpful because if all you have are nouns, well, why don't we just say any noun you throw at me, I can make it a word. Any word you throw at me, I can make it a fact. Any fact you throw at me, I can call it an elephant. Doesn't help. And then there's our understanding of it and our misunderstanding of it. So there are many things that we think we know that we're wrong about. That we're wrong about. There are many things that we are aware. And where does this point come from? Rationality is about following in a train. And it's like Peterson is going along making a chain for you, Sam. And Sam's like, yeah. We're ignorant of and there's this larger, always this larger space of reality that we're struggling to engage with. And it may in fact be the case that in evolutionary terms, we know it's the case that we have not evolved to understand reality at large perfectly. That's not the sort of monkeys we are. And you could even argue that one cognitive scientist who some of you may have heard of, Donald Hoffman, is arguing now very colorfully that human consciousness or the human mind is actually evolved to get things wrong in fairly specific ways. To get things factually wrong. And in fact, Donald Hoffman, I think, strengthens the point that Peterson just made. That we have to, there are intermediary levels between us, whatever us is, and this is the guy that says, well, I can take psychedelics and get rid of me. Well, that's helpful if you're living in this static, monarchical bubble. And Hoffman makes Peterson's point. So that, so as to maximize survival and that That was the argument I made in our first discussion. No, but, but, but here, it was not right because there's still, this still preserves the difference between getting things right and getting things wrong. And nowhere in what Peterson described does he say that even that sponge that he says, we don't get things wrong. That's not the point he's making. It's not germane to anything Peterson just laid out. His argument is that getting things truly right, having a nervous system and a cognitive architecture that could really understand reality, quote, reality as it is, would be maladaptive. And he has See, what blows me away at moments like this is Sam Harris just again completely undermined his own argument because his argument, if he is following it, is that we have direct apprehension of facts and that's all there is. And he just quoted Don Hoffman, who's basically saying we don't have this kind of relationship with the world outside of us at all. And Sam Harris just said that. So what's your point? He has some mathematical demonstration of this that the quote, true representations of reality are categorically maladaptive and that there's a certain kind of error that is, and I'm not sure I'd buy this argument, but the fact that you've Maybe you should not be sure that you buy this argument because this argument cuts the legs out from under everything that you've been promoting in these talks. To make this argument, the fact that you can differentiate the adaptively useful misunderstandings versus a true understanding that's maladaptive. The fact that we can even talk about that demonstrates to me that we have this larger picture of what is in fact true, whether we know it or not. And this is what religion gets so catastrophically wrong. But religion gives you some other mechanism whereby to orient yourself. In this case, revelation. Well, I think religion does provide those functional simplifications. That's actually, yeah, but there's simplifications appropriate to the iron age. See, now we've jumped back to the Brett Weinstein talks that Brett Weinstein was saying, well, these are appropriate to, well, that's right. Peterson's going to say, yes, that's right. But religion is in fact, again, has always in a sense been a heuristic that we have, that has emerged. Again, I'm talking all from the bottom here. This is Peterson's big agenda that has emerged from below. Well, some of them are. If then. Some of them are, for sure. And that's why we have to have this discussion, because because mere, mere revelation and mere tradition is insufficient. And I truly believe that we can agree on that. But back to the back to the biological argument. So OK, so Sam, yeah, OK, let's keep building our let's keep playing with the blocks here. Let's keep building something. Because I thought that tonight I would make a very strict biological argument is that. So now the question is now. So now you've got your sensory systems that are detecting the world of facts and you have your motor output system, which is a very narrow channel, because you can only do one thing at a time. And that's one of the things about consciousness that's quite strange. It's a very, very narrow channel. So you have to take this unbelievably complex world and you have to channel it into this very narrow channel. That's right. So I walk into my office. There's a snake on the floor. My biological system has me jump back. And then the adults at the table say to the children's table, there's something you need to look at and think about and make a report on. But I know that takes you a while. In the meantime, we just saved you. You don't do that by being wrong about the world, but you do do that by ignoring a lot of the world and by using representations that are no more complicated than they have to be in order to attain the task at hand. I walked in the office and I had a book in my mind and I knew roughly where the book was in my office, but I didn't even, my eye never, normally, if I had walked into the office and there weren't a snake there, my eye would have gone over to where I'd expect the book to be and then my body would have walked in and my hand would have reached out and it would have grabbed the book. But because I saw the snake, bang, everything else happened differently. It's like you're using low resolution representations of the world. They're not inaccurate because a low resolution representation of the world isn't inaccurate any more than a low resolution photo is, but they're no higher resolution than they need to be in order for you to undertake the task at hand. And if you undertake the task at hand and that goes successfully, then what you've done, and this is basically the essence of American pragmatism, what you've done is validated the validity of your simplifications. So if the tool you have in hand is good, if the axe you have in hand is sharp enough to chop down the tree, then it's a good enough axe. Now, so I walk into the room and, you know, maybe there was a mouse that darts across the floor or maybe it was just a shadow or maybe just the light hit things wrong and my snake detection systems thought there might be a snake. And so I jumped back. Well, well, it was wrong. And so again, I jumped back and the adults in the room say to the children's table, there's something you need to check out. So then you're a little slow with the report, at least compared to the parts of the body that made me shoot back. And then they report to the other part of the mind and say, yeah, there's not a snake there. And so then the rest of my body, I've already, you know, my systems have already geared up for action. Adrenaline's going through my body. I'm already hyper. The pupils are dilated. Everything's ready to go. So the rest of my mind is walking in the room looking and the kids at the table say, there's no snake. There's no snake, dad. Go ahead in. And okay, now I'll grab the book. And that's part of the way that we define truth pragmatically in the absence of infinite knowledge about everything. Okay, so now you build up this nervous system between the world of facts and the world of values and it and it narrows the world of facts. And the question then is how do you generate the mechanism that does that narrowing? And this is what's useful. But that's not quite how the cake is layered. Because the facts are up here too, right? For me to even notice that you're a person, right? Or to attribute beliefs to you or to have a sense of being in relationship at all. This is one of those higher order interpretive acts based on a many layered nervous system. Now forgive me if I'm wrong. I just can't follow Sam in any of these rebuttals to what Jordan Peterson is laying down. Yes, it's not only bottom up. Yeah, but yeah, it's bottom up and it's top down. Yes, and but facts are also on the top, right? It's not that we have facts here and values here. Well, I think what I'm trying to do. You can't get to a fact but through going through a process like this. I think what I'm trying to do, I think maybe, or it's one way of thinking about it, is that you are using, you're positing that we can use rationality as a mechanism for mediating between facts and values. I believe because otherwise there's no use for rationality. We can just have the fact. But it's even simpler than that. It's just that for me and I think for everyone, if they will only agree to use language. Did you hear that? Verbs are simply nouns about experience. Now again, verb and value are not the same thing and some of you might jump on that. But it's the verb is in a sense the part of the value that you can see in the world Sam is paying attention to. It's not a self report, what I feel. It's what I actually act on. It's not a self report. It's what I actually act on. It's the basis for my actions or it's the actions themselves. Yeah, but they're not simple. That's the problem. But neither are the goods and the bad. Some are very simple. Having your hand put on a hot stove is incredibly simple. Not if it'll save your child if you do it. But again, the unpleasantness of it. Right. Peterson just made his point. Because if your child's in danger and let's say something hot has fallen on your child and the only way to save your child is to reach down and grab that hot thing and you know very well your little conscious self from the children's saying is saying you're gonna burn your hands and the parents table saying grab it. Why? Again, I'm driving in the car with my father before seat belts and I'm sitting in the front seat as a little kid and dad sees a car coming and when I taught my kids to drive, I'm sitting in the passenger seat of my regular car where there's no brake pedal and it's like bang my foot just keeps hitting the floor and the children's table is talking to the adult table say you don't need to move your foot and they don't say shut up our life is in danger that kid doesn't know how to drive. Well, my father's like out goes the arm. Well, we never hit the car. We never hit a car but out went the arm. That's how we work. And so Sam says but if you put your hand on a hot well then you take it off. Not if everything has been wired that you see the incredible value of that child that you love or even any child and you go into that burning building and you grab that burning thing and you pull it off and you know your hands will never be the same again but the value of the life of that child which has been built into you not only biologically but through centuries of value and even through religion. Well, what would you say? Well, God. I had to go in there because of God. Any religious person will say that and in a sense they have a better argument than the non-religious person that says I just had to save the kid's life. Why? Well, because kids are important. Now we're getting into religious territory here. This is where we're going. All right. The a priori facts, structures and facts. Now the axiomatic gods, what is the diamond of Socrates? Well, you can look that up and well that gets very interesting. Diamond is a Latin word for the ancient Greek diamond. They almost took it which means God, God-like power, fate. It's this thing that selects and which originally referred to lesser deities or guiding spirits. This is why I use small g's because this is how this is when we developed language and when we developed culture we had to name this experience and we named them as spirits or gods or things like that. That's how we experience them. Again, I'm talking from below here and nothing I'm saying here should bother an atheist because this is just all settled stuff. The word is derived from provider or divider. Well, look at Jordan Peterson's axiomatic god. That which provides, that which selects. This is the language we have been using since we started having language. These are the pictures we've been drawing and the statues we've been making since we've been able to represent that which is greater than us because as my friend said, well, why don't we call this community? Because it's more than community. It's more than just the sum of the people and what they start doing naturally is worshiping they start sacrificing to it and they discover the future. Again, this is what Jordan Peterson has been working on the whole time. This is why his biblical series is so gripping and just like Mr. Plunkett says, the little conscious self at the children's table might not know but your brain knows. That's why he's breadpilling people because he's saying, hey, wait a minute, these stories that have been passed around on handouts at the children's table, the adult table has been looking and watching and yeah, the kids are passing around those papers but we're going to still act like, according to Nietzsche, we're going to still act like there's a god. The kids are saying, no, there's no god. No, there's no god. No god. But they still act like there's a god because Nietzsche says, yeah, you're still acting like there's a god. You're still doing it. No, no, there's no god because the children's table tends to be in charge of the rider. And so then you look by and benign nature spirits, ghosts, spirit guides, forces of nature, you get into Hesiod and so there's good and evil and it's Flip Wilson. Those of you old enough to remember Flip Wilson, the devil made me do it. Just Google that and you'll hear Flip Wilson say the devil made me do it. That's what we're talking about with these things. And these come in individual experiences, intuitions. Verizon Lisa says, you know, thanks universe. She's talking to the gods. Well, why do I use gods? Because this is the word that we've used. Now you can say, well, I'll just use universe instead of gods. But if you listen to Brett Weinstein, if you listen to almost anyone, even if you listen to Sam Harris, he personifies these things. Well, what the genes want. Well, they're your gods. They're all your little gods built into that. Jordan Peterson says all these little gods come together into a hierarchy. And the longer we work with them, the more connections we have in terms of the network. We're putting them together. And well, and it's also the collective element. And it's and the community represents that in idols and statues and stories and myth. And as James K. Smith talks about liturgies, cultural liturgies. This is how we express our religion. And if you're your religion of nationalism, you pledge allegiance to the flag. And when Uncle Sam calls, you answer to pay your taxes or to go into the army and to fight the wars. It's a god. And so you have Uncle Sam versus, you know, the Russian bear or, you know, why do we personify these? We even do it with our sports teams. They all have mascots. Why is this? Well, John Calvin says our hearts are idol factories. What did John Calvin mean by that? He means this process is completely natural to us. This is what we do. And so gods are the best word for it. Now, God aspect one is the hierarchy of all of this. How many all powerful, all knowing, omnipresent beings can there be? You just think about that for a few minutes and you'd say one. Why? Because if you have two all knowing, all powerful, omnipresent beings, they're the same. This is where you get into the simplicity of the god. And these ideas develop. In what way is this god the maker of the world and the creator of history? Now, here's where we start to bump up against this line. Because if you're talking about a found universe, okay, so let's assert, let's assume here a materialistic development of the universe. Well, the logos, that which creates order out of chaos. Well, how does, you get into Jonathan Haidt here, how does the image look at the book of Daniel? How does the image in the center of the village create order out of chaos? Nebuchadnezzar says, when the music plays, everyone must bow down. And Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego say, no, I won't. You must be killed. You are bringing chaos into my tyrannical order. And Plato's Republic. This sheep herder wants to be king. Sorry, you have a function. Fulfill it. If you can't fulfill it, we're going to kick you out of the city, if not kill you. This is how hierarchies and order and gods develop. This is the logos. It's the order out of found chaos. It's still agnostic in terms of source for the material world. Nothing supernatural about anything, but we're getting up here to the line. This is all from below. But that's when they start talking. And Brett Weinstein says, you can pray to this god. I played this in my last video. And Jordan Peterson says, and this god will bloody well answer. But we don't know where it comes. And Sam Harris agrees. Oh, where does it come from? Some comes from the same place that fiction comes from. But now talk to a writer. And what do they talk about? My muse. Sometimes their muse might be another human being. But often their muse, well, where did that word come from? It came from the Greeks. They talked about the muse. Well, why do we personify it that way? Well, because we can't help but because again, something sufficiently powerful, something sufficiently complex, something sufficiently germane to our life. We personify it. We have to because we have to integrate it into our story. Because again, story is what we are. It's not this body. It's the story that is me. That's why we watch movies with stories all the time. Because the characters are characters in stories. Now it seems to separate. Now what happens with some people and like those of you watching my videos for a while, no, I work with a lot of people who hear voices. And so I'll sit down and I'll ask them, well, what do the voices say? And when I hear them describe what the voices say, I fully much believe those voices are coming from inside their head. What they are doing is actually hearing their consciousness committee. They are hearing the Jungian cloud of witnesses between your ears or at least within your body, the internal ones. And they're talking to themselves. But they can't distinguish. So, you know, is that that atlas, call it an adaptation if you will, because some of the people who hear voices say there's nothing wrong with me. I'm not going to take your darn psych meds and shut those voices up. That would be murder. Well, multiple personalities are just hearing voices. You're hearing the chatter within and you can't, the conscious self is then fractured or not whole. And we look at this as a malady, as a disorder. But those voices are coming from somewhere. They're not coming from the children's table. Something of sufficient power and complexity is indistinguishable from a person. So often when I talk to people who are hearing voices, they'll think, well, there's, I'll sometimes be in the car with them. And I'll say, well, are they talking to you now? Yes. And I'd say, well, look in the car next, is that them talking? No. Well, they can't point to anyone talking, but they tell me that someone is talking. Are they in the back seat? No. But someone is talking. Oh, and you know, here's the thing that you would think, okay, let's play Sam Harris. Well, I will reason them out of the voices talking. Good luck, bucko. It ain't going to happen. How do I know? I've tried. I'm in the car with them. I'm saying, let's use reason. We're driving 50 miles an hour down this road. If someone was outside of the car talking, five seconds from now, even if they're in the back seat, five seconds from now, even if they were screaming with the windows up, you would never hear their voice. You look in the back seat, no one is there. Who's doing the talking? Please tell me. I'm not going to talk person out of this. Why? Because their experience of it is as real as any experience that we have. You're not going to reason it away. You're going to be indistinguishable from a person. Now, my friend Wright, doesn't this get rid of God? He said, no, no, no, let's differentiate between God, meaning the Christian God, and the gods. The gods are all around us. The gods are between us. The gods are in our music. The gods are in our movies. The gods are in our culture. The gods are between us. They've been built into everything. And it's all part of this system that Jordan Peterson is trying to lay out to Sam Harris. That system is getting expressed. Now, we've still not crossed the line, but what we've seen is that we're not going to be able to see the line. Just like the person hearing voices, you're not. And again, as a Christian, people will say, well, the Holy Spirit is telling me. And I don't dismiss that out of hand. Why? Because I'm not a materialist. But I do have a degree of skepticism. Maybe it's God, capital G. Maybe it's the Lord via His Holy Spirit talking to you. I can't rule that out. But usually based on what they say, I've got my doubts. Sometimes I believe them. I believe them. Now, if you go back to my Sunday School lesson, the last few Sunday School lessons where in the very early church we're going through 2 and 3 and 1 John, we're trying to figure out these pieces because prophets arise. So I was reading the Didache, however you pronounce that dumb word, the Didache where it's this ancient manual from the late 1st, early 2nd century which tells them how to deal with these traveling prophets who come in and say, the Lord is, the Lord is, the Lord, thus saith the Lord, give me a million dollars. And basically this manual says, if they're doing that in spirit, kick them out. And it's like, yeah, kick them out. Well, why would you say that? Could God not tell them to give you a million dollars? No, God could. But most of the time, they're a con man. And they're using reason. They're using reason. And they're using, they're putting their world together. And reason is a part of this. And so if you read that ancient document, you'll see a lot of reason in it. And it was just last week's Sunday School lesson, it's my introduction to the book of 1 John. You know, I walked through it and everybody in the class could see it. It's not hard to see. But we can't see the line. Just like my friends who are hearing voices, they have difficulty distinguishing the voices. So what is natural and what is supernatural? How are you going to know? Well, you're going to look at patterns and you're going to look for authorities. Well, what are authorities? They're trusted, they're patterns that have been trusted by ancient people. And Sam keeps talking about revelation at some point. We're going to have to talk about that word because Sam has a point in that, well, here's a book. And that, well, here's a book. This is why I keep talking about organic inspiration. Read Herman Boving. Organic inspiration. Well, what is organic inspiration? They're just like you can't find Elvis in the guitar. You're not going to find in that same way God in the Bible. You can't extract DNA. It's like, oh, here's a little bit of God. God's not that kind of creature. You can, I don't have a physical copy of Lord of the Rings in my, I can hold up Lord of the Rings and I won't find any Tolkien DNA in it. Now, if I use DNA as a metaphor, you'd say the Lord of the Rings is full of Tolkien DNA. Yeah, but you're not going to find anything in the copy. Well, why? It's not the medium. They're different things. As we said, these things are indistinguishable from persons. Watch the movie Her. A man falls in love with his operating system. And I've only seen like the first third of the movie. And what's interesting is that as I was thinking about this, I was thinking, yeah, if AI keeps getting better, why would you want a real woman who has rival needs and issues and perspectives rather than a computer OS that will always tell you exactly what you want to hear based on all the information they're getting? Now we can get into the original Star Trek, I, mud episode. But this is where we're at. This is where we're almost at there, but it's indistinguishable. Indistinguishable. They might say, well, boy, you're a Christian pastor. You're talking about this. Look up John Calvin's census divinitatis. Also refers to the sense of deity or seed of religion as a term used by the French Protestant reformer, John Calvin. Paul VanderKlay, where'd you get this stuff? I didn't learn it as is. It's I'm taking what I knew from John Calvin and what I'm learning from Jordan Peterson and I'm putting it together to describe a hypothetical human sense. Maybe now it's less hypothetical. Instead of knowledge of the environment as with, for example, Smell and Sight, the census divinitatis is alleged to give human beings a knowledge of God. Oh my. In Calvin's view, there is no reasonable non-belief. Neocalvinists who adhere to presuppositionalist school of Christian apologetics sometimes appeal to the census divinitatis to argue that there are no genuine atheists. This is part of the reason I think Jordan Peterson got my attention. Some of my presuppositionalism that was built into me when I was yet a youngster going to Christian school. Sam Harris says, yeah, that was built into you. Yeah, yeah, it was. But I'm not nearly as confined by it as you might imagine. That there exists in the human mind and indeed by natural instinct, built in from below, some sense of divinity. We hold to be beyond dispute since God himself to prevent any man from pretending ignorance has endued all men with some idea of his godhead. This is not a doctrine which is first learned at school, but one to which every man is from the womb his own master, one which nature herself allows no individual to forget. You cannot be a human being and not have one, John Calvin says. Analytical philosopher Alvin Plantinga, not Plantinga, Plantinga of the University of Notre Dame and for that Calvin College posits a modified form of the census divinitatis whereby all have the sense only it does not work properly in some humans due to sins noetic effects. See reformed epistemology. Jonathan Edwards, the 18th century American Calvinist preacher and theologian claimed that while every human being has been granted the capacity to know God, successful use of these capacities requires an attitude of true benevolence. So what do you think? Is there or isn't there? There's a sort of a philosophic concept that a sufficiently advanced civilization will be able to create a simulation. Yeah, maybe you've answered this before. A simulation. I've had so many simulation discussions, it's crazy. Okay. So because. It got to the point where basically every conversation was was the AI AI slash simulation conversation and my brother and I finally agreed that we would ban such conversations if we're ever in a hot tub. That was like. Because that really kills the magic. So the idea is right any sufficiently advanced civilization would create could create a simulation that's like our existence and so the theory follows that. Good old Josh Tupolsky. This is my next. Maybe we're in the simulation. Have you thought about this and a lot are we. Are we even in hot tub so much so that. Walt Moshberg getting a kick out of this. Okay, it's not the sexiest conversation. Are we in? Are we in? I think here's like the strongest argument for us being in a simulation, probably being a simulation, I think is the following. That that 40 called 40 40 years ago we had pong like two rectangles and a dot. That was what games were. Now 40 years later we have photo realistic 3D simulations with millions of people playing simultaneously and it's getting better every year and soon we'll have you know virtual reality of augmented reality. If you assume any rate of improvement at all. Then the games will become indistinguishable from reality just in the instinctual even if that rate of investment drops by a thousand from what it is right now. Then you just say okay well let's mention it's a 10,000 years in the future, which is nothing in the evolutionary scale. So. So given that we're clearly on a trajectory to have games that are indistinguishable from reality and those games could be played on any set top box or on a PC or whatever and they would probably be you know billions of such. You know computers or set up boxes. It would seem to follow that the odds that we're in base reality is one in billions. Tell me what's wrong with that argument is the answer. Yes, while it's listening. The argument is probably I just like is there is there a flaw in that I mean someone but someone I'm not sure what the error. No, no, the argument makes sense so the assumption then is that somebody beat us to it. And this is a game. No, no, there's a one in billions chance that this is base reality. Oh okay. What do you think. Well, I think it's one in billions. Okay. I mean that seems to be like clearly. What the you know what the what what suggests and actually I mean arguably we should hope that that's true because otherwise if if civilization stops advancing then that may be due to some calamitous event that erases civilization. So maybe we should be hopeful that this is a similar. Remember I said you always have to pay attention to who we is. Otherwise, because they could reboot it. Well, otherwise, either we're going to create simulations that are indistinguishable from reality or civilization will cease to exist. Those are the two options. I think that's an argument for the existence of God. But it's not a new argument. Dorothy Sayers made a similar one. Can Frodo no talking. Now, we have a sense of the verbness of a computer simulation, but a book has just as much verbness as just a computer simulations a little bit more advanced. Again, when we watch computer games, these things get in some ways indistinguishable, not quite yet, but this is AI indistinguishable from dealing with the world. Indistinguishable from dealing with another being and essence. So this argument begins to say, well, you say, well, yeah, but a computer simulation. Well, you're thinking you're thinking about two dimensional objects on a TV screen. And what we've discovered or a computer monitor and what we've discovered is that we keep going deeper and deeper and deeper into the universe. And it gets weirder and weirder. And we can't seem to exhaust this. Well, what kind of being could make such a universe? What are the odds that this is base reality? What does that mean? What are the odds that what he's really asking is what are the odds that this just happened? And again, I don't think there is anything is just happen because the CS Lewis notice if it happened only once, then there's no just in it. To imagine that we are alone seems unlikely. Who or what made us? That'd be worthwhile thinking about. It's been worthwhile thinking about for as long as we have human civilization. All the large and interesting questions revolve around here. And I think John Calvin is right. We are built to relate. So no, God's around. No, they're around. No, they're around. You've just taken a language game, Sam Harris's language game. Well, it's earlier than Sam Harris and just decided to take him out of it. But as Nietzsche noted, well, that's what's funny is that God is dead in some ways, but in other ways, he's not dead at all. Just taking a different shape. And the gods are around you. The gods are inside of you. The gods are between you. And collectively, you're going to make a God. And that's where John Calvin comes in and says, your heart is an idol factory. You're going to have to serve somebody. We all do. We all create something that we go around. Look at Jonathan Haidt. We are built to do this. Now you might decide, I'm not going to use God, but then you'd better not use universe and you'd better not personify anything that your system says is not personal. So no more talking about what genetics want. No more talking about how we are programmed because that makes us the entity, the noun that receives the action from something that you assert is immaterial and mechanistic, but so powerful and so complex that it's indistinguishable from what we call persons. There's no other language we have. Even Sam Harris can't hold canon in this. That's the point of the paper, the heretic that I've read a bunch of videos past about Thomas Nagel. That's the point of C.S. Lewis in miracles. You can't hold canon with that language game. It doesn't work. And here Jordan Peterson is saying, not only doesn't it work, it's not true to the science which has become the idol you wish to bow down to. So then what you're going to do? Well, the system you choose to you use to choose what you see is the system creating the gods or the you in your story. And it's not going away. It seems reasonable that it's connected to a larger story. That's what we all do with it. Now, is there a larger storyteller? Is there a maker of this world that we are within? Did that maker have design goals for this world? If you're playing in this world, you can see the advantage for working on the design goals. Now, Calvinist theology says, as Alvin Plantingen noted, you're not going to get it all right. Sam Harris said that. Jordan Peterson said that. What do we call that in Christian theology? Talk about a broken world. And we're we talk about this in Calvinist theology as total depravity. It does not mean we're as bad as we could be. It means we'll never get it right. We're always bent. Where Martin Luther said we're curved in on ourselves. Well, probably some for some pretty good reasons, but that's how we are. But it's worth your while to figure out what the story is about and what part you can play in the tiny little section that you're in it.