https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uJYbU9yMPLE

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm continuing on the Easter video. We're gonna jump into part four, but before we get to part four, I want to touch on everything, or a bunch, everything that's in the video. I want to run through the history of authority and texts and then we're gonna look at part four. But before we do that, we should get into what Jordan Peterson says religion is and its relationship to the axiomatic. And this is from the Mills series at Lafayette College. Thank you for being here. I really appreciate it. So I was watching a few of your interviews in preparation for this and I heard you speak about religion quite a bit. And if you look up what religion means in the Webster dictionary, you get something like a system of faith centered on a supernatural being or beings or something like that. But I've heard you use religion to describe things like punk rockers, for example, that that's a religious experience. So my first question would be how do you define what is considered religious? And then sort of as a follow-up to that, if say Sam Harris... Religious is what you act out. What's that? Religious is what you act out. Anything you act out. Everything you act out is predicated on your implicit axioms. The system of implicit axioms that you hold as primary as your religious belief system. It doesn't matter whether you're an atheist or not. That's just surface. That's just surface noise. Couple videos ago made the point Peterson is a Protestant like Matt Dillahunty is a Christian. If you want to understand why Peterson calls Matt Dillahunty a Christian, much to Matt Dillahunty's annoyance, Matt Dillahunty is a celebrity atheist. Kind of a B League celebrity atheist. He's not on Sam Harris's level, but he's out there doing his thing and Peterson in his conversation with him, which I broke down a number of videos ago, you know, basically says, well, you're a Christian. And of course Dillahunty's all offended at this. What do you mean I'm a Christian? I don't believe in God. Well, this gets down to Peterson believes that your religion are the are the implicit axioms that you act out. So it has nothing to do with divinity or supernatural beings? No, I didn't say that. Or it doesn't necessarily have to do with those. No, it probably necessarily has to do with it too, but it doesn't necessarily have anything to do with your voluntarily articulated statements about whether or not you believe in something like a transcendent deity. So I mean what you act out is much more what you are than what you say about yourself. And what the heck? That's the difference between the elephant and the rider in Jonathan Haidt's scheme. How do you know about what you believe anyways? What does the rider know about what the elephant believes? You're complicated man. Fair question. Well, seriously people are complicated. You know, like we're we don't we're not transparent to ourselves at all. That's why we have that's why we have to go to university and study psychology. It's like, you know, we're not exactly black boxes, but we are the most complicated things there are. Right, and we can't even program our VCR clocks. So it's like how the hell can we propose to understand ourselves? And you know, I'm existentially oriented, which is to say that I think that what you hold to be true is best determined as a consequence of an analysis of your actions rather than as a consequence of an analysis of what you purport to believe. Now we could get into what is usually the central sport of our Jordan Peterson meetups here in Sacramento, which is analyzing Jordan Peterson based on his actions. So according to his actions, not just his words, what does he believe? That's that's an interesting question. Now, in order to act, you can't act without a hierarchy of value, which I tortured the other poor questioner about. You can't act without a hierarchy of values because you can't act unless you think one thing is better than another because why why would you act otherwise? So that means that you're embedded within a hierarchy of values, whether you know it or not, or maybe multiple fragmentary and competing hierarchies of value, which is all the worst for you, by the way, because it just makes you very confused. That hierarchy of values has an axiomatic, it's based on axioms and the probability that you understand them is very low because generally people don't understand their axioms. But that axiomatic system is essentially your religious system. And there's there's no way out of that as far as I can tell. And you can say, well, it isn't predicated on conscious belief in a transcendent deity. It's like, okay, have it your way. But you know, most people in this room act out a Judeo-Christian ethic. And not only do they act it out, if they're treated in a manner that's not commensurate with that ethic, they get very, very, very annoyed. So for example, if I fail to treat you as if you're an embodiment of a divine fragment, let's say, that's characterized by the ability to make free choice and to determine your own destiny, in some sense, or if I fail to treat you as if you're a valued member, valued contributing member of the polity as a sovereign individual, then you'll find that very offensive and become angry. It's like, okay, then that's what you believe. Well, if I ask you if you believe any of that, well, that's a whole different story. You might give me some radical leftist nonsense, but that doesn't take away from what you've... That doesn't take away from the fundamentals of your action. As one final thing, so when you and say Sam Harris argue about religion, you're arguing about fundamentally different things, it sounds like. His conception of what is religious is very different from yours. Yeah, well, he tends to think of religious, religious thought the same way that a smart 13-year-old atheist thinks about a fundamentalist Christian. It's like, yeah, okay. That just, you're just not getting to the heart of the matter, you know, and I just finished reading all of Sam's books in the last couple of weeks, and as far as I'm concerned, he doesn't ever get to the bottom of the issue. He doesn't address the fundamental thinkers. There are some profound thinkers. Dostoevsky's one, Tolstoy, Nietzsche, Jung, it's like they're completely absent from, and the same with Dawkins. It's completely absent. All that conceptualization is completely absent from their corpus of works. They don't even have an understanding for the psychological utility of religion, and it's a big problem. You know, you don't get to be an atheist when the people you attack are fundamentalists, like naive fundamentalists, and I have some sympathy for the naive fundamentalists. It's like what they're basically saying is something like this. Look, we have an ethos that's valuable. You scientist types are casually dismantling it. What the hell are we supposed to do? Well, the fundamentalists don't know what to do about that, so they say, well, creationism is science. It's like, well, no, it's not, but that doesn't mean that they don't have a point. Their point is there's something valuable here. It's like don't break it casually. What are you going to replace it with? The new atheists wish that everybody becomes rational. It's like, yeah, sure, that's going to happen. Thank you. And if you've listened to enough Peterson and you just listened to that, there's a lot of him that's right in that answer, and it's very compact, and it's very succinct, and it's well articulated, and there's just a lot there. So people don't like it when you poke them in their axioms. What are these axioms? Where do these axioms come from? What are the things that they're going to do? What are the axioms of Western civilization? Why are we talking about them now? Where is this going? Where did it come from? So this is going to be kind of a long video. I'm going to run through the history of text and authority like I have in another place, in a variety of places, but I'm going to go way back to the beginning of texts this time. So we're going to look at, we're going to first begin with point one of Peterson's five-part video series on Easter. Now he made this and he released this around Easter time. It was actually very close to my conversation with him, and it's so he's in the same place that he was staying in when he spoke with me. So we're going to listen to the first part, and we're going to listen to the second part, and the first part and the second part are very short. The third part is basically an elongated version of chapter seven in 12 rules for life. Do what's expedient or do what's meaningful, not what's expedient. I've covered that quite recently in the last three videos on this Easter video series. So you can go back, not too many videos, and find all of those videos on sacrifice because that's what it was about, and I'll do a little bit of summary in this on sacrifice, and then we're going to go back to the third part. And then we're going to get into the fourth section where really he starts laying out the axioms, and he does so, I think, tipping his hand a little bit about the the long expected Exodus biblical series that will hopefully come at some point. We've had no announcement of it, so we don't know when this is coming, but and then I'm going to pull a few things together at the end. So that's the frame of this video. So let's listen to point one of his Easter series, and as you listen to it, basically listen to, again, this is his standard treatment of, we can frame it a lot of different ways, modernism versus phenomenology, consciousness versus a world of objects, the world as a as a form for action, pragmatism versus a space of objects, modern materialism, and listen for those themes as he goes through it, goes through it fairly quickly. Some people said I gotta make noise during the pauses. Oops. No, we're gonna start to be... Okay, let's bring it all the way back to the beginning. Today, I want to present to you some of the things I've been thinking and writing about as Easter approached. I'm going to do this in five separate parts, which hopefully will make up a coherent whole. I'm going to read all of this because it's complicated. So, let's start with the first part of the series. So, let's start with the first part of the series. So, let's start with the first part of the series. This means that the world as a place of things is nested inside the world as a forum for action. This means that our conceptualization of the world as objective must remain subordinate to our conceptualization of the world as a place of being. This is from the first part of my book, Maps of Meaning. The world can be validly construed as forum for action or place of things. The former manner of interpretation, more primordial and less clearly understood, finds its expression in the arts or humanities in ritual, drama, literature, and mythology. The world as forum for action is a place of value, a place where all things have meaning. This meaning, which is shaped as a consequence of social interaction, is implication for action or, at a higher level of analysis, implication for the configuration of the interpretive schema that produces or guides action. The latter manner of interpretation, the world as place of things, finds its formal expression in the methods and theories of science. Science allows for increasingly precise determination of the consensually validatable properties of things, and for efficient utilization of precisely determined things as tools, once the direction such use is to take has been determined through application of more fundamental narrative processes. No complete world picture can be generated without use of both modes of construal. The fact that one mode is generally set at odds with the other means only that the nature of their respective domains remains insufficiently discriminated. Adherents of the mythological world view tend to regard the statements of their creeds as indistinguishable from empirical fact. Even though such statements were generally formulated long before the notion of objective reality, the world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world as a whole is a place of value. The world can be validly construed as a forum for action as well as a place of things. We describe the world as a place of things using the formal methods of science. The techniques of narrative, however, myth, literature, and drama portray the world as a forum for action. The two forms of representation have been unnecessarily set at odds because we have not yet formed a clear picture of their respective domains. The domain of the former scientific domain is the objective world, what is from the perspective of intersubjective perception. The domain of the latter, drama and narrative, is the world of value, what is and what should be from the perspective of emotion and action. The world as a forum for action presents itself in two stories. The normal story, I was at point A and I was going to point B, and the revolutionary story. I was at point A and while going to point B something entirely unexpected and earth-shattering happened. This meant I had to abandon my story, question my assumptions, allow my old beliefs to die, and be reborn anew. The second story, which is deeper, is essentially religious. It's essentially religious. Well, what does he mean by that? Well, it's an expression of the axioms and it's in some ways reflects the hero story, where the hero gets interrupted in his normal course of events and has to go into the underworld, has to descend into the realm of chaos, so on and so forth. This is also, he will see, and as is often seen, the story of Jesus' death and resurrection as a metaphor for this story. Now, we're going to talk a lot more about that because again, one of the things that keeps coming at Peterson is people keep saying, is it merely a metaphor? Peterson wants to keep saying, I can't say it's merely a metaphor. I'm not reductionistic. I won't say it's merely a metaphor. Then they jump to the next. Well, what about the truth of that in terms of the physical world? And Peterson then balks, demurs, expresses his open agnosticism on that score. And that, of course, is right where there's a lot of attention and energy and drama. Is he or isn't he? Will he or won't he? So on and so forth. Now, to listen to that first part, I've been looking at Peterson now for a year, and I feel like after a year of pretty intensively studying him, I have a pretty good understanding listening to that about what he's talking about because he does select his words carefully, and each one of those words is in a sense hyperlinked to a whole other big conversation. It's very compact, and I always chuckle whenever he starts that video. I've seen these videos multiple times. I'm going to read it because it's complicated. Because it is complicated. So myth and matter. And when he says that the world is divided, it's not just divided in the sense he's talking about. It's deeply split between meaning and the physical layer. A friend of mine, Len VanderZee, who's a Christian Reformed minister, he's going to be coming out to the Sacramento area later this month to be subbing for another friend of mine, Eric Dirksen, who preaches at Christchurch Davis. Len VanderZee has written a book on sacraments and sacramentalism, and I hope to have a conversation with Len. Hopefully we'll put it on YouTube. Len's a really sharp guy. He's an important guy in the Christian Reformed Church. But this issue of sacramentalism right now in the church is a really big one because what I've been able to discern is that from all of this Peterson work is a theory about history in terms of why we make the decisions that we make and the motivational things that are acting within us that we may not be aware of. Of course, this is deeply related to depth psychology that we do things we don't understand. Well, who is understanding? Well, again, to go back to Jonathan Height, the elephant is understanding where he's going, but the elephant can't talk. And so the rider's making up stories and the rider's making up excuses and the rider's making up post-hoc rationalizations and the rider has a little stick sometimes and he whacks the elephant. And if the elephant doesn't care, maybe he'll listen to the rider, maybe he won't listen to the rider. And then of course the rider is going to lie and make up stories and so on and so forth. Well, part of what's been happening, for example, in my own tradition, even in the Christian Reformed Church in Protestant, in newer church plants here in places like the West Coast, there's a real interest in hunger for sacramentalism again. And what is being expressed by that hunger is the attempt to once again reconnect the physical world with the meaning world, the physical world with the world of mythology. And that's exactly where Jordan Peterson is working right now, even though, yeah. So this is, the world has been split apart and Jordan Peterson wants to put it together. And when I first heard him, I thought this is exactly what he's trying to do. He's trying to put the world back together again. He wants the mythos layer and the physical layer to connect. And what he's saying essentially through his strident, sometimes even his strident social public agenda is that even in the divorced way that they've operated in modernism, if we lose that balance, things could go terribly wrong. That's in a sense, the apocalyptic warning that is Jordan Peterson. And that's the form for action in which he's getting a lot of pushback. Now I want to go, I've told this story, the story of the relationship between texts and authority in a number of my videos, and I'm going to tell it again in this video. And when I first wrote this video earlier this morning, I was able to back it up into the destruction of the Hebrew temple in 586 BC, which some of you might think, well, why would it go there? I'm going to go even earlier though, because after I made the video and while I was making breakfast and getting ready to come here into my office, I thought, you know, this goes all the way back to Walton and the origin of texts and how texts emerged. So if you go way back to my earlier biblical series on some of the early Jordan Peterson biblical series videos, I brought John Walton in. John Walton is a retired scholar of ancient Near East culture. He's got a number of commentaries. He's basically spent his career looking at ancient Near East texts and cultures and figuring, trying to figure out how they relate to biblical content. And so there's Zondervan's cultural backgrounds commentary that I use often. John Walton is the editor of that. He's written The Lost World of Genesis 1, The Lost World of Adam and Eve. So he's done a lot of work on this. And here in this Veritas Forum video, only 6,000 views, there's a lot of really good video out there on YouTube that doesn't get a lot of attention. But here's John Walton talking about the relationship between texts and authority. So in the ancient world, we have authority figures whose information was dispensed orally and spread about orally. And there were very rare circumstances when texts would be written. And those texts would be written by scribes, not by authors. And scribes were specialists who wrote text for particular reasons. And so when we talk about a book of the Bible, we're already using anachronistic language because a book would have been the last step in the process, not the first step in the process. We can't start by thinking, well, this whole thing got started when somebody, Isaiah or Moses or anybody else, sat down and wrote a book. The prophets spoke. Thus spoke the prophets. And so we have to start to understand the text that we end up with in our hands. We have to start to understand that process that brought that about by understanding the ancient world in which it took its shape. And so we have to account for the fact that we've got authority figures and scribes and documents before we have anything that we could talk about as books with authors. And that's going to affect how we think about the composition. Now I have to warn you ahead of time, we can't document this whole process. We can come to understand a little bit about how it works just by knowing the ancient world. But it's not like we can document the process step by step. And when we learn more about it, we begin to understand some of the variables and some of the options. That doesn't mean it gives us more answers. In fact, it may give us less answers, fewer solutions. But at least we know there's a whole range to deal with. And so composition becomes a very interesting conversation. Now I fully believe that that whole conversation can take place within the framework of a confessional attitude towards scripture. Attitude towards scripture and to think about scripture as having authority, as being God's word. But it might take a little bit different shape than what we often think. And we'll be able to talk about those things. All of this is part of a larger enterprise that seeks to understand that the Bible is given to us in an ancient language, in an ancient context. The Bible, although we may very well feel, and I think appropriately feel, that it's written for us, it is not written to us. It's not in our language. We are not the anticipated audience. It's not written in the context of our culture. And coming out the text the way I do, I fully believe that it gives God's word to me, but it is not written to me. So we either have to learn Hebrew and Greek or we have to have the text translated for us because it's not in our language. So that goes on and you can, I'll put the link to Walton's, to Walton's whole video in the in the notes section. But this is in a sense, Walton's point here is that before there were texts, there were authorities. And when we talk about, for example, the Torah, the first five books of what Christians call the Old Testament or the Hebrew scriptures, those bear the authority of Moses. They are the five books of Moses. Now did Moses write them? Now listen to Walton. There are scribes and there are there are prophets. Moses, if you read the New Testament even, Moses is a prophet. Moses speaks the word of God for the people of Israel. The books are, you know, the books here are the word of the word of God. And again, Walton, John Walton is an evangelical Christian. He's not playing games with this at all. He's not saying that the texts are merely the record of revelation or kind of the residue of revelation. The texts are revelation, but you have to understand them within what they are and within the world. Now this begins the once when Moses speaks. Now remember when I started this whole Jordan Peterson thing here, I used to hold up this book quite a bit. I haven't held it up for a while. Amusing ourselves to death, thinking about discourse, thinking about spoken word. Over the last 200 years, this is from that that great courses course on history of science in the 20th century. Technological change has moved societal and cultural change dramatically in the last 200 years. I am doing this on YouTube and now I have a mirrored audible podcast that goes out through this. You're hearing my spoken voice. That's different from a text. Now when we get into the fourth section a little bit later in this video, this is going to be a long video, so you know, buckle up and you might be grateful for the audio only version so you don't have to sit and look at a screen. But we're going to get into the question of spoken word, that in relationship to consciousness, and written word. Written word in a sense better mirrors what I've called the monarchical vision. You look at a text. Now reading a text involves consciousness, but if a text is sufficiently short and there are different ways to chop it up, highlighting words, when I do biblical studies as a part of my pastoral work, I have various computer programs now that search text, analyze text, pull things out of text so that I can see them in a moment. That's a vision. Audible is something is a series of auditory moments and this the pace at which I'm speaking right now. Your brains work far faster than what I'm speaking and so while I speak, I'm triggering things in your watchers in your head and they're going back and forth and they're having instant dialogue and your elephant somehow through the rider, some of this stuff seeps into the elephant and that's ruminating in the elephant and like Peterson says in the first thing, we're amazingly complex and what we have deep down inside us are a bunch of implicit axioms. Now back to John Walton, prophets spoke, scribes wrote, books got copied. Well over generations, books take on a life of their own in communities. Now we in the year 2018 are very comfortable with that. What we're not yet comfortable with is how YouTube is taking upon itself the life in a community. We have a president of the United States now who doesn't read books. He watches TV. He is in a sense the president of the post-literate society. The previous president, let's avoid the political stuff, the previous president read a lot of books and he would often read books and he would even go on. There's a great podcast with Marilyn Robinson where they are discussing her book with him because he read books. Our current president watches TV. George W. Bush read books. He also painted. Now none of this is, you might look at this as incidental, it really isn't terribly incidental because this is all involved in this long history of civilization and John Walton says prophets spoke, Moses spoke, scribes recorded, books were copied, books were memorized, devoted to memory. Now there was some angst at the development of the printing press and in fact the same angst was at the development of writing that this would make people lazy and dull because they would no longer have to memorize what was spoken and humanity in a sense lost the capacity to store in our brain accurately for long periods of time text. If you read for example the Old Testament, you'll see that much of the Old Testament is in poetry. Well why in poetry? Well part of the reason for poetry is you can keep it accurately recorded with meter, rhyme, wordplay, some of this. We tend to be, have a little easier time, especially in our culture, keeping narrative in mind because as I've spoken of in some of my previous videos, if you ask us what a human life is, a human life is in many ways a story and the story of Paul VanderKlay is different from this physical creature that is Paul VanderKlay. When I go into the doctor, the doctor in a sense shuts me up and says I don't care about your story, I want to look at your blood work, I want to look at your blood pressure, I want to check your vital signs, I'm going to look at your body and I would say no, it's not, my body is not me, it's my story and so Ray Kurzweil has the dream of downloading his story into a computer and being able to live within a computer. Now I think Ray Kurzweil woefully underestimated the complexity of a human being. We will not within Ray Kurzweil's life, he's 70 years old now, we will not within his lifetime, no matter how good he eats and how good his doctors are, we will not understand consciousness sufficiently to be able to program that into a computer and from what we've been learning I think in the last number of years about computer science is that computers were going to have to teach themselves how to program, increasingly computers are going to be writing code, machine learning, artificial intelligence, you hear this coming out of Google and Apple and Microsoft that the computers are, we're not smart enough to teach the computers what they need to know, we need to embody computers and have them learn from the real world. In other words, well this is, we're going to revisit this when we get into the story of text and authority, but again to go all the way back to John Walton, first the prophet spoke and then they inscripturated in text and then once we had text, the world began to change because reading a text and hearing the spoken are two different things and until the invention of the printing press, which again is a technological thing, texts were very expensive so they're there within hierarchies and economies and once the printing press happened, well then you get the Protestant Reformation, all of these layers of reality are connected, okay, and we don't know the ways that they are all connected and historians are provided endless work and for historians, endlessly fascinating work and trying to connect up these layers of meaning with the physical layer of history and for those of you who have been following my commentary on the resurrection, the fight over the resurrection now is exactly that fight, how does meaning link up to the physical and if Jesus walking out of the tomb is merely a metaphor and not physical, we still have a split universe and it's right there at that split which is why Jordan Peterson is on the bubble about the resurrection, okay, he's on the bubble about the resurrection because he's grappling with the meaning but we are all formed and for him to come out and say, I think Jesus walked out of that tomb and Thomas touched flesh and not simply say what let's say Bart Ehrman says, the disciples experienced something, okay, well lots of people experience something and what the experience changed their life, okay, now in the psychedelic conversation people are taking psychedelics and they are experiencing something and those experiences are changing their lives, but what? Well, we are dissatisfied as human beings to the degree that all of our layers are not connected and that has been creating the nihilism in a sense a transgender person changing their genitalia to match their experience is not functionally different from, and I don't mean this in a pejorative sense, a person committing suicide because suicide in a sense is an expression of inner death and wanting their body to match, okay, that's one view of suicide, now suicide is very complex, it's the same thing with changing jobs, it's the same thing as Peterson says with changing your mind, when you change your mind the old idea dies a little death and the new idea lives a new little life, it's the lobster, now again lobster specialists are saying, well he doesn't get lobsters quite right, okay, Jordan Peterson getting critiqued by technical specialists isn't a lot different from pastors getting critiqued by technical specialists, we regularly do because what pastors try to do is take complex things and simplify them for a mass audience that aren't necessarily specialists in phenomenology, Marxism or lobsters, all right, that's part of the process of participating in community and trying to keep the whole community up to speed, again back to John Walton, prophets spoke, how many people heard the prophets, someone says we've got this new tool called language and writing, let's write it down, it goes from memory and it gets written down, well once it's on a page it's taken a different form and our perceptions of authority will change, so again if you go back to point three, my last previous videos on sacrifice, if you haven't heard them, listen to them, their background to this, okay, in a sense what Peterson says, I'm going to go back to this again a little bit later in this video, in a sense what Peterson says is we discovered the future, we discovered our future, we discovered death and we discovered God all when we arrived at self-consciousness and self-awareness, my dog is conscious, he's not terribly self-aware, my dog runs around naked, pees wherever he wants, would copulate with a dog if we had left his genitalia unaltered, but my dog is not self-conscious, a two-year-old or a one-year-old is not very self-conscious, at some point that child begins to close the door because that child discovers the child is naked and if you know anything about the story of Genesis 2 and 3, you know that these stories are deeply tied and this is the reason that Jordan Peterson's talks about Genesis grab preachers attentions and grab atheist attentions because at a deep level we appreciate the fact that, well I don't know what happened way back when in terms of how modernists are talking about history, but I do know at the age of four I discovered I was naked and that was part of a big world change, okay, I'm not being reductionistic about the Genesis story, I'm talking about how the Genesis story scales and what Peterson was able to do in the biblical series is show the scaling of that story, now what is Peterson doing in this series, he is talking about a text and what has happened and this is the story I'm telling and I keep interrupting myself but we will get there, what has happened is that we have come to be suspicious about texts and this is deeply tied to post-modernity but we've come to be deeply suspicious about texts and we've come to be deeply suspicious about texts in a culture that formerly had a very deep relationship to texts and that very deep relationship to texts goes all the way back to the prophets, okay, now you might say well my particular culture if you grew up in a well if you imagine you grew up in a culture other than the ancient near east which well I guess I'm guilty because my Jewish ancestry but I've also got Dutch ancestry, those Dutch barbarians never grew up in the ancient near east, well how did the ancient near east stories overwhelm them, how did the ancient near east stories capture them, why is the ancient near east story dominant in terms of the world, well in terms of a lot of the world and that conquest continues as China Christianizes, as Asia Christianizes, as Africa Christianizes, this process is still ongoing, read Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs and Steel, now again Jared Diamond's work can die the cuts of a thousand technical deaths but the major point which is that eastern ancient near east culture has processed through an evolutionary process and has been capturing the world is a point that is difficult to dismiss and so what happens is that this has gotten into our culture via text that first the prophets spoke and then the scribes wrote and then the text became a touch point but the text for a long time was in competition with sacrifice, well how do we know this, well actually we see this playing out in the text of the Old Testament because in the period of which a lot of the former prophets which is what in Christian speak we talk about after Torah not including the writings, you get the former prophets and the latter prophets, former in terms of what the older stories of in the book of Samuel and the book of Ruth and the book of Kings, right now in my sermon series I'm starting again to preach through the book of Kings and so I'm dealing with who is Elisha and who is Elijah and I'm reading NT Wright's, some of you always want book recommendations, well read NT Wright's new biography on the apostle Paul, there's tons in that book about all of this so what is happening in Israel, now these ancient Israelites in the time of David, you know, to what degree do they have Torah, we don't really know, we don't really know the written records they have, we do have records of Josiah finding, what does he find, does he find the book of Deuteronomy, maybe that's what he find, whatever Torah was during David and the Kings of Israel, we know they had books, are they not written in the annals of the Kings of Israel, you find that again and again in the book of second Kings, but they have something written down and but that writing is something that gets lost, it's not central to their community yet, well what is central to their community yet, well we know that by reading the book of Kings and the book of Samuel and the book of Judges, what's central to that community is sacrifice, sacrifice is again, go back to my videos Jordan Peterson and the history of the Christian God, Jordan Peterson on sacrifice and then the symbol, the biblical symbolism of sacrifice, these are videos I just did last week, go back through those videos if you haven't heard them, figure out how sacrifice worked in the phenomenological, well that's a hard word to say, the phenomenological world of the Bible, why fire is God, why the substitute animal gets placed into the fire and how the fire consumes the substitute animal representing the sin, the small taking the place of the whole, this was the heart of practice what we might call religion or cultic exercise for the ancient Hebrews during the Israelite monarchy, text wasn't central, it didn't have to be central because sacrifice was central and again listen to all of those videos I did and listen to Jordan Peterson on sacrifice, what is sacrifice and so Peterson sees right there in the Genesis 2 story, this is where in a sense humanity, we become human not animal, we become human, we have the Imago Dei, Logos possesses us and in Tolkien's words we are sub-creators able to wield Logos, able to wield word, able to create with words but not only able to create with spoken words, able to write those words down into language and to have those texts begin to dominate communities, look at what happened during the last presidential campaign with respect to the constitution, look at what the right did with respect to the constitution during the Obama administration and what the left is doing with respect to the constitution during the Trump administration, what do we all assume, we all assume that the sacred text of the American experiment is in the constitution, that text has authority, that is still with us, but that we see that authority has been derived from the consent of the governed, okay, now we're deep into the enlightenment but texts took on authority but texts didn't have authority before texts had authority, sacrifice had authority and so what you see this morning, I was in preparation for my sermon this week on a passage in 2 Kings 8, I was listening to the entire book of 2 Kings and I was listening to it partly because I notice listening to the Bible and reading the Bible are two different experiences for me, part of this is because I'm such a strong auditory learner but part of this is because of all that I'm learning with respect to spoken versus written and how they are different and many times I need to both read a text so I can analyze it in a certain way but also hear a text especially from another voice besides my own, you may or may not realize that for much of human civilization we've been reading a text, we read it out loud so our eyes would see it and our mouth would speak it so our own ears would hear it, that was common, today that's uncommon and so we have another division, so text replaces sacrifice, why? Well, the destruction of Israel's temple in 586 BC is foundational, sacrifice connects heaven and earth, you can find this in NT Wright's book on the apostle Paul where text connects heaven and earth and then Jesus connects heaven and earth but sacrifice connects heaven and earth and I put that into my video or my podcast on sacrifice, going through 2 Kings there's wars over high places again and again none of the northern kings are good kings, sorry kings of the north, whether you're worshiping Baal or whether you're doing Jeroboam's original two golden calves and Dan and Bethel, you're still substandard, the southern kings are often good kings because, well why? Well what's the standard in the book? The standard is sacrifice but then there's almost always a rider but they haven't gotten rid of the high places and what you find in Judges, 1st and 2nd Samuel, it's not so much in Samuel because Samuel is much more focused on the political but you find in Judges and you find in Kings, 1st and 2nd Kings is one book, what you find in Judges and Kings is that the struggle between not only between the Lord and the other gods, often Baal, but also the struggle between centralized sacrifice versus private sacrifice on high places. The Protestant Reformation picks this up, okay? And the Protestant Reformation, well this is kind of getting watered down into evangelicalism, and the Protestant Reformation, Lord Supper only happens in church officially and in the Christian form church we still have rules about that and if I start freelancing the Lord Supper all over the place I can be held, I can be put under discipline as a Christian for a minister and some of you might hear, huh? Well that's conservative religious communities continue to take things seriously and what we're seeing increasingly is churches that do take things seriously and churches that don't take things seriously but this whole tension between sacrifice on the high places versus centralized sacrifice in the temple is a very big deal. Why? Because what they are trying to establish in practice is Jerusalem and the temple as the umbilical to heaven and if you look back in my Ezekiel series there's one interesting passage in Ezekiel where you know Ezekiel says you know Jerusalem is the umbilical, the umbilical to what? It's the connection between heaven and earth, that's what altars does, that's what sacrifice does, that's why in Leviticus 9 and 10 when Aaron's son introduced unauthorized or strange fire to the inauguration of the tabernacle they are consumed by the fire of the Lord just like the animal on top of the altar is consumed, it's the same process, it's the same symbolism, it's the same story so sacrifice is the first thing and Peterson is right on that, okay? Sacrifice is connected with the future, it's connected with God and in a sense what Peterson says and I'll get to this later on is that we discover, I put, now I've got an audible version so I gotta do things for the auditory folks, I gotta put God in quotes here for Peterson, why? And when I put God in quotes I'm saying that God is functional in the community but not necessarily ontological and that's Jordan Peterson speaking psychologically, okay? Every time he starts a biblical series, every time he talks about the Bible and he says I'm speaking psychologically, he is playing with ontology and we are right there on the border of between psychological and physical and the way this gets carried over for Peterson is because just what he said in the axiomatic answer in the mill series that I began this video with, all right? That's at the heart of it. So what do you do however if you're a Hebrew and your temple is destroyed? You've got a real problem, you've got a crisis because sacrifice is your umbilical to God, do you go back to the high places? Well that's going back, well where do you find your authority? Well when the first temple gets destroyed what do the Hebrews do? Well the prophets are still speaking, Ezekiel is speaking out of the exile, you know poor Jeremiah, read the book of Jeremiah to figure out what happens to poor Jeremiah but Jeremiah tells the exiles seek the welfare of the city, well how are they going to do that? Well I recall, I think there's archaeological evidence that the Jews tried setting up sub temples, maybe, I don't know, I'm not an archaeologist, I've read stuff about that, can't be sure of it but it would stand to reason. When the main temple is destroyed what do you do? If you go back to high places, can you really establish a temple in Babylon for the Lord? No, probably you can't do that sociologically, Babylon's not going to tolerate it, you know look what happens in the book of Daniel with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that's not going to work and if you again you remember some of my other videos, the videos of the history of God, polytheism is the way to lubricate religious pluralism, okay, so you can have your private god, you can have your civic god, you can have your national god, and all these gods can cohabitate as long as everyone plays nice, all right, and in a sense polytheism allows multiple people of different religious backgrounds to live together and of course the Jews in the Roman Empire are the stark exception to this, they're not going to go back to private altars because once you go back to private altars pretty soon you're going to go back to a multiple gods and you're going to have the Yahweh of the Van der Kley's and you're going to have the the Lord of the the Lord of the Baptists and you're going to have, you know, you're going to have all these different gods again, you need to keep it centralized to keep monotheism together. So okay, so what do you do when your temple is destroyed? Well you're going to want to rebuild it and they do rebuild it in the second temple, but what begins to develop is synagogue worship and what do they do in the synagogue? They read Torah, they comment on Torah, they keep their community together, they keep their rituals and their practice, but they don't do sacrifice, text replaces sacrifice as the central authority, so Torah replaces animal sacrifice, you don't sacrifice in Babylon, well how do you keep the Lord alive? Well you read Torah and you pray and you gather together and you have rules about life that keep you together as a community, they become boundary markers, well one of the rules, well you don't attend pagan temples. Paul has to deal with that in the book of Corinthians because now he's dealing with non-Jews and they're new Christians and they've got to figure out the rules, well you've got a rabbi telling them the rules and he's remarkably open if you consider, well see he keeps getting in trouble with the Jews and he keeps getting in trouble with the Gentiles and again read NT Wright's The Apostle Paul, his his biography that just came out. I should be doing commercials for NT Wright. So Torah replaces animal sacrifice, obedience is better than sacrifice, so what you find for example in the Pharisees in Jesus' time, keeping the law is now more fundamental than bringing offerings to the temple even when you have a new temple and Jesus affirms that because Jesus in fact critiques the Pharisees on these same points, Jesus says now you're tithing the condiments on your table but you're not fulfilling the law in your heart. Now Jesus is taking it again, we've got another level of abstraction coming with Jesus and we're going to see that with the church, but the shape of the church follows the shape of the synagogue. So even as the second temple is operative, Torah study as sacrifice replacement continues alongside so the remnant goes back and they rebuild the second temple and the old men cry but second temple now is replaced but what about the Jews all throughout the Roman, the Persian, Greek, Roman, eventually the world keeps getting bigger from a Jared Diamond perspective, the world keeps getting bigger, what are those Jews going to do? Well they make a pilgrimage, kind of like Islam picks this up, they're going to go back to Jerusalem for feasts but they're probably not going to be able to make it for every feast because the world keeps getting bigger so the majority of Jews out there are doing what? They're in the synagogue, they're memorizing Torah, they're obeying Torah, they are hedging the Torah, they are working out the tradition and what the rabbis continue to do is figure out just how to implement the tradition in all of the different cultural places that they find themselves and they are fabulously successful because they are still here and I don't have a temple of Marduk in the city but I can easily find a Jewish synagogue and there's plenty of Christian churches around, it's enormously successful. Now we are pairing in this process the text and the world, in this process text replaces sacrifice and Torah, the law and the prophets, the law and the prophets the writing, the law and prophets the writing and the writings of the apostles, all now becomes the place where God inhabits. Now when we get to the Protestant Reformation this is going to be the institution or is it going to be the text itself? Jesus text and temple, Jesus is associated with the word of God. Pete Enns, who some of you know his writings, Pete Enns is on the progressive evangelical wing, teaches at Eastern College his first book that got him in trouble with, now this is a bunch of Christian intramural stuff, his first book that got him in trouble with Westminster Seminary, the point of his first book is basically riffing on the point that the word of God means the Bible and the word of God means Jesus and that should have implications for understanding both of them. Jesus is, according to the creedal tradition of the Christian church, Jesus is fully God and fully man. What is the word of God? You've heard me make the points number of places, organic inspiration, the word of God in terms of the Bible, and John Walton was just saying this, is a product of human culture. Now Christians then add to it, inspired by the Holy Spirit, but what does that mean? Means unlike the Mormons, unlike the Muslims, the Bible doesn't drop out of heaven, it is part of this history and that's why Jordan Peterson in a sense with his theories about why the Bible should be read, he comes at it from below, whereas most Christians who are theists will come at it from above. When Christians say the Bible is the word of God, that's coming at it from above. Jordan Peterson comes at it from below and would say the Bible is the product of millions of years of conscious creatures watching each other, so on and so forth, and God communicates through that. Well, have I just spoken heresy? I'm in trouble with the Christian-formed church? I would argue no. I look at the Belgian Confession, why did I do my conversation with John Van Slocum? You can look that one up. God speaks through two books. Now the fight right now between creation and the Bible is how do those two books, where do those two books relate? How do those two books meet? And you can find tons of stuff on that in terms of conversation. Jesus is the word of God. The Bible is the word of God. John Walton just said it. The text is the word of God. Well, what if Jesus says some amazing things about the Old Testament? Jesus quotes the Old Testament about as rapidly as anyone else. Heaven and earth will pass away. Not one jot or tittle. Read the Gospel of Matthew. It's very rich in the Gospel of Matthew. People like to say, I hear Russell Brand talk about, you know, Jesus, he just wants to have the Gospels, and it's like, you don't know the Gospels very well if you do that. You don't know how the New Testament came about, much less those Gospels, and you don't know those Gospels themselves well because almost everything in those Gospels, almost everything on the lips of Jesus can be found in the Old Testament. So again, I'm reading NT Wright's The Apostle Paul, that book, and the book is wonderful in terms of the Apostle Paul was not one of Jesus' twelve disciples, okay? I'm not going to assume a lot of Bible knowledge here. The Apostle Paul was not one of the twelve disciples. Jesus appears to the Apostle Paul. On what authority does the Apostle Paul speak about Jesus? Apostle Paul would say, because I know the Torah, and I know the prophets, and now understanding Jesus, he fits into that story, which is exactly the point that C.S. Lewis makes in his book, Miracles. Jesus announces his replacement of the temple. Now, this is one of the most interesting things. In Jesus' trial, those who are accusing Jesus say of Jesus, and we don't have this in another story, which is really fascinating, they say of Jesus, he promised to destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, and any Christian hearing that knows he's talking about himself, and the text then goes to say, just in case you missed the point, he's talking about himself. Well, what does that mean? It means Jesus is about to replace the temple. Okay, but now go all the way back. Sacrifice is our connection to God. You've got to get rid of the high places. So centralized sacrifice is our connection to God. Jerusalem is the umbilical. What do the Christians say? Jesus is now the umbilical. Not text, not sacrifice, but Jesus. That's what N.T. Wright says flat out. I just listened to it this morning in his book on the Apostle Paul. Well then, why do Christians, why are Christians so obsessed with the text? Well, how do we know Jesus? We know Jesus through the text. Now, now again, we're beginning to knock on the big conflict between the Roman Catholics and the Protestants. What is our connection to Jesus? Is it the text? The text is the text. The text is the text. Or is it the institution, an apostolic succession? Jesus announces his replacement of the temple. I'll destroy it and raise it up in three days. Jesus is talking about his body because Jesus replaces the temple. The cursing of the fig tree. Why does Jesus have against that tree? You'll find it in the Gospels. It's a metaphor for the temple. Jesus is the coming of Lord to Jerusalem and Jerusalem does not recognize its Lord. Therefore, Jerusalem will be destroyed. That happens in 70 A.D. The temple, the temple curtain is torn in two. Well, what does that mean? It means that in a sense, God is not inhabiting the temple. Well, where does God inhabit? What's the name of my church? Living Stones. Well, that's a weird name for a church. What is Living Stones about? Well, read the book of 1 Peter. Jesus is the Living Stone. We are his Living Stones. What are we built into? We're built into a temple. What is the church? The church is the temple. How does God inhabit his temple? By the Holy Spirit. All this stuff connects. Bible does. We don't know our Bible very well today. People of the books. Rabbinic Judaism continues with Torah and synagogue. Text replaces sacrifices. That continues today. If you get into Christian dispensationalism and certain Jewish sects, you know, they want the mosque taken off the Temple Mount and even some constructionists, some Calvinists, imagine a rebuilt temple and reinitiation for animal sacrifices. And as a Christian, I read the book of Hebrews and I say, no, Jesus replaces temple. We're not going back. Just like when the temple was destroyed in 586 BC, you don't go back to high places. You don't go back. Christianity is a progressivistic religion. We're going to get into that in a little bit. So, Rabbinic Judaism, this is a big split. Rabbinic Judaism continues with Torah and synagogue. Text replaces temple. Jesus' followers, Jesus' meal and story, word and sacrament, replaces sacrifice. In not reformed churches, in Lutheran churches, in Roman Catholic churches, in Orthodox churches, that thing in front of the church is called an altar. Why is it called an altar? Well, can you see how sacrifice has continued to move through the system? And Jesus is the host. Now, there's a big conversation between Reformed and Roman Catholics. Is Jesus resacrificed? And I take the Catholic seriously. No, he's not resacrificed. It's commemorated. Do this in remembrance of me. Now, I'm not going to get into all of the fight over the Lord's Supper, but there's a reason that's a very big fight and there's a reason it's a very big fight in history and as there's a reason it doesn't go away. Now, Americans who don't take any of this seriously because it's not connected with the physical world just say, eh, well, maybe we'll blame Zwingli. But all these issues are involved here, okay? And if you don't know too much church history, Ryan Reeves has a great church history channel. I'm not going to duplicate Ryan Reeves' channel. He knows more church history than I do. Learn from him. But Jesus' disciples are devoted to prayer, teaching from the scriptures, that is Jesus' fulfillment, and the breaking of the bread. This is the church. It's the synagogue. You take the synagogue and it's adapted. And so Paul goes throughout the Roman empire and he preaches in the synagogue and he splits the synagogues, causes a church fight, gets stoned or beaten up or abused verbally, whatever. But what grows out of it is a synagogue-like thing called the church and that thing will continue to evolve and it's continuing to evolve into the churches that you see around you. Now, text, in a sense, continues to interact with world. This is the big division Peterson is working on. The text becomes the interpretive framework for the world. World, that is logos. Now, again, if you get into, I touched on it in some of my earlier videos, logos is in Stoicism. Logos is in Heraclitus. When John, when the Gospel of John starts with the logos, boy, he is connecting up a whole bunch of things right there and everybody knows it. And that's why the Gospel of John is so incredibly important and so incredibly powerful. And it's also the most controversial Gospel because Jesus, if you talk to Bart Ehrman, Bart Ehrman's skeptical about the divinity of Jesus and Matthew, Mark and Luke, I disagree with Bart Ehrman there, but Bart, or even Bart Ehrman will say, well, you can't disagree with the Gospel of John. It's just obvious there. Jesus is the man that comes down from heaven. Look at his dialogue with Nicodemus. So in my Sunday school class, I've started, I'm going to do second and third John and then first John, and then I'm going to do the Gospel of John. So I'm getting encouraged to make that into a podcast. So maybe you can follow that too. In the patristic period, we see Origen and Augustine and others trying to integrate and modulating philosophy and culture with the text. So this is the process of putting all of this together. And what do they do when they do this? They make more texts, more and more texts get made, but the printing press isn't around yet. So, you know, it won't really explode until the printing press. But polysemias practice, what do I mean by that? Well, listen to Jonathan Pujo and Rachel Fulton Brown have a video in which they talk about, they do some conversation, Orthodox and Roman Catholics. So it's well, it's a very good conversation that those two have. Okay. But Rachel will often bring in polysemias. What is polysemias? Well, the text has multiple layers of meaning and interpretation. And that is a nice way to keep the world and the text together. Because if you have multiple ways of interpretation, including allegorical, that's where Origen and Augustine interpret the Genesis 1 through 3 texts allegorically to keep it inside of their own contexts. Now, modernism and the modernist church will do it exactly the same way. The fundamentalists look at that and say, I got problems with that because you're taking my world apart. And in a sense, what the fundamentalists are doing, which is exactly what Peterson is talking about at Lafayette College, you're taking their world apart. Stop it. This is problematic for them. And it's not just problematic for them theoretically. It's problematic for them in practice. Okay. And they're annoyed by it. People don't like you poking them in their axioms. Matt Dillahunty doesn't like Peterson poking him in his axioms. But we're going to have to do a lot of axiom poking. So polysemias practice, allegorical interpretation smooths out the conflicts and the rough edges. I have an entire commentary series back here. I'm going to make the video big. Entire commentary series here, Ancient Christian Commentary on the Bible. And this has commentary from the Church Fathers about all the texts in the Bible. And I really enjoy this commentary. What you bump into into this commentary all the time from authors from the patristic period, which mostly makes up this commentary, are allegorical interpretations. Now as a Protestant, you read those and you tend to, oh why? That's a good question to ask. And it's a good question to pursue. And it's a good question to think through. Now you have the sacramental world. And again, maybe Len Van De Zee and I are going to have a conversation about this. Maybe I'll get him to watch this video. The Church's institutional preservation and promotion of Christianized Rome in the West through the monastic movement becomes the institutional foundation for the evangelization of the barbarians, the foundation for the continuity of patristic project in the West through text. Augustine becomes the major church father, followed by then eventually of course Aquinas. But you still have Aristotle in the Bible. And few people realize that Galileo and Copernicus don't really run into conflict with Genesis or the Bible. They run into conflict with Aristotle because the church had pretty much adopted an Aristotelian cosmology. Well why? Well because Aristotle was the science of the day. And Aristotle was, they received Aristotle from the Classical period through the Greeks, through the Romans, into their period. And so when Galileo and Copernicus say no, the earth goes around the sun. We have a heliocentric universe. Who are they fighting with? Are they fighting with Moses? Not really. They're fighting with Aristotle. Why? Because Moses you had the earth on pillars with a dome on top, so on and so forth. Yet today when you hear this story, Galileo and Copernicus denied the Bible. They didn't deny the Bible, they denied Aristotle. Does it make a difference? Yeah, it makes a difference. Did they fight with the church? Yeah, they fought with the church. But up the resolution on that fight and you'll find there's a lot more things going on at the time. But you have the sacramental world. The world, they're still holding their world together in a way. Now you have the Protestant Reformation. This is the triumph of the text before the fall of the text. Because for Protestants, texts trumps institutional authority. Martin Luther says, if you can't show me by the Bible and reason, I'm not going to listen to the pope. And now politics gets involved. Roman, or Martin Luther's political sovereign says, I don't want you killing my monk. I'm going to kidnap him and safeguard him in a temple. Not a temple, in a fortress. I'm going to safeguard him in a fortress. Why? And what's he going to do there? He's going to write the Bible in German. The printing press is out. And he's going to keep writing. He's going to write the Babylonian captivity of the church. Oh my. So text, Trump, institutional authority. That's the conflict of the Protestant Reformation, one of the conflicts. The Roman Catholic Church must be judged and held accountable to the text. And anyone who says this is a Protestant. And so whenever even an atheist tries to hold the church and church people accountable to the text, they're making a Protestant move. I think Matt Dillahunty would probably be upset. Not only that he's a Christian, but he's a Protestant Christian. Because his Protestantism, despite what he says about not believing in God, remains in his project. And that's Peterson's point. Erasmus exposes the textual weakness of Jerome's Vulgate. And it has doctrinal implications. But the church doesn't want to deal with it. The church has a lot of stuff it needs to deal with. Now Martin Luther will, in fact, in some ways, reform the Roman Catholic Church, but it wind up happening from the outside. The Council of Trent will have to deal with a lot of the things that Martin Luther illuminated in his protest. And that the pressure of the Protestant Reformation was threatening. But the institutional's corruptions and unwillingness to address increase his faith in the texts to judge. When Martin Luther wields the Bible against the church, Babylonian captivity of the church, commentary on Galatians, commentary on Romans, Martin Luther wields the Bible against the church, and the printing presses out. And literacy rates are up. And Erasmus has taken better Greek text than they had before and puts it next to the Vulgate. And universities have started all over Europe and they're reading Greek and they're reading Greek and they're reading Latin. And they're saying, man Luther's got some points. I'm not ready to go all Protestant Reformation on y'all. I live in France or I live in what will be Italy or I live in Spain. And there's a monarch, not some patchworks in the Holy Roman Empire. There's a monarch and I'm not going to cross the monarch because I could get got dead. And I don't have a good wise elector who's going to keep me holed up in a castle. So I'm not going to join the Reformation. But Luther has some points. Because actually Erasmus, who stays a good Roman Catholic, he raised those points. And Luther and Erasmus will write back and forth and argue. But Erasmus did the deed. And all he did was put the text of the Vulgate and the Greek New Testament text side by side. And hey, Luther's writing, you know, Luther's writing or Jerome's writing in the seventh century. He doesn't have that great a text or does he? He gets things wrong. He's a human being. You mean the Bible has things wrong, my Vulgate? It's a translation. Again, go back and listen to Walton. But what Luther does to the church, others in turn do to Luther. And the Protestant Reformation breaks out in a food fight. Luther's optimism that text and reason, now reason plays an important part in this, that text and reason would yield religious institutional interpretive unity never comes about. Even Karlstad, his friend, he and Karlstad can't get on the same page. And so the church fractures. And you have Lutheran churches and you have Zwinglian churches. And you have Anabaptists, the Radical Reformation. And everybody's appealing to the same Bible. And they're all using the Bible against the Roman Catholic Church and they're using the Bible against each other. Now, do you see the seeds of postmodernity there? The political chaos, which was always present, explodes now that the church's pretense of unity is weakened. Now, Europe bloodies itself with these religious wars and these wars aren't merely religious. They're also political because in a sense the church tried to keep a lid on this. We're all Christians now. Well, now you're not the right kind of Christian. And there's tremendous diversity within the Medieval Roman Catholic Church. But the institution kind of keeps it all in one fold. So Protestant Catholic Wars are not resolved religiously via the text, but politically. They come up with a political solution to the Protestant Reformation. And that is that each civil authority will decide the religion for their subjects. Wow. And you thought the sale of religious offices was a big, you know, letting a lot go. But notice now how this redefines belief. So your elector or your monarch will say, you're all Catholic now. Well, now you've got a choice. Act like a Catholic or leave. Or maybe kind of act like a Catholic to the degree that anybody's looking and stay. Well, a lot of people leave. And again, this happens over a long period of time. There's early elements, later elements. John Calvin, remember, is a Frenchman. And he's a refugee, along with a lot of other religious Frenchmen, Protestant French, who flee to Switzerland and they go to Geneva and they basically overrun the city. And there's a lot of religious refugees around. But again, notice how belief gets changed. So, well, your king says you're Roman Catholic now. I say, well, I don't feel Roman Catholic. Being Roman Catholic is inauthentic to me. Well, what does belief mean? Every time you hear Jordan Peterson talk about belief, this should stay in the background. Faith in texts is waning. So, you know, texts take a huge hit as a result of the Protestant Reformation because they can't bring the unity that Luther had hoped it would bring. The Bible can't restore the unity of Christendom. Civil powers are deciding the community's religious practice. Feel how unthinkable that thing that seems to us today. Why? Because the American experiment run out of what we call freedom of religion. Well, this goes back to the Dutch. Well, why did the Dutch do it? Well, part of the reason they did it was because why let religion get in the way of money? Voltaire makes the same point. The process is long, slow, barely discernible, detectable. It's still the Bible, even if they can't agree. And so the confidence in the authority of the text of scripture endures, and it continues to endure. It endures in me. It endures in many churches. It endures in the Protestant Reformation. It endures in the Catholic and the Orthodox churches. So the Bible doesn't lose all of its authority, but you can see the outlines of the process that are involved. But on the philosophical front, you have Descartes and Locke. And they ask the question, well, how do we know? How do we know what's true? Look at Jordan Peterson talking to Matt Dillahunty. They're asking the same questions. Descartes says, I think therefore I am. I am a subject. I know that much. And God wouldn't let me be fooled. So, well, we get down to phenomenology, and I don't believe in God. So how do I know I'm not fooled? Well, now we start in phenomenology at the beginning of the 20th century. Locke on the empirical side. Knowledge can be validated and justified by empirical evidence. I'm a black box, and my sensory powers instruct me of the world. Well, now we have empiricism and rationalism. We have the seeds of materialism in Locke. In a sense, when you hear Dillahunty, you have to justify your... you have to give evidence of your knowledge that is subject to empirical validation. That's the kind of Concordist realism that Dillahunty and the materialists are trying to work. And Peterson comes along later, and along with many others, along with Alvin Plantinga, and says, yeah, but the subject has to see that. And you're not finding any... you're not finding a vouchsafe method of showing that that's valid. And Darwin won't give it to you. Okay? Darwin won't give it to you. And that's where Don Hoffman comes in. Again, see all these previous videos that I've done. I know it's hard to jump into the middle and not watch them all, and I know it's impossible to watch them all because they're so long and there's so many of them, but that's the same problem with Jordan Peterson. So to the degree that you're interested, you can always go back and research. But you have Aristotle versus the text now in the 17th century. Aristotle, if you wanted to learn physics, you learned Aristotle. When Galileo and Copernicus start overturning the world, they're overturning Aristotle. They're overturning what's in books. Well, where do you find new information? You find it out in the world. You find it through observation. You find it through measurement. And now Newton and others are doing direct observation. They're still Christians. In fact, they're still alchemists. But it's increasingly we have providential deism, as Charles Taylor talks about, and the clockwork universe and the watchmaker God. And so God is receding now, and humanity is increasingly buffer. This process is beginning now, post-enlightenment. This is what's happening. And then along comes the American experiment in church and state. States are religious. In my last videos, I had Massachusetts City on a Hill. Well, what is that? That's the Kingdom of Heaven here on Earth. That's what the pilgrims came to do. They're errand in the wilderness. They were redoing Israel coming out of Egypt. Read Puritan sermons. And Egypt is Roman Catholic England, to the degree that it was Roman Catholic after Henry VIII. So, you know, this is a long history, and there's a lot of history involved in this. But Massachusetts City on the Hill, and JFK brings that up. But again, as I showed in the last video, or two videos ago, that's all been changed where America is the City on the Hill. That's what Ronald Reagan says in his last presidential address. We're a shining city on the hill, and he uses the New Jerusalem metaphors from the Book of Revelation. But our doors are open, welcoming people to come in. Ronald Reagan to damnesty. Trump's like, build up the wall, close the doors. This stuff holds together, right? Well, in the colonies you had, well, what's the Quaker state? Some of you live in Pennsylvania. The Quaker state. Why do they call it the Quaker state? Is it like Quaker and oats? No, it's not Quaker and oats. It's Quaker and William Penn. Penn, Pennsylvania, Quakers. Well, what did Quakers believe in? Well, you still find Quakers today. I've been talking about Dallas Willard. He worshiped with the Quakers. I'm learning a lot in his biography. But you've got Quakers, and you've got Anglicans, and you've got a few Roman Catholics running around. So, you know, don't forget that it was the 19, it was the late 1950s when John F. Kennedy is running for president that, well, 1960, he's running for president and everyone's concerned about a Roman Catholic president. I don't think about that at all today. The world has changed fast in 50 years. But why the angst about a Roman Catholic president? Well, he's going to take marching orders from the pope. And John F. Kennedy has to go on TV and explain to everyone how he's not going to take marching orders from the pope. Today, that sounds ridiculous when you look at American Catholicism. You know, they like one pope, they don't like a pope. They're Americans. They're picking their religion, just like the Protestants. Declaration of Independence. God has endowed us with inalienable rights. God? Who's God? What God? The deist God. The God of the Enlightenment. Thomas Jefferson writes this, the man who cuts out all the miracles from his New Testament. We're endowed by our Creator with certain inalienable rights. Rights are connected to the Creator. We're going to get there too. Constitution. I sometimes ask people, say, why don't you pull up a copy of the Constitution on the internet and search for God in it? You know what? You don't find it. Why don't you find it? Well, it's the United States of America. States could have official religions. The religion of Massachusetts is Calvinism. The religion of Pennsylvania is Quakerism. The religion of Virginia is Anglicanism. But the government, the federal government? No. Separation of church and state. And eventually the states, that trickles down into the states, and the states don't have religion anymore either. We're all secular. Also in the 19th century you get, well, not also in the 19th century, 18th century is, of course, the beginning of the American experiment. The 19th century of science and history have changed. They are both understood in terms of the physical layer of the universe as material processes more than stories. You have evolution and progress. You have Hegel begetting Marx and Darwin. In the 19th century in the Christian church we have the fight between the fundamentalists and the modernists. Modernist says that the Bible teaches us moral wisdom. The Bible can teach us morality. And the Bible is revelation in how it teaches us how to act. The Bible doesn't teach us science or history. We don't believe that. We found Darwin. We found evolution. We no longer believe the flood. We don't believe that the dinosaurs were ancient dragons. We believe that those big animals were animals and that we came from monkeys. Well, there you go. Freud is coming. But the Bible still teaches us morality. Fundamentalists say, no, you're not going to split our universe. You're not going to divide us. You're not going to pull us apart. So then what they tend to do is they take creation science, they take creation and they turn it into science. And Peterson's point is, yeah, but the text was written before there was science and it was a unified world. And we probably really don't quite know how to read that text. And so, well, if you want to look at how John Walton tries to piece it together, read John Walton, lost world of Genesis 1, lost world of Adam and Eve. But their assumptions about history have all become modern and materialist too. And this is the trick that the fundamentalists miss. Say you're not going to divide my world. Yeah, but your world has changed. And you haven't recognized how your world has changed. So in a sense, you're trying to fight the modernist with modernist tools and it's probably not going to work. So then watch the videos of Jonathan Pujol because Jonathan Pujol is using ancient tools and he's connecting it with yet newer tools like phenomenology. And this is what Jordan Peterson is doing too. So you have morality versus materiality. The world is separate. Our moral world is here and the material world is here. And this this kind of holds together through the Cold War. Because we recruit God to fight the communists kind of like the Avengers recruit Thor. We need God to fight the communists. So then we put in God we trust on all our coins. One nation under God gets put into the Pledge of Allegiance. Eisenhower, not a particularly devout man. His mother was. Read, if you don't want to read a whole Eisenhower biography, just read David Book's The Road to Character. We recruit God to fight the communists because they're godless communists and we're God fearing people. And so, again, we continue to keep the Bible. And so but in mainline churches, they're not going to play around with the Bible and history and the Bible and science. They're mostly going to be about the Bible and morality. So if you listen to mainline sermons, it's all about morality. Well, the mainline hasn't given that up. The mainline continues to talk about morality. They often do have a fair amount of sacramental stuff going on, which is very interesting, but they continue to talk about morality. But now there's a new morality. Well, why has morality changed? Well, after the Cold War, the Bible is no longer good for morality either. Freud on religion has now come full flower. And, well, morality, we're just, you know, we're the writer playing ad hoc moral games. And we need a new morality. Where's this new morality going to come from? Well, the new atheists say, well, listen to Sam Harris and listen to Matt Dillahunty. Well, we already know what morality is. We already have moral knowledge. Well, they won't call it moral knowledge because that violates their sense of knowledge. But we all know how to behave with each other. This is reasonable. Our morality is derived from reason. Jordan Peterson talks to Matt Dillahunty and says, I don't think so. This is this is way older than that. And your assumed rationalist morality looks way, way, way too Christian. You have progressive liberationism. The progress of morality continues. But in what direction? We're going to get into that in a couple of minutes. You have the sexual revolution. Oh, those churches and they're those churches are so anti-sex, they're so hung up on sex. And Freud teaches us that they're repressed. And so we need to be healthy is to is to be sexually free. And if we're sexually free and are allowed to sexually express ourselves. Well, where are the lines for sexual expression? When you're a celebrity, when you're a billionaire, when you're high status, looking for the highest status place in the land, you can just, you know, go up to a woman and kiss her. You can go up to a woman and grab her private parts because you're a celebrity, you're high status. That's his sexual expression. I made a I made a comment about, you know, some of the stuff going on in the Anglican Church with respect to sexual expression. Here's the problem. If you want to critique Trump's sexual expression and you want to differentiate it from other people's sexual sexual expression, you're going to have to have some moral knowledge to do so. You say, well, consent. OK. I don't know how consent gets a little wobbly when you introduce alcohol. Consent gets a little wobbly when you introduce status because why do young supermodels consent to marry old billionaires? Because they're so hot. Well, what's hot about them? Well, their money's hot. Well, their hierarchy's hot. Their opportunities are hot. Well, I guess if she wants to, well, OK, you marry an old billionaire who feels himself entitled to feel people up as much as he wants to or to walk into dressing rooms on beauty pageants. I guess you get what you get. That's what you asked for, right? Still feel bad for her. He stood up there and promised. Yeah, he promised. Where are the lines? Is there moral knowledge? Christianity then, and this is kind of where I got into this, is because as a pastor, I continue to feel the two-worldness of our world. You have Genesis 1 with us living under a bowl with waters above and waters below. You have sacrifice, ascension, heaven, etc. To make sense in the world. And then someone comes into my church once and I'm talking about Genesis and some of this stuff. I think I have something to say about Genesis. He said, I don't believe any of it. I said, why? He said, I believe the earth is flat. And I thought, well, I knew flat earthers in the Dominican Republic and I didn't think much of it because, you know, people don't have much of an education. The world looks very flat from the Dominican Republic. Well, here's a flat earther who converted to flat earthism. I thought, well, that's interesting. Well, why would you convert to flat earthism? Because I need to believe the Bible more. Well, why do you need to believe the Bible more? Because I need to stay sober and I need to stay faithful to my wife. And I need to live a life of order because before I became a Christian, my life was chaos. And the chaos was destroying me. And the only way I could find order was giving my life over to Jesus and really believing the Bible. And when I read the Bible, the earth is flat. So I'm a flat earther. And I don't have a problem with round earthers, but I have to believe the earth is flat so that I can really believe the Bible and inhabit that story. And I began to understand how the split in the world was really impacting regular people and the lives that they lived. And this person has a wonderful wife and beautiful children. And to let chaos back into that family, I know what that would do to those children. And I think, go ahead, be a flat earther. I'm not going to bother you. Why? Because I want those children to be raised in a home of order and not chaos. And maybe someday those kids are going to grow up and say, I think the world is round, Dad. OK. I'm not worried about his flat earthism so much. I'm worried about the life of his family. And then I began to realize, boy, I really have to come to terms with these two different worlds that we're living in because this is impacting us at a deep level. And then Jordan Peterson comes along and I see he's trying to put the world together. I don't see a lot of people trying to put the world together. I see a lot of people making justifications on both ends of the spectrum. I see bio logos and the creation scientists and they're all working that end of it. And then here comes Jordan Peterson and says, well, let's start from below and see if we can put this thing together. And then I see all of these people getting interested in Christianity and I think, huh, something going on here. I'm not ready to baptize Jordan Peterson if Jordan Peterson came to my church and said, Paul VanderKlay, you're the pastor of the intellectual dark web. I'm going to join your church. I'm going to move to Sacramento. I'm going to tithe all the money I'm making and I join your church. If I was in a Christian-informed church, that'd be a problem. I'd say, oh, boy, Jordan Peterson, we're going to have a we're going to have to have some long talks about what you believe. I'll leave it there. Educated Westerners are living in a ball flying through space. So where is God again? Well, Jordan Peterson, just like the belief in text started to crumble as it reached its height. I think we're seeing the same thing happening in science right now. And this is the alarm that Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein and the intellectual dark web are making. The roots have the roots happened 100 years ago in the philosophy with phenomenology, consciousness and pragmatism. We're not really the materialists we thought we were. We're not really the materialists we thought we were. Just like in 1500, we weren't the Christians that we thought we were. We're we like to say we're materialists like Matt Dillahunty, but we act like Christians. What do you mean we act like Christians? Well, this whole morality, this whole figuring out how to act, you inherited from the Christians and you're pretty much keeping all of it. Yeah, you're dealing you're tinkering with some of it, but there's lots more people tinkering with it far more radically. And other people coming along like Donald Hoffman are cutting legs out from under things. And the intellectual dark web comes along and says, you know, science is under threat from new dogmatism surrounding race and sex. Ben Shapiro says, well, you're a doctor and someone comes into your office and you look at the chart and says woman. So maybe say, OK, we'll do a pap smear. And they come into your office, you look at them, they look a little funny. And they say, take off your clothes and there's a penis and like, wait, we got to do a prostate exam, not a pap smear. No, I'm a woman. Yeah, but you still got a prostate and that sucker gets cancer in about half men. So we're going to want to keep an eye on it unless you're going if you want to say you're also you're not only post gender, you're post cancer. Well, usually cancer wins. So you're not going to dispense with the physical layer. But but this is seeping into the universities. And Jonathan Haidt was the first one that says, hey, dogmatism in the universities is destroying social sciences. We need more ideological diversity because the balance of that diversity keeps us from getting into crazy town and shutting down science because of particular dogmatisms. Well, we thought we were materialist. Well, we're really not as materialist as we thought. And this is Peterson's point. We act out. Go back to part one. Didn't think I'd get there, would you? We go back to part one of Peterson's Easter message. Well, what is reality? Are we sitting around with objects or is it a field of action? Well, the trans woman comes into the doctor's office and says, I have a prostate. And the doctor says, no, you don't. We got to do a pap smear. Well, what does that mean? Well, why can she say I have a prostate? Why can she say that? I am not going to have a pap smear because I do not have because I am not a woman. Well, or you can keep playing wrong with the competitions. Brett Weinstein at Evergreen, he's solidly politically left credentials chased out of town as an imagined bigot. I don't see that George, that Brett Weinstein is a bigot. Jordan Peterson. I mean, this is the whole point of the intellectual dark web. They're saying, I mean, Jonathan Haidt is in a sense the Erasmus of the intellectual dark web. Because he came along, he's saying, hey, wait a minute, we're losing the game here. Well, what game? The game we thought we had, the game we thought we won. Because in a sense, it's like Luther. Hey, wait a minute, here's the Bible. The Bible will bring us all together. The Bible is now we're fighting over the Bible. Well, now we're fighting what? It depends, Bill Clinton. What you mean by is. He is a man. She is a woman. This is data. It's getting difficult. What's coming up from below? Well, it's the secret, sacred self. When people disbelieved the old God, they began to believe new gods. The ironic reversal of the Christian conquest of the Roman Empire in late antiquity. People stopped believing in gods and began to believe in one god. And the rationalist said, give up your god. And again, just like Jordan Peterson said in the opening video, when they stop believing in God, what do they start believing in? I'm a spiritual being having a physical experience. I am, there is a secret self deep within me. And my authentic self has a gender and a personality. But it's not being adequately expressed by my physical self. Therefore, I'm going to employ technology to make my outsides look like my insides. Where do your insides come from? Well, we just spent 150 years with psychologists telling us that our insides were constructed. Well, now we're having people on a mass scale say that my insides are spiritual. Well, what do you mean by spiritual? How do you define that? I'm from another world. Oh, really? Is this constructed? Spirit runs amok, apparently, after reason exercises the one true God. These new gods are our secret, sacred selves. This is an ironic twist on Freud. We are projecting our individual selves as gods, but not God. Now we've got lots of gods again. It's the new polytheism. You want to read up on this? Read David Brooks, The Road to Character. We've got Adam 1 and Adam 2, and we've got the new sacred self. And we're in the time for graduations. I'm going to go to a graduation this weekend, and I expect to hear, be true to yourself. Well, who is myself? How do I find myself? Eat, pray, love, go to India. That's how I'll find myself. A Harare, I'm going to pay attention to my breathing, and I'm going to divorce myself from any story I know or see. Well, that's interesting. Where does that come from? Where does that come from if you're a materialist? Where do those stories come from? People are attacking Jordan Peterson like he's in isolation. But if you're, once you figure out some of these threads, you begin to find, ooh, there's a lot going on. Well, of course there's a lot going on. I'm going to pause now, and so this will be part one, and then we're going to get into part two. Yeah, it's long, but here's an hour and 40 minutes, and yeah, they'll be part two. Thank you.