https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rv6_PQw7ZKA

 No frills at all. Oh, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Tell me a little bit about yourself. Okay. Well, my name is Fred Swan. I'm actually doing this at work right now. I work at a fireworks store. Oh really? Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty cool. And the assistant to the regional manager. But it's kind of slow this time of year, so there's not much need for an assistant to the regional manager. Let's see. Married for 15 years. I got three kids. 14, almost 13 and 11. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. And well, I've been, been atheist since I was 18 and I read a book, a library about, it was just disproving, you know, the creation myths. And when it said, when it gave actual measurements for the art and then converted it to meters and then, you know, show how many meters you'd have for each animal, it really didn't, you know, for me, that just destroyed the whole Bible for me. Yeah. I see that. I'm like, oh, everything I've been believing all this time is a lie. And so I spent next 16 years or so as a, about atheist. And it wasn't until the past year or two that I started really looking at what, what we, you know, what we have in our culture and how it's all based on, you know, the Christian mythos. And I became, and I said, I can't be an atheist with it. I don't believe in God. I absolutely do not. But I need something. And so I started calling myself culturally Christian, because that's, you know, that's what I have. You know, my, my culture is, you know, is the, the Jaya Christian, you know, heritage and that's built this country. And so I should, you know, I should at least pay homage to that. And it was actually Jordan Peterson and Ben Shapiro on the Dave Rubin show that finally got my wife and I back to church. We were listening to the, to the whole thing while driving along and we get home and I said, I think we need to go back to church. She said, I knew this was coming. Okay. Kind of like, you know, your first colonoscopy. I knew this was coming. Okay. And she's been resisting it so hard. I was telling her about the, the Sam Harris debate where he, where he questions the idea of a God who cares if you masturbate. And then I, I feel, I relayed Peterson's rebuttal, his explanation to her. She says, I knew this was a bad idea. It makes too much sense. And all these stories, you know, I've been, I've read the biblical, the biblical, I've read, I've watched the biblical series and you know, of course you got to parse out, you know, meaning through his, you know, verbiage, that spreads for hours. But inside there, you know, it makes a lot of sense. You know, it, you know, it's, it's all just like this 12 Ruseful Life. It's all basic stuff. It's stuff that we already know, but he's explaining it. And looking back, I see that, what probably chased me away from Christianity more than anything was the constant topical treatment of the, of the biblical stories. You know, from the time I was a little kid, you know, Noah was the only good guy in a world full of evil. And that's why God sent the flood and that was the end of it. There was nothing deeper to know there. There was nothing more to understand. It was literal. It was factual actually happened just the way it is written in the Bible and there's nothing more to read into it. And you know, as you get older, you get skeptical. And I, I couldn't, I couldn't wrap my mind around something that was so simplistic. So, and yeah. So you went, so you went to a church. What was that like? Well, it was, I went to my old family church when I grew up in and my pastor, Ira Hall, shout out to him. He, he was the youth pastor and he was always very exuberant, very, very ready to preach the, preach the gospel. And, uh, and he worked exclusively with the team. And then a few years ago I find out that he's the pastor of the whole church. Ira can't be the pastor of the whole church. That's not what Ira does. He's never been in there. Of course he's great at it. And, um, yeah, I take my, I took the plunge and took the family the first Sunday after Christmas. We had planned to go to the Christmas Eve service as a nice break in period, but, you know, daughter ended up getting a fever and you couldn't go. Um, so we go in and I sit down and I think myself, what the hell am I doing here? And I, and still, you know, I go in and I'm like, and I think myself, what am I doing here? And, um, and the thing is, you know, it is, um, it's been good. You know, the kids are behaving through it. And, um, uh, that's about all I can ask, uh, because they really don't like the idea. Now they, well, I have, I have two teenage. Sure. And they, they hate the idea of going to church for them is just, it's, it's just boring and lame. Um, my oldest is the most reticent, which I find odd because she's right into her, uh, into her Greek and Egyptian myths. She loves reading of those. You can, she can recite to me all the Egyptian gods and tell me what they do and, and some of their stories. And so I try to tell her, you know, there's an awful lot of overlap between ancient Egypt and, you know, and the Bible and the Bible myth actually have some bearing on your life. It's true. No, no, it's still church. It's still, still stupid and lame. Uh, where the, my, my middle child, my boy, he's a, he'll go along with anything once you make them. Yeah. You tell them, it's time to do this. And then he does it and he's fine. He gets right into it. Um, my youngest actually loves the idea. Yeah. She, she really liked it. You know, she's 11, um, her, uh, her oppositional, uh, teenage hormones haven't kicked in yet. She's still game. And, uh, yeah. So what are you learning? So what are you learning? What am I learning? Um, a lot. And, uh, so much of it is hard to, uh, you know, it's hard to put it all together. You know, I'm still, I've kind of got myself settled on the idea of God. In fact, I sent you an email about that a few days ago. Um, how, you know, it's kind of all right there. And, and, uh, and the 10 commandments where God says, you know, don't make any graven images of me. Don't think of me that way because God is so much bigger than that. And at its simplest, I think, okay, you know, we, we know what happened, how the universe is expanding from a central point. We know that there was a, you know, some, something happened to start that off. We call it the big bang because we don't know what else to call it, but we don't know what caused it. We don't know where the matter came from. We don't know what's outside of it. We don't know what came before it. As far as I'm concerned, whatever we don't completely understand, you may as well call it God. And, um, then the more I listen to Peterson, the more I listen to yourself, um, the more I hear how, uh, you know, our own subconscious, our own consciousness is completely not understood. It's not misunderstood. It's not poorly understood. It's not understood. We don't have the first clue, uh, what we're, what we're doing here with consciousness. All we know is we have it. And that's, um, and, and learning how, uh, how our consciousness plays off each other, how it's, uh, how it goes so deep in our, in our evolutionary history is absolutely astounding. And, uh, so God is everything outside the universe that we don't understand. And at the same time, God is everything inside our own head that we can't understand. And that is that I find that just amazing. So I, uh, so that, that's where I am with God, you know, the Old Testament, God, the God who created the universe, the God who smites people. Um, and, uh, and the, my, my problem now is, well, what about this Jesus guy? Jesus got because Jesus, well, he's supposed to be an actual historical figure. And I've heard flames both for and against his actual existence. I haven't dealt too deeply into this yet. Uh, still looking for a good Peterson video to explain it. Um, yeah, we're waiting around for him to get through Exodus Leviticus numbers due to the economy all the way to Matthew. Oh, that'll take him. That'll take him years. Uh, so yeah, you know, this whole idea. So Jesus, for all intents and purposes, he existed. He actually hung out in, uh, in, in Galilee and, uh, and said things and did stuff. Now the nature of that stuff, that's where I started having problems, you know, turning water into wine and things like that. And, uh, and raised, rising from the dead, being born to a virgin. And to an extent I can wrap my mind around some of these things, um, vaguely. Uh, I watched a rant, you know, just one of those random, uh, you know, weird facts videos on YouTube. Um, somebody wanted to know about this, uh, this story that circulates this, uh, you know, a little urban myth that some girl who did not have a vagina gave birth and the, and they explained, I mean, I, I hope I don't get, I don't want to get too crude that we can't post this up, but, um, uh, basically, uh, she had oral sex and then, uh, some bad guy comes in, stabs her in the stomach, burns spills out and makes its way down for a uterus and impregnates it. It's one of those things, it should not happen. There's no way this should, this should happen. But when you see how it happens, you know, yeah, it kind of makes sense in a weird way. And, um, you know, it's those kinds of weird stories, you know, those, uh, those one in a million things, you know, there's, um, uh, you know, how many, how many times have we, uh, have we heard these, uh, these stories of people who died and they were buried and then, oops, they weren't dead when they were buried. And, uh, so you'll, it's little things like that. And I can, I can wrap my head around those things, right? I can get the full explanation, but when you say, Jesus died and then, you know, after three days he rose again because, you know, he's a son of God and you know, Jesus magic. That, uh, that's a little different. That's a little more difficult. You know, if you'd said, well, you know, he had a, I'm sorry, brain injury and everybody thought he was dead because he didn't have modern medicine. And then he came back to, you know, they, they woke up. I can get around that. Um, it's when you start wrapping a historical figure in magic, that's where, uh, that's where I'm having the difficulty right now. Okay. Okay. I'm not surprised. That's, that's given, given the time and space and culture we're living in. That's what many of us in this culture look at and say, that stuff doesn't happen. Yeah. That's our, that's our cultural background. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, and I understand that, um, in other times, uh, people accepted these, you know, strange happenings as just every part of everyday life. And you know, I don't want to give up rationality. And by rationality, you mean? Um, being able to trace my, uh, trace, you know, my, my thoughts and my, my, my beliefs back to a logical point of origin. And what do you mean by a logical point of origin? Um, you know, one thing follows another, you know, when, when I, when I traced the idea of God out to the extremities of the universe, you know, to me, that's, that's, that's the logical progression. You know, you get that, you get to this end point of your understanding and it's what's beyond that, that we call God. That makes logical sense. We that that's rational. Um, now, if you just told me, yeah, there's a big old dude sitting on a cloud up there, you know, uh, granting wishes to people who pray to him. I'm not gonna, I'm not going to agree with you on, but you know, the idea of something beyond our universe. Yeah, I can handle that. Yeah. So yeah, if I can make it make sense for me, okay. Then I can, then I can go with it. Okay. Okay. And so when you go to church, there's obviously some, I don't know what your church is like, but you experienced some dissonance because you're around people for whom stuff like the virgin birth and water to wine. They just kind of say, Oh yeah, no problem. Cause he's the son of God. Um, don't you really talk about that? Well, that's the, that's the interesting thing about this, uh, about my church. Um, they're Baptist, they're conservative, which, um, server to Baptist are usually kind of out there. Um, but these folks are, you know, are very grounded. Um, uh, my pastor is very willing to meet me where I am. You know, it's not this, uh, it's not this, well, if you don't believe exactly this, if you don't do just this, then you know, then you're an evil bastard. You're going to hell. It's, uh, you know, in fact, uh, the pastor, when I, when I came in, he was in the middle of this, uh, uh, sermon series of, uh, you know, what makes a, uh, basically what makes a good Christian. And, um, he, he, it boils down to there are none. Every, every single one of us is just a, we're heaps of garbage and, uh, not a single one of us is, you know, is worthy of the title good Christian. Um, you, you model your way through life. You try your best to be a good Christian. And, uh, because it's by grace that you are saved. You know, do what good work you can, but, you know, if you fall flat on your face time and again, you're still good. Cause we all screw up. And, uh, and so, yeah, there's a, there's a lot of acceptance for me where I am. I know, uh, there's a few, uh, uh, one time hippies there that I've, that I knew before. Um, there's a fellow with a nice garish neck tattoo. Uh, you know, so they, you know, people are coming from different backgrounds and this is a growing church too. Okay. So, Oh, it's very cool. I, I, thanks for sharing this with me. That's exciting to hear. I, I love, I'm always nervous when, okay, so someone like you, he's watched the biblical series and then they go into church and, and then it's just a train wreck. I hate those stories. So I love a story like yours where the, where the pastor is cool and well, and it's also kind of neat that this is, this is the same town you grew up in and you probably know other people in church just because you, you know, you're part of the town, I assume. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, in fact, the thing that surprised me most was the lack of surprise on people's faces. I was, I was bracing for all these, for all these old timers in the church to see me say, Oh Fred, you're back. And I was ready to run out of there screaming if that happened. And, um, and that didn't happen. You know, people were just like, people came up to me and said, hi Fred, how are you? Just like as if they'd seen me yesterday. As if I never left. And I really, really appreciated that. I did get one guy who gave the deer in the headlights look. And, um, and one, uh, one kid that I knew, uh, outside of the church, I never knew him when I went to church, but he was going there when I was, uh, uh, running away from, uh, the Bible screaming. He, uh, he, he, he was actually there back from, uh, California, where he was, uh, where he's doing some, some sort of mission work. And, uh, he says, you know, so for the one week that I'm here and you're here too, that's awesome. Yeah. We, and you know, we, we had, we had a nice talk too. Uh, so yeah. And you know, my, my wife, she's been, uh, she's been right on board. Um, did she grow up in the same area as you? Yep. Yeah. She grew up, uh, you know, next town over for me. And, um, and she was raised, uh, you know, in a super liberal, uh, home and, uh, you know, very, very atheist, you know, her dad, uh, her dad actually did, um, uh, a living, uh, living history at a, uh, at a local farm and they had a chapel there and he played the preacher and he played it ironically because he, he was a hardcore atheist from, uh, you know, from the time he was in college. And, uh, so the only, I think the big reason he took it was because it was, uh, yeah, it would be funny for him to play the, uh, play the pastor in the living history, uh, museum. Uh, so that's the kind of family she comes from. Okay. And so for me, you know, even though I'm, I'm, I'm wondering why I'm here, I was able to fall back into the routine. You know, the pastor, yo, says, yo, we're going to pray now. I, I sit forward and bow my head, uh, just like I never left. And, um, but for my wife, it's a bit harder for her because she never grew up in it and she's quite invested in her, you know, in her rational atheism that she was, that she was raised with. So it's, uh, I think it's a lot harder for her. And, uh, I think she's going to go kicking and screaming the whole way. But she sounds like a wonderful woman. I mean, she, I mean, she's supporting you and I mean, it's just beautiful. Oh yeah. She absolutely is. Um, you know, and, and we've gotten, uh, the two of us, uh, have, you know, have gotten more conservative, uh, together. You know, she, uh, Ben Shapiro is her thing. You listen to Ben Shapiro. I listen to Jordan Peterson. So when Ben Shapiro and Jordan Peterson are talking together, well, boy, we're, we're both listening to that. Okay. So, so yeah, we, uh, we get a lot, uh, we agree on a lot and our biggest reason for going to church was, um, because we want our children to have that grounding. We realized our kids don't even know the Bible. These are Bible stories. Even she, as an atheist, uh, all her life, understood. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, um, and we know that, you know, we've, we had already agreed on the cultural importance of, uh, of the, of Christianity. Yeah. Uh, and now we're thinking, well, we have to take part in it. At the very least, we have to go through the motions for our children. And, um, the reason I keep digging deeper is because I don't want to go to church as a complete hypocrite liar. I mean, that would be going against one of Jordan's, uh, you know, most important rules. You know, I don't want to lie. At the very least, I want to, you know, I want to tell the truth. And, uh, so, you know, I first go in there with, you know, what is God? I need, uh, before I even go into church, I want to have some sort of, you know, tentative grasp on what God is to me. So that I'm not just going in there as some jerk who's, you know, trying to leech off the system while not, uh, while not actually, you know, putting my whole self into it. Okay. It would be the equivalent of, uh, of going to Alcoholics Anonymous just for free coffee. Coffee is usually not very good. No, no, it isn't. Church coffee office isn't either. Maybe that was a bad, uh, maybe that was a bad analogy. Um, but I think, I think you get my point. You know, uh, you don't want to just go and take something from, uh, from these people. And not, uh, you know, and not have some sort of accord with, uh, with what their, their beliefs. Sure. I think a lot of people who aren't in the church probably don't understand that. I think in many churches, many churches are absolutely fine with people who come and listen and participate and engage, even if they're not on board with all of the beliefs of the church. That's, that's tremendously common. I, I find, you know, if I, if you start talking to people, okay, in churches and people who've been members for a long time, you'll find all kinds of divergent heretical beliefs out there. It's just how people are. And so they, so churches usually, it's in a sense you, you compliment and honor the church by showing up and church people are often very appreciative and very happy to have you. So I'm not surprised by any of this. Yeah. Well, I actually discussed it with, uh, with Ira before I, uh, before I made the leap, um, because I wanted to, I don't know, it's, it's, it's almost like I wanted his permission. Yeah. It's just, I, you know, I have this, uh, I was just this deep desire to, you know, fully engage in my cultural. Um, you know, this is where I'm coming from. Are you going to judge me? Or are you going to accept me? I guess it was kind of, you know, I was maybe testing, testing the church. Sure. Beforehand, you know, you know, are you guys going to be one of those where you, you, you, you believe in literal literal God up on his cloud? Um, or are you going to be the church where, you know, anybody can come in? Like you're like this. And I kind of knew where what the answer was going to be because I, I knew I are from when I was a, when I was a teenager. Yeah. Yeah. I had to be sure. Yeah. Yeah. And yeah, that's good. That's wonderful. I'm so glad to hear that. So, so what, what, what should we, we got to, so we got about a half hour yet. So what should we talk about? Um, well I had, um, I, well I, uh, when I set up the interview, we had a list of things. Yep. And, um, but one of the things that I really want to, uh, I want to work on, um, is my kids actually, just because they are so, um, they are so resistant to it. You know, I don't want to, I don't want to push it so hard that they get, um, that they end up, you know, just like I was and get chased away, but I don't want to, um, I don't want to go so easy on them that, you know, I don't even make them go. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I want them to have this, uh, this ground. Yeah. And it's, you know, it's cool. And then that's, that's kind of what I've been feeling with the whole Jordan Peterson thing is okay. How do I give the Jordan Peterson experience to my kids? Yep. Yeah. Obviously my parents telling me to clean my room as a kid didn't work for me. Gordon Peterson had to do it. So, you know, how do we, how do we get this great phenomenon? That, uh, how do we get it, uh, we're, uh, brought down to a level of, you know, being and that's, uh, that's kind of where I'm at right now. Well, I think, I think the first thing to always remember is that your kids will, if the best way to influence your kids is to be who you want them to be. And I think because your kids are watching and absorbing, they, you know, to the degree that they're conscious of everything that's going on, that's quite a bit more limited because they're children. So they're watching and absorbing. And I think they're watching this transition with you and your wife. And, and I would be, you know, I would just be very upfront and direct with the kids and say, yeah, I know, we're making you go to church. This is why. And, and you can be very upfront and say, you know, when you, when you go off to college or whenever, you know, I'm not going to be there to make you go to church. And so I'm, you know, I'm not, I'm not hemming you in or, you know, I'm not being a tyrant on you here. I'm trying to give you something good. And what you do with it someday is going to be up to you, but I'm trying to give you something good. And it's important to me and your mother. And this is what, um, this is what we'd like to do. Now it's a little bit difficult because often, when people start, when the kids are earlier, like three, four, five years old, then they're just sponges and they take in Bible stories and they don't have, they haven't yet kind of brought in a lot of these cultural objections the kind, the likes of what you found as an 18 year old, by reading that book in the library, those things come later and they will come. But at this age, I think, you know, I think you just, you're just upfront with your kids and say, you know, this is, you know, we're parents and we ask things of you, including, you know, doing your homework and getting good grades and keeping your room clean. And so this is, this is part of the package of what we're going to ask of you and we're not going to be tyrants about it, but, um, this is, this is part of the deal. And kids will often accept that. But as you, you know, they get into the teenage years and then they're differentiating and, you know, so you've got everything. This everything. And that's kind of what I've been, uh, been doing, you know, um, it's just, yep, we go to church now and I, I'm not sure if the kids think we're insane or if, uh, or if they just think we're, we're intentionally doing this to ruin their lives. Um, but, uh, I've actually found, I've been able to have a handful of, uh, conversations with my oldest, uh, about it, where it's still actually sit and listen. Um, the other day we had when I explained the idea of God as I understand it. Um, and my boy says, you know, I asked him, well, you know, what do you think is outside the universe? And my, my boy always won with an answer. He always has an answer. I mean, I would think he'll, he'll, he'll come up with an answer. Even if it's, even if it sounds stupid, uh, he pipes right up with dark matter. It's just dark matter outside the universe. How do you know? Cause I read it in one of my trivia books. Okay. You don't know. You, you read it. You read what somebody else knows or claims to know, but you don't know. And, uh, so we had, we had, we had a bit of a discussion about, you know, knowing and, uh, and, uh, yeah, then just today, you know, taking the kids home from school. Uh, my daughter was talking about, uh, social studies class and how, um, all the, all the kids in class are being taught at a fourth grade level because, uh, the teacher says, none of you are paying attention in fourth grade. So we get to talking about, you know, about how social studies is study of culture of your history and how important that history is. And eventually on the ride home, we got derailed by, uh, you know, a discussion about cannibalism because this is the nature of discussions with teenagers. But we were able to have that Frank discussion that I really appreciated being able to do that with them. Uh, and I, you know, and when I'm, I'm not doing that, you know, I'll be playing, uh, you know, when it, when if your videos or, uh, or when it's Jordan Peterson's while I'm driving along, not watching, just listen, which you can do with your Android phone. Absolutely. I love it. I love it. The best thing ever. Um, the best 50 bucks I ever spent. So I imagine in the, in the comments section, there's going to be tons of people, you know, screaming about iPhones better. But, um, no, let's see. So I have here, um, yeah, if we have a few minutes left here, I think we do. Yeah, we do. We're doing good on time. Uh, the phenomenon of atheist in church. I mean, this is this kind of astounds me more than anything. Cause when I first got the idea to go to church, I thought that, um, I thought that I was, I was the only one. And the more I looked into the more I, the more I was reading your YouTube comment threads were great for her for this. Uh, the more I find that I'm not isolated in this one bit. In fact, when I talked to my pastor, um, about the church, just in general, he said that one of the biggest growth areas or rather their big, the biggest growth area is men, single men between, uh, what was it? 25 and 35, same demographics who are listening to Jordan Peter. And they're just walking into church and my pastor says, I have no idea where they're coming from. I know where they're coming from. Oh, so to see the phenomenon going that far is, um, you know, and, and, and pastor's not even understanding where it's coming from is, uh, is pretty amazing. Yeah. And at the same time, I don't even understand. Yeah. I mean, what is Jordan Peterson doing as connecting with atheists? They have that, that movie, uh, that movie, God's not dead, yeah. Where the, where the, the atheists are all, you know, the, these caricatures of a, of a bond bill as a, as a bond villains weren't already character. And, uh, and you know, that's, that's what they've been using to try to reach out to atheists. You know, they've been using these, these very, uh, these topical, uh, uh, you know, treatments to try to, to try to convince atheists. And it hasn't been working. Yeah. And Jordan Peterson comes along and what is it? Is it the, is it the current voice? Is it just the father figure, you know, persona that he, that he does that by the, he projects. What is it? I don't know. I've been spending a year and a half on what is it? Yeah. And at some point you just got to throw your hands up and say, I, I give up. It just is. Yeah. Yeah. It just is. That's right. Well, and this, you know, so if you know anything about church history, this stuff has happened again and again around the world. You know, Korea, for example, Korea, if you look at the history of Korea in the 20th century, just Korea, not a great place to be throughout most of the 20th century. I've gotten that sense off it. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and the, you know, and what happened in the early 20th century is that Christianity just exploded in Korea. And there are stories about it and there's, there are people find reasons for it, but boom, it just happened. That's happening in China right now in certain places in Africa. And, and of course as Christians, Christians will say, well, this is God and the Holy spirit at work. But that doesn't mean there isn't a sociological or psychological layer to it because his, you know, reality is rich with all of these layers. And so, so often in our dualistic thinking, we think God or history and no, it's God through history. And, and so, no, I, I've been, you know, that's why I started making videos. Cause I was reading the comment section in YouTube too, thinking what's going on here. But this is, and this guy who says, do you believe in God? I act as if God is real. And it's like, who says these things? Yeah. And, and every time you try to corner him on it, he's going to ask that question over and over again. And you always give the same answer. I act as if he's real. And then you look at other things, he's tough. And he talks about, and he'll talk extensively about how you act it out before you ever put it into words. Well, he's told you over and over and over again, what do you believe? Yes. He believes in God. No, he's not going to say it. Because I really think if, if he came out and admitted a belief in God, his ministry as it were, would be over. Yeah. Yeah. You know, Christians are going to see him as just, just another, just another, you know, preacher. Yeah. And, um, and, and any non-believers are going to dismiss them as just another preacher. Yeah. Yeah. You know, but as, as long as you're being skeptical and I, I wonder if that's, if that might be, you know, might not be part of it too. You know, that, um, you know, that, that's being able to keep that seed of doubt. You know, I can't say, I can't say it was 100% certainty that outside the universe and inside my own consciousness is God, but I can be reasonably okay with that. Yeah. I don't need to, I don't need to necessarily have all the answers, but I need acceptable answers. Cause none of us have all the answers. No, no, it's not going to happen. Right. Our brain is an infinite amount of time. Yeah. Yeah. Given an infinite amount of time, we might understand everything, but as it stands now, we don't know. And like you said about consciousness, it's amazing what we live with and know so little about sleep, you know, sleep and dreaming. All of us do it. We've never met a person that doesn't, we know nothing. We know very little about it. You know, it's just, yeah. I mean, what, and what, what's the point there? There's nothing you can, there's, there shouldn't be anything you can get from sleep that you can't get from just laying down and, you know, staring at the ceiling for a few hours. Right. You know, but apparently your brain has to go to sleep and recharge for whatever reason. Why can't I just, you know, put a cheeseburger in my head and, you know, and, and recharge my brain that way. Wouldn't that make perfect sense? Yeah, yeah. I know. So it's no, I'm, you know, I've to me, this is just, I, part of the reason I do these conversations and why I like to record them. And then with permission post them is because, you know, I've heard your story, not never exactly every story is individual, but, and so then it's like, so what is going on here? And this is fascinating, but it's also really cool because I get the sense that this has been a very, this has been a welcome thing for your life. And now your kids are a little grumpy about it, but probably 10, 15 years from now, they'll look back on it and say, you know, yeah, I kind of resented it, but I'm glad he took us. You know, that's kids are. And I hope so. I hope so. You know, they don't need to, I never did this with the expectation that, you know, anybody was going to, you know, say a prayer and invite Jesus into their heart or anything like that. I only want them to know where they came from and understand their roots so that hopefully we can stem this tide of the bloody postmodernist. Bloody postmodernism. But it's, but it's, you know, but that's, but what's really key though is that you're going with them because I've seen before parents are like, ah, church is good for kids. You kids go to church. And the kids very quickly say, Hey, if it's good for us, you know, and so, no, you just, you, you know, you strike me as you and your wife are excellent parents and your kids are lucky to have you. So we do what we can. Yeah. And you know, that's, you know, maybe that's something that made it a little bit easier because, you know, before you have kids, you, you think you can perfect your life. You think that every, you know, if you, if you do X, Y, Z, then you'll, then your life will be perfect. Because that's what they said in the commercial. You know, that, that's what they told you in school. And then you have a kid and you don't sleep. Your, your house smells like dirty diapers. You know, everything is just terrible. And then you, you think, okay, well, they're just babies. They'll get over this. And then they get over this and give you some new terror to horrify you and destroy your life. And, you know, and then you, you know, in, in yourself, you know, you, you always think, you always start out with these great ideas. All my babies can only organic baby food and we're going to breastfeed all the way till they're two years old. You know, all these, all these perfect things going to happen. We're going to get them into preschool right off and, and we'll volunteer at school every single day. And then you don't because other things get in the way. You know, and life is not life does not work out the way you want it to. We, and my wife and I will, we'll see new parents, you know, talking the same way. Oh, you know, I'm not going to, I'm going to, I'm going to stretch out my kids vaccines over the course of a few months. So it's, yeah. Um, for worse, I'm not going to vaccinate them at all. Or you get these, uh, you know, again, organic food and cloth diapers. And, uh, I tell, I try to tell them, try to tell them, but what everybody tried to tell me and, uh, they don't buy it. No, no, I'm going to, I'm going to do it. I can do it. You know, I, I know, I know better because I read all the books. Yeah, I did too. And, uh, and yeah, you get angry, you know, you, you, you, you know, sometimes you, you're louder with your kids than you want to be. You know, you say stuff that you regret, um, because you are not perfect and don't even try to be. And, uh, so, you know, I think, uh, especially where I'm, the way I'm coming at Christianity now, I'm able to see, yeah, I don't have to be perfect. You know, this is a, this is a religion where if I don't follow it exactly, I'm not, you know, I'm not condemned forever. You know, I am allowed to make mistakes and even our own, even our society doesn't give that much, uh, leeway. Yeah. Yeah. You gotta be perfect in society. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's true. Yeah. So we got about five minutes. What's, what's, what do you, what do you not want to miss talking about? Um, don't know. Um, well, how long I'm on right here. I'll show you my awesome sweat shirt. I was wondering. Yeah. So if you wear that at work, does anybody come in and say, you know, it's like the secret handshake. Uh, we got, uh, uh, we do have, uh, you know, uh, company approved sweatshirts. I'm, I'm not required to wear them, but it's, it's encouraged. Um, but I wonder if customers recognize the Jordan Peterson meme on it or not. Uh, so far I haven't had anybody recognize it, but I've had a lot of people ask about it and it's easy enough to, uh, you know, depending on the level of interest, uh, to tell people, Oh, you know, it's an admonition to straighten your life out. Yeah. Um, sometimes I'll get a bit deeper. Um, you know, as a, as one of my, with the lady I know, I, uh, she wants to know what the lobster was all about. So I had to explain the whole lobster thing. You can never do that quickly. But, uh, but she loved the idea cause she's actually a, uh, uh, licensed clinical social work. Oh, okay. So she, uh, so she understands some psychology. And, uh, when I told her the whole, the whole idea behind it, she really liked it. Um, who knows if she'll still be talking to me after she Googles Jordan Peterson and finds out that he's a right wing extremist. Yeah. Custodian of the patriarchy. Yes. Monogamy wherever he goes. Absolutely. Absolutely. I've decided I need a t-shirt. I saw that says I am the patriarchy. I need, I need five of those, one for each day of the week. I like ruffling feathers. That's another interesting thing though. Um, as much as I've always liked ruffling feathers, since I've been going back to church, um, I've been less keen on ruffling them. Yeah. It's like, I'm, I'm trying to, uh, yeah, I used to, I used to be an internet troll. You know, all my friends on Facebook expect me to be, to be a troll. And, you know, I always got the craziest memes and the harshest, you know, come back. And, uh, for the past, uh, six, eight months I haven't been feeling it. You know, for a while I just, I throw stuff up just to keep up appearances. But now I'm like, nah, and the most, the worst I've been doing I've been, um, I've been putting up, uh, uh, pro life memes on the online and, uh, getting, getting people much angrier that way. And that way, and I'm not trolling. Yeah. I'm not trying to get people upset. I'm trying to, you know, you know, show people, hey, you know, life is a bit sacred. Yeah. So, and, uh, and yeah, I, I just, I don't feel like I need to go around, you know, pushing people's buttons anymore. Yeah. I have other things I need to do. That's a nice, uh, that's a nice pastime when you're, when you're depressed. But, uh, you know, when you, when you start getting your life together, you start cleaning up your room. A good place to start for me was, uh, you know, my own Facebook page. And, uh, it's been fairly successful. I logged in every couple of days, check up on, you know, what's going on with my Facebook friends. Oh, good. That's a beautiful story too. I just, it's, it's, it's all right. Well, if you, if you do decide that, that you'd like to post this, I'm sure your pastor would be quite gratified to hear, to hear this. So, no, it's, it's beautiful. It's beautiful. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. From where I sit at the moment, I wouldn't mind going up. So you can, uh, you can proof watch it. You and you and your, you and your wife can watch it. And if you decide, nah, I don't want to be on, I don't want to be on VanderClay's channel, then I won't post it. But. Yeah. Well, I came in thinking, don't swear too much. That's a great way to, to, you know, to not, to make it not postable. But yeah, this is, this is very enjoyable. And, uh, uh, I don't know. Well wouldn't mind doing it again sometime when I get more questions for you. That'd be fine. That'd be fine. You've got the link. So. Super. Super. Well, thank you, Frederick. All right. Thank you for the beat you and say hello to your wife for me. And, um, and I'll say hello to your pastor for me. Absolutely. I will. Okay. You take it. Bye. Bye. Bye.