https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=u1i3FHOyqxc

 This is Paul and I'm continuing my work in CS Lewis's Miracles. There is a video out there, an evening with Matt De La Hunty and Jordan Peterson. It's an unlisted video. I'm sure you'll be able to find it. Those of you who are savvy enough to ... someone pointed this out to me in the comments section and I watched it. I'm going to watch it again. The guy put a big ... because it's unlisted and because the guy put a big, you know, do not copy this recording in any way, blah, blah, blah. But I thought, okay, I respect that. But it's an interesting conversation and one of the interesting things, De La Hunty, I'd never heard of him before, but apparently he goes around. He's a former Southern Baptist and he goes around with his own conversion story. It's funny how the conversion story ... this conversion routine kind of flips. You know, the Christians go around on the stump saying, you know, I was blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and now I saw Jesus, blah, blah, blah. And you got the people doing the other thing. So his claim to fame is that he used to be a Christian and he isn't anymore, so now he's an example of you can flip too. But you know, one of the big things that he talks about in this is, you know, the laws of physics, the laws of physics, the laws of physics, and the laws of physics kind of frame reality. And this is ... and based on the laws of physics, I kind of want to hear his skeptic speech that he ... he talked to Peterson instead of giving his skeptic speech in Toronto, as if Toronto were lacking in skeptics. We certainly want there to be more, I suppose. But so hopefully if one of you knows, if he's got his skeptic speech on YouTube, I'd be interested to watch it. But he keeps talking about the laws of physics, and that grabbed my attention. Great quote by C.S. Lewis, to say that a stone falls to earth because it is obeying a law, such as the law of physics, makes it a man and even a citizen. Now, think about that. Why a citizen? Oh, citizens obey laws. So what's ... you know, one of the things that I read in How to Think by Alan Jacobs, which is a terrific book that I just finished, Jacobs makes the point that so often metaphors, we run into thinking problems when we begin to stop recognizing a metaphor. Law of physics is a metaphor. Well, what's a metaphor of, and this is exactly what C.S. Lewis points out, to say that a stone falls to earth because it is obeying a law, such as the law of gravity, makes it a man, even a citizen. And I'm going to pull up some quotes about some stuff from Rupert Sheldrake in this where he's talking about ... he's talking about laws and metaphors. Well, we're right here already. So interesting. This was a really fascinating video to watch, Russell Brand's interview with Rupert Sheldrake. I've seen it a couple of times. And I know Sheldrake is a very controversial figure in the scientific community, and I'm sure rightfully so, but I'm going to pull up a couple of little pieces from the interview that I think are germane to this conversation. Me. Well, morphic resonance is the idea that there's a kind of memory in nature. Morphic resonance is his big thing, and for him, this is his attempt to not only account for what science is already accounting for, but to account for things beyond it, such as ongoing changes in what are supposed to be constants. And if you've heard any Rupert Sheldrake before, this is one of the things that he talks a lot about. And again, I know you're all going to have lots of ideas on this, which is fine. Post them in the comments. Love to read them. But that's his deal. And what he's doing is really the process of science, whereas you, just like you have a universe where the Earth is central and planets are out there, and you imagine that in the Aristotelian system that the planets were on spheres, and Copernicus wants to figure exactly how it is, and they discover the spheres aren't perfectly spherical, the planets are elliptical, the orbits are elliptical, and they redo the math. This is the process of science. And so Rupert is trying to continue to do science beyond the existing boundaries that science is seeing. But then he makes this observation. Temporary science, one of the dogmas which was established in the 17th century at the scientific revolution is the idea that nature is governed by fixed laws. And the idea was in the 17th century, God is the maker and ruler of the universe and God is eternal. So God's laws are eternal. And then the idea was that everything in nature had to follow these laws because God is omnipotent. So God was the universal law enforcement agency. That was the metaphor. So it was a theological conception, and they didn't have the idea of evolution then. And it's a very anthropocentric metaphor, the idea of the universe that nature is governed by laws, and only humans have laws. So when you think about it, it's not a very appropriate metaphor to start with. No, there are just patterns, and I like this idea. And so, you know, right away, we're back to see as loose as quote, to say that a stone falls to earth because it is obeying a law makes it a man and even a citizen. Lewis, Lewis is a brilliant, brilliant guy. I mean, he saw this stuff and he recognized that when we, if you hear someone talking about the laws of physics, they are using a metaphor. And that metaphor is based on what I called in some of my previous visions, a monarchical vision of the universe. Whoa, where's my, have I jumped too far? Yes. The laws are based on what we call a monarchical vision of the universe, that the entire metaphor assumes, and again, I've been, lately I've been reading a little bit more 17th century history because I've been trying to get in better touch with that period. And go ahead and research Newton and all the scientists of his time. I mean, what Sheldrake describes here is in fact what they thought. And again, if you look at my treatment of Descartes, Descartes imagined that I think therefore I am established himself and then he establishes God and then God is used to fill in the rest of the picture. Well every time you use this phrase law of physics, you are appropriating this metaphor and in fact you're pushing this metaphor into the world. And this is again, when I think of the monarchical vision. Now this is Sheldrake talking about a little bit further on in the video. With those rats before, morphic resonance is about similarity in patterns of vibration or patterns of activity. So what I'm suggesting is there's a kind of resonance across time that just goes across time without falling off with time and across space. This is a difficult idea perhaps but the alternative is laws of nature that are outside time and space altogether and yet somehow present everywhere. It's not as if the conventional alternative is absolutely mind boggling, the mind boggle factor free, it's just we're used to it. That's right, you're quite right. To suggest there are objective laws that exist outside time, that is an unusual one as you've said already. It's analogous to the idea of God anyway, saying that there is an absolute template, a sort of a monolith of truth that stands beyond all that's in a sense as a paradigm, that is the same as saying God. There's these rules that are in charge. Except for materialist scientists, the rules are supposed to have come about spontaneously by themselves. They're like things in a mind but they say there is no mind. So they're completely paradoxical to have laws that are immaterial, that are rational, that have no material being and yet no non-material substrate is an incoherent belief and yet that's what most scientists believe. How? So right there, that's in a sense what I call this monarchical vision. And as Russell Brand points out, if you look at that vision, it's eternal, it's unchanging. Anyone looking at this vision and knows anything about theism will look at it and say, that's just theism and you took out the will. That's all that is. And so again, if you trace this back to the 17th century, well of course it connects because that's where it came from. What has happened is that the contemporary scientists, because they weren't living in the 17th century and don't remember it and haven't been studying any history, well they've simply forgotten it and what's been left is this shell. And again, if you read Charles Taylor's A Secular Age, he runs through a long, big fat long history of this process to arrive where we have this monarchical vision but we have taken out the God, yet the God is still functioning as this monarchical vision and now we just use different words for this God, we call him laws of physics. And again, if you sit across from a debater like De La Honte who's arguing for atheism, you might say, well your God is your laws of nature. And this is where in a sense Rupert Sheldrake walks in and says, yeah but wait a bit, your constants aren't that constant and you just keep changing things to fit the data. One of the quotes I want to pull up is from an audio course that I've been taking on the history of science in the 20th century and in fact quantum theory, basically they couldn't figure out why this movement that we can't track of the subatomic particle so that we can't track it. So therefore let's just assume it and move on from there and see if that helps our systems and it in fact did help their systems and therefore it is helpful but we soon forget the move we made in order to progress with the science and then we in a sense, you know, then the science itself becomes the dogma and anybody says, hey wait a minute, remember that move you made back there? No, no, no, no, we don't talk about that. Okay, again back to C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles and I've been rereading some of Lewis's Mirror Christianity, some of the opening chapters of that too and I'll probably bring some of that in in some of the subsequent videos but what's key for Lewis here is Lewis says, you know, one helpful place to begin is if we talk about nature and reason because truth be told, De La Honti keeps saying, you know, well there's no proof of the supernatural and that's when in a sense Peterson wades in with his phenomenology and his pragmatism which I think does undermine the point. I think Peterson is legitimate there but I think actually Lewis has seen this through and really finds where one of the key problems that the, that arguers like De La Honti or rationality rules has which is rationality itself and now this, this is really ironic because if you listen to these guys, they keep flying the flag of reason but okay, reason? Well let's talk about reason and let's talk about nature and this is exactly where Lewis begins in Miracles. Well and so as I've been working through this book, I've been doing a lot of thinking and asking this question, well, well what really is reason and what do we mean by reason when we're talking about it and I should have had a capital R there and as I've been, I even went to the Stanford, the online Stanford Dictionary Philosophy and thought surely they must have a definition of reason, I couldn't find one. So this is my own and please let me know what you think of it in the comments section. What Lewis is talking about when he talks about reason here is basically a chain of thought, of thought process or a mental event that's trying to connect self-evident truths and relationships and perhaps an example of this is math, long division. When you were in grade school, you learned how to do long division and you drew that thing and you put the big number here and the big number there because you couldn't just divide this number in your head so you drew the thing and you put it and then you carry it down and you do this whole process and you come up with the answer. Now what's critical about that is that in fact the process is fixed. Your grade school teacher taught you the algorithm exactly, you know, how to work this process and the answers are duplicable. In other words, you have those in there, you do the division, you always get the correct answer. If you start in the right place and you follow the process, you end in the right place and what's important here is that again we are trying to transcend individual perception and the assumption here is that any reasonable person who understands the premises and understands the processes and understands each step at a time will get to the correct conclusion and we see this in long division and we see this, this is in a sense what reason is for us. So if you look at the atheist arguers like Delahunty or Rationality Rules, this is their answer that this is the process by which we can arrive at truth and we see it in mathematics and then from there we extrapolate on to further and further more difficult and more controversial reasoning. A couple of days ago after the Bill Maher interview with Jordan Peterson, I posted a video about that and that one just took off like crazy. Everyone was interested in the overtime, the overtime segment that Peterson kind of took over with his question which I thought was a great question but what's interesting when you look at the comments, people are of course are all over the map. For a lot of my regular videos it's the regular commenters and it's really, I've been terrifically impressed by the community in the comment section. People are having reasonable arguments back and forth, there isn't a lot of name calling, there isn't a lot of straw manning, there isn't a lot of any of this stuff, people are actually having productive conversation but then in the comments for this other video, well now we're just out in the open field of American politics and he's an idiot and she's an idiot and I'm disappointed in him and you know on and on and on. That's just kind of, that's kind of the way it goes and now you would, by this you would be able to imagine that well why has reason failed us when it comes to politics? Why has reason failed us when it comes to religion? Well, because the problems are getting larger and larger and further and further away and we're a good bit, it's a good bit more complicated than long division which you learned in grade school. But now this process is something we do but this process can also be impaired by many things and so what you will see with almost any argument, whether you're watching Peterson and Dilla Huntie or soon we'll watch Peterson and Sam Harris and people are always attacking other people's arguments by claiming that there's some other natural reason for the conclusion they come to. And in other words, there's a natural reason for it isn't pure reason because if it were pure reason then it would be true but if there's another reason for it such as you're drunk or you're rich so you're trying to keep your money or you're poor so you're trying to grab the money of the rich person or you're religious and so that's contaminating your argumentation, watch how often these arguments come in and if you watch the rationalities rules video again he says well Peterson has a motive. Well reason is undermined by motivation and if you have a motivation you will give up reason well what is then reason? Well we'll go back to the Russell Brand conversation. It's this monolithic monarchical vision by which all subjectivity is erased and we see God in the vacuum, in the vacuum of nature we see from God's perspective and in one of the videos, I think it was the video on should pastors tell you how to vote, you know in a sense we create the tower of Babel and we climb to the top, we reach up to the heavens and now we can see as God sees and now we can have truth and now that we have truth, well suddenly the will comes in, now that we have truth now we can instill our will upon the universe. And this in fact is the, this is the desire of technology. This is what tech, this is the promise that technology fills us with and again we see tools, we see opportunity, we see potential. When we see this kind of powerful potential it grabs at our heart and we're back into a Tolkien Lord of the Rings ring of power type conversation once more. Now what the naturalists or materialists say is that this process itself is a product of nature but then you have to ask the question, well why does this particular product of nature which you believe is pure reason by which you can do long division and after that far greater exercises of sustained thought and intentionality and process that can be reproduced. What is the difference between that in nature and drunkenness, trying to do math when I'm drunk or trying to do math when I really want to get the answer right so I peek over at the other paper and I see the answer so I copy it or maybe it's a multiple choice test and I'm doing all this work and I can't really come up with the right answer, the right math answer so I look at the four options and I pick the one that seems most reasonable according to what I've done. Now you might have gotten the right answer but rationality says wrong, you have failed because you are not doing the process that we in fact call the basis of civilization. This is the basis of our rule on the earth, this is the basis of our power. So say one is nature and the other nature, well what the naturalist says, the naturalist or the materialist says that it's all nature. Well now you have the problem, why are you discriminating between one or the other and how will you know the difference and in fact De La Hunte in this Peterson nails him on, why is keeping your head, why do you consider that a good thing? In the next chapter in Lewis it's going to deal with morals and these kind of value statements and De La Hunte says well because ancestor after ancestor, ancestor after ancestor prioritized self preservation therefore that priority got encoded in our genes and that got carried on to me so I still do it. But your ancestors also encoded racism and your ancestors also encoded all kinds of things about sexuality and your ancestors also encoded eating a lot of sugar and eating a lot of fat but now you come along today and say well when it comes to racism, fat and sugar or rules about sex we have to change those based on reason even though our ancestors gave them to us and this other thing of self preservation we know this is good. Well right away you have a problem, self preservation, eating fat and sugar, does that really work? Well you don't know because it's all the same in naturalism, it is in fact the whole show. So this is why Lewis goes into nature and reason and this is where Peterson's point of coming in via pragmatism and his not seeing world but reality is this field of potential in which we act and I'm going to have to go back through the video and Peterson listened a number of things and I thought Peterson's comments there were very clear and helpful. Everyone acts and in fact society enforces that this process called reason is privileged above all other natural thought process. In other words if your teacher asks you how did you get the answer to that problem and you say I guessed the teacher will say go back and show me you can do it again, why? We have so privileged reason and in fact all of the rationality people privilege reason because what they keep hammering on us is reason, reason, reason, reason and if you watch for example Jonathan Hite's video on reason and bias Jonathan Hite is looking at them and saying you're not that reasonable. In fact what we know from a fair amount of brain science is that if you take out more of the intuitive elements people can't pick via reason that's simply not how we work but yet we privilege reason, why? Well we privilege it because we know it can be corrupted by motivation and we know it can be corrupted by air and we know it can be corrupted by chemical issues such as alcohol or other pharmacological agents and we know it can be corrupted or even killed by nature and physics and this gets into the broader conversations with Brett Weinstein who says that well the material level is the highest level and Jonathan Peugeot expressed his skepticism to that and the reason the materialists say well it's the highest level it's because if you're doing your math problem and someone puts a bullet through your head you're not going to finish it and so therefore materiality is key but you have the problem that just because you put the bullet through the head of the mathematician it doesn't mean you've killed math and as Rupert Sheldrake notes there's the problem because the naturalists or the materialists want to say it's all in the material but then they have the problem of math well what is math? Is math something that we project onto the material world or is math something that we see from the material world and derive from it? And in some ways now we're back into Plato and Aristotle. Now Lewis again in his book Miracles talks about the frontier between reason and nature and note some of these very interesting relationships nature can kill reason in other words the bullet can kill the mathematician but the bullet killing the mathematician does not kill math and it doesn't just not kill math because math is only something that human beings do and this is where all the rationality people and in fact the conversation about realism gets very interesting because well the materialists want to say if the tree falls in the woods it still makes a noise even if nobody hears it well okay but how do you describe that noise? Can you? So does math evaporate when we evaporate? So nature can kill reason but reason rules over nature. Reason can employ nature we see this all the time with science and technology. Reason can harness nature. Reason can change nature. Our employing reason does things in nature that nature doesn't do by itself. Now what's interesting is people want to say well that's all part of naturalism well then you really can't complain about pollution because pollution is just as natural as anything else because we're natural but we never use the words that way well why not? Well I think we know more than we think we know. See nature serves reason and every time someone develops something of technology nature is serving reason. Nature and our and so nature and our employment of reason are however in a long war so we discover antibiotics and penicillin that way we can kill bacteria that are in our bodies and then the bacteria become resistant to it and you will find this almost perpetually in technology. We develop a technology via our reason our will employs our reason we harness technology and we develop a technology and we or via technology we harness nature and we try to control nature and what does nature do? Slips out again this is essentially the plot of Jurassic Park. That were reason and nature are always in this fight with one another and this fight goes on and on and on and so humanity we begin to dominate the earth as the dominant species and you know illnesses break out and over population and we threaten the sustainable the carrying capacity of the planet so on and so forth. Now if you read an interesting book like guns, germs and steel what Jared Diamond essentially does is tell a long story about how we colonize nature and he goes into the east west of Europe and Asia and why animal husbandry the number of domestic animals but think for a minute about the domestication of wheat. Well what happens well this plant this grass this grainy grass grows and naturally when the stock gets to a certain point it bursts. Well if you are needing something to eat and you are out there on the plane and you discover this plant and you discover that hey you can do something with these seeds you can grind these seeds up and you can make a flower out of it and you can make bread out of it that's cool but you know it's a real pain in the neck when these things ripen they burst and they are all over the ground and you are in there amidst the straw and the grass and you are just trying to pick up all these seeds until one guy comes along and he says oh I really like the ones that haven't burst and so they take those and then you know they decide you know I would like more of this really really nice grain why don't I take those seeds that haven't burst and why don't I plant those. Well now today we look at this and say well that was a that was a recessive genetic characteristic of these particular seeds so if you take these seeds and you start to plant these seeds you are starting to get a field you are going to get a field with more of that recessive genetic quality and on and on and on and on. Well what are we doing? We are employing reason to change the world and if you read a book like I mentioned it before 1490 1493 in fact we have been terraforming the world from the start and part of what 1493 is about is that the colonization of Europeans in the Americas wasn't just people coming over and killing other people we terraformed North America so that it would look like Europe and so in 1493 and in Guns, Germs and Steel they both go through the question of why are Europeans all over the world colonization and that gets into a whole other football of a political argument but this is the process. Now what are we doing? Well we are colonizing nature we are taking hold of it. Now this gets theological because well right at the beginning of the story God makes a man out of clay and what does he do? He breathes in it and so according to the book of Genesis what is a human being? A human being is made of the stuff of earth but given the breath of God and if you look at how humans behave and you look at how humans relate to nature well that's exactly what we do. We are lords of the earth now we are in a perpetual war against nature and if you read for example Yuval Harari well we have won a lot of those wars well are we going to keep winning those wars? Well I don't know we might kill each other with nature. That's what we do we harness nature so we colonize it we bend it to our will and then we employ it with our will to do our bidding. Now I'll often in my classes talk about glory and talk about the fact that when you see a cake that cake is glorious well what does that mean? Be fruitful and multiply and fulfill the earth the book of Genesis says and in my Calvinist training of my youth we call this the cultural mandate. Well what does that mean? It means we take the stuff of earth and we make things out of it we colonize nature and again this is one of the things I appreciate about C.S. Lewis's book Miracles where you know we are this is what we're doing the relationship between reason and nature and the relationship between us and nature and that's complicated because we are not perfectly rational animals in fact reason is something we aspire to reason is hard and as Jonathan Haidt keeps making the point we actually do better when we're reasoning together when we're talking together and working together because one brain and two hemispheres is smart but multiple brains each with two hemispheres is far smarter which is why in fact free speech is so important. But now again you get back to Matt Dillahunty and I won't believe anything until I see the supernatural this past Sunday I preached on Doubting Thomas. Thomas comes along and says I'm not going to believe he's risen from the dead unless I can put my hands my fingers in his hands and my hand in his side then I won't believe. Well here's the problem it depends what you describe as nature and supernature it depends on what you define as supernatural and this is getting into C.S. Lewis's book on Miracles. Well what do you mean supernatural because in fact we've got supernatural all over the place right now. If you walk through a field and you see this book you think wow where's the plant that's growing Neil Postman books. Not there baby. We're the stuff of earth and the breath of God and you know we're doing this kind of stuff and we're employing nature and we're eating lobsters and shout out to. You know who you are. Thanks for the carving it's really cool. You don't see supernatural stuff. Well I think there's a reason for that and I think Louis C.K. in this pretty famous clip really nails it. It's a lot of trust back then. Yeah those were simpler times I think I just feel like we may be going back to that by the way but in a way good because when I read things like the foundations of capitalism are shattering I'm like maybe we need that maybe we need some time where we're walking around with a donkey with pots clanging on the sides. You think that would just bring us back to. Which frankly is pretty supernatural. Everything is amazing right now and nobody's happy like in my lifetime the changes in the world have been incredible. When I was a kid we had a rotary phone. We had a phone that you had to stand next to and you have to dial it. Yes. You realize how primitive you're making sparks in a phone and you actually would hate people with zeros in their numbers because it was more like oh this guy's got two zeros. It's true I remember that. And then if they called and you weren't home the phone would just ring lonely by itself. No answering machine. It was open for like three hours. You had to stand in line write yourself a check like an idiot. And then when you ran out of money you just go well I can't do any more things now. Right. I can't do any more things. That's it yeah. That was it and even if you had a credit card the guy would go ugh and he'd bring out this whole shunk shunk and he'd write oh cut you have to call the president to see if you have any money. It's all true. You had to call the president yeah. It was ridiculous. Yes. Do you feel that we now in the 21st century we take technology for granted. Well yeah because now we live in an amazing amazing world and it's wasted on the on the crappiest generation of just spoiled idiots that don't care because this is what people are like now. They got their phone and they're like ugh it won't give it a second. It's going to space. Can you give it a second to get back from space. Is the speed of light too slow for you. Yeah. I was on I was on an airplane and there was internet high speed internet on the airplane. That's the newest thing that I know exists and I'm sitting on the plane and they go open up your laptop you can go on the internet and it's fast and I'm watching YouTube clips. It's a man. I'm in an airplane and then it breaks down and they apologize. The internet's not working. The guy next to me goes this is bull. Like how quickly the world owes him something. Yes. He knew existed only 10 seconds ago. Right. Right. And on planes. Flying is the worst one because people come back from flights and they tell you their story and it's like a horror story. It's they act like their flight was like a cattle car in the 40s in Germany. That's how bad they make it sound. Right. They're like it was the worst day of my life. First of all we didn't board for 20 minutes and then we get on the plane and they made us sit there on the runway for 40 minutes. We had to sit there. Oh really what happened next? Did you fly through the air incredibly like a bird? Did you partake in the miracle of human flight? You're not contributing zero. You're flying. It's amazing. Everybody on every plane should just constantly be going oh my God. Wow. Yes. You're flying. You're sitting in a chair in the sky. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Well this is anthropology. We're swimming in the supernatural. Everything around us is supernatural. You know if you wanted to go natural you know go to naked and alone and live in some desert somewhere and try and scrape out surviving. We've been doing this for a very long time. Well then you say well why can't we see the supernatural? I think Louis C.K. has a point here. It has a lot to do with our hearts. Well and Louis goes into this in miracles actually the chapter that's coming which I might skip because in the last couple of videos I've hit both ends of it. You know we're seeing through. Louis makes the point that when you look through a window you see through and you know imagine you're at a wonderful hotel outside of the Grand Canyon and you look and it's like ah and someone says yeah isn't it beautiful? Like wow this glass thing. You know you can you it's like a wall but you can see through it and we would look at them and say the Grand Canyon is right in front of you. This is the point we look through things and in fact when we enjoy a book we pay no attention to our eyes or the cognition recognizing this amazing thing we're calling reading. I understand well there's nothing supernatural about this. Is there anything natural about this? Not according to how we use the term nature and so then Louis gets into this. The naturalists have been engaged in thinking about nature. They have not attended to the fact that they've been thinking. The moment one attends to this it's obvious that one's own thinking cannot be merely a natural event and that therefore something other than nature exists. The supernatural is not remote and abstruse. It is a matter of daily and hourly experience as intimate as breathing. Denial of it depends on a certain absent mindedness but this absent mindedness is in no way surprising. You do not need, indeed you do not wish to be always thinking about windows when you're looking at gardens or thinking about eyes when you're reading. In the same way the proper procedure for a limited and particular inquiries is to ignore the fact that the fact of your own thinking and concentrate on the object. It is only when you stand back from particular inquiries and try to form a complete philosophy that you must take you must take it into account and so when Peterson is talking to Delahunty this is what Peterson is trying to do. He's saying you have to look at a bigger picture because you're not even thinking about thinking. You're saying I don't see anything supernatural and you're sitting in a room that is anything but natural by any stretch of the imagination and you say well this was all simply a product of everything and there's no truth in it. Well okay but you don't act that way. For a complete philosophy you must get in all the facts which means you took out the subjective and you're going to have to put that back in there and what are you going to do then? In it you turn away from specialized or truncated thought to total thought and one of the facts total thought must think about is thinking itself. There is thus a tendency in the study of nature to make us forget the most obvious fact of all and since the 16th century when science was born the minds of men have been increasingly turned outward to know nature and to master her. Now if you want to get into what is most supernatural get into the fact that we are longing to master her. Well we see tools. This is what we do. They have been increasingly engaged on those specialized inquiries for which truncated thought is the correct method. In other words as Peterson says many times in his stuff this is a powerful tool but it's a tool. I talked with Carbon Mike last night. Carbon Mike made the same point. It is therefore not in the least astonishing that they should have forgotten the evidence for the supernatural. They've completely forgotten the supernatural even though they're using reason and they're screaming about reason. It's all reason. Oh okay have you thought about what reason is? Have you taken a moment to consider what you're saying and what you're doing when you're reasoning and what the relationship of that is to nature? It is therefore not the least astonishing that we have forgotten the evidence for the supernatural. The deeply ingrained habit of truncated thought that we call the scientific habit of mind was indeed certain to lead to naturalism unless this tendency were continually corrected from other sources. And again if you go back and you read Newton and some of those other 17th century scientists they were embedded in religion. So well then what's the relationship between their religion and their science? Well what happened? But no other sources at hand for during the same period of, during the same period men of science were coming to be metaphysically and theologically uneducated. That brings me to the second consideration. The state of affairs in which ordinary people can discover the supernatural, notice the hyphen, only by abstruse reasoning is recent and by historical standards abnormal. All over the world until quite modern times the direct insight of the mystics and reasonings of the philosophers percolated to the mass of people by authority tradition. They could be received by those who were no great reasoners themselves in the concrete form of myth, ritual and the whole pattern of life. This is the picture that I've made for I don't know how many videos now. The materialists are in the middle, they see objects, they're Newtonian, Peterson comes around and says, y'all aren't seeing all of this. In fact it's so glaringly obvious. Why would Matt Dillahunty bump his skeptic speech to have a talk with Jordan Peterson? Hierarchies, status, you know they both see each other as tools. If I can best him in debate therefore I can move up the hierarchy, I can gain more attention, so on and so forth. We're all playing this hierarchy game. Story governs stuff, we see tools. This is being, this is knowing and as Lewis says, if you're only looking at the middle and you forget the yellow frame here, well you don't know anything. And so what we really I think have with people like Dillahunty is we have a theist in revolt that he wants to make the laws of physics but he doesn't and he embeds and endows those laws of physics with everything God like except a will and then he parades that around and uses that as a tool to beat up on other people and say you too should embrace this heartless God who we've taken the will out of him. Well why is it so important to have a heartless God who we've taken the will out of him? Well why is it so important to take the will out of God? Why isn't it so important to get rid of the part of God that has an opinion about our behavior? Well this is my general thought with pantheism which we're going to get into later in C.S. Lewis' book Miracles that what pantheism is in a sense similar to science because once we have a non-personal being at the center of the universe I as a personal being with a will will look for whatever technology I can find to try to employ that impersonal thing and use it. So when I pick up this micro USB cable well this is a tool and now I can do a bunch of things I could tie my shoes with it I suppose but what it really works best is hooking up an older type smartphone to a computer. I see tools and well now I've got my USB-C cable and well you know now I use this for my newer phones and so on and so forth and so what these what most of these people arguing are they're just they've still got God they've just taped his mouth shut and but we still want you to enforce for us the laws of physics and as Lewis says well you're making stones into men even citizens. Now beginning of chapter 5 Lewis says now we're going to have to talk about morality because if you think doing long division is hard think about answering the questions of should you sleep with someone else beside your spouse. Now adultery is a wonderful example because unlike many of the other formerly prohibited aspects of traditional sexuality even sexual libertines will look down on adulterers and they might be they might be polys and they might say well you can sleep with anyone but first check with your partner because that would be betrayal. Well now we've got some law of reciprocity going and you know if I betray someone yeah that's kind of bad but we sure don't want it done to me. So further difficulty with naturalism even as rigorous a determinist as Karl Marx who at times described the social behavior of the bourgeoisie in terms which suggested a problem in social physics pay attention to the language could subject at other times a withering scorn which only the presupposition of moral responsibility could justify and this is the heart of the complaint that you can't have it both ways. You want to scorn someone for what is natural well here's where these arguments get interesting because we want to say well you know we really shouldn't condemn people for things that they're not responsible for. If you're a materialist you're not responsible for anything. There's no you to be responsible for yet no materialists seem to live this way because if they well I should correct myself there might be materialists that really live this way we just never hear from them. The reason we never hear from them is that they are so thorough going and so disciplined in the practice of their non-faith that they don't bother to try and correct anyone who's living any other way and that would actually be consistent for that philosophy every time you see a materialist take the stage and want to argue for his point he is betraying his point and this is exactly why Lewis starts right at rationality. Peterson starts with phenomenology and starts to bracket the whole thing and say hey you can't see that. It doesn't get very far with Dillahunty. They spend most of the time talking past each other. Well this is why Lewis begins with reason. Some people regard logical thinking as the deadest and driest of our activities and may therefore be repelled by the privileged position I gave it in the last chapter. Now what's interesting is Lewis is dead on right because if I would show most of my friends a video from rationality rules or Matt Dillahunty they're just not going to have any patience for it and so then they're going to say reason, logical thinking, you know that's all. I'd rather be intuitive. Well there's good reason people would rather be intuitive because intuition is often smarter and it's a whole lot easier than rational thinking but it's the rationalists that fly this flag and so they first get tagged on being boring and heartless and all you rational people. That's no fun at all and Lewis says in the last chapter probably a lot of you said that. But logical thinking, reasoning, capital R, had to be the pivot for the argument because of all the claims which the human mind puts forward. The claim of reasoning to be valid is the one which the naturalist cannot deny without philosophically speaking cutting his own throat and this is exactly right. You want to privilege reason? Please tell me why. Well because it gets answers because it yields results because it yields predictability and I think before I do my next video I'm going to look for this Scott Adams quote where Scott Adams basically lays this out. Well we know reason works because of this. Okay well how far will that reason get you? It isn't very popular. The numbers of people who really do this are quite small and that's probably because of nature. Probably a tiny, maybe 10% of the population is capable and desirous of doing this kind of rational thinking. You're not going to take over the world. Why? Because of nature. It's not going to happen and people are like no we're on the winning side of history. Really? You've been playing this song for over a hundred years and the first big success was killed in the mud of Belgium and France in the first world war. You cannot as we saw prove that there are no proofs but you can if you wish regard all human ideas as illusions and all human loves as biological byproducts which is exactly what Dilla-Hunty does. That is you can do so without running into flat self-contradiction and nonsense. Whether you can do so without extreme implausibility, without accepting a picture of things which no one really believes is another matter. And this then leads to the deep irony that the rationality flag that the rationalists are flying is in fact the most supernatural, one of the most supernatural things we experience every day. It is the supernatural basis for bread, for air travel, for cell phones, for science, for argument itself. And the rationality people keep saying I don't think, I don't see anything supernatural. You're doing something supernatural. Why don't you just stop and say wow I'm the stuff of earth and the breath of God and every time I pull a loaf of bread off a shelf and toast it and take a bite. What is it about eating bread? Anyway, there's another little segment on miracles.