https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lnzbkWXE-Fw

 What would I do without her? What would you do without her? All this state of the art, fly to the moon stuff. That's right. Well, how have you been, Ron? Oh, fine. Good. Don't show that to the viewers. Already did. I really had chicken down under. Real self chicken. Well, how have you been, Ron? We haven't spoken for a while. Oh, fine. In the busy, really, the throws of mid-semester. So the horse is at a bit of a gallop, and I'm holding the reins with feet in the stirrups. What classes are you teaching this semester? So this semester, I'm doing an upper level human rights, theory and practice. The second level intellectual, western intellectual tradition from Erasmus to Frederick Nietzsche. An ideology and politics course. And then running sort of a bit of a covert seminary at the public university. So I'm doing a bunch of students, one to do Augustan City of God. Oh, wonderful. Yeah, so we've been working through two books a week. We just had books 11 and 12 of the City of God. And so they're quite loving it, grounding them in, well, obviously, a great thinker, and then reflecting on what has he contributed of good, and then critical reflections on Augustan as a thinker, and his impact on Luther and Calvin, and where they perhaps have misread him, and where perhaps Augustan's misread Paul and Romans and Galatians. And so it's sort of a nice approach to a great thinker. Yeah, yeah. The City of God, what an important work for our history. Absolutely. Just last week, I had a conversation with Brett Sockold, who published, I think we've got the book right here, really a terrific book. He's a diocese theologian for the Roman Catholics in Regina, Saskatchewan, just wrote this book, Transubstantiation. Really a fine book, basically treating Luther's misunderstanding of Aquinas, dealing with real presence. We had a terrific conversation, and it's really a good book. So much. I'll have to take a read of it then. Good advice then. Yeah, take a look at it. I found it terrifically helpful. Someone in fact in my church saw the conversation, and was all excited about healing the wounds of the Protestant Reformation, and then he went to solo scriptura. I thought, well, we make progress in one front, and then the other side falls apart. So a lot of reasons for division. Yes. Our topic today is this, how much time do you have by the way? Well, whatever works with you. I just got in from the City of God group. We have our dinner at the parish, but that's not until 530. So four or five hours will be fine if that works for you. We won't go full Joe Rogan. We'll cap it off at two hours probably, because I've got to pick up a car and then have another conversation. Yeah, whatever works for you. Okay, Ron. Well, you emailed me about this. Now we're getting a couple years after the Jordan Peterson wave, now we're getting a whole bunch of books, including one that you've edited. Yes. So we'll talk about some of those. Have you read many of the other books? Yes, I've read most of them. Some were published late 217. A whack of them came out 218. Then one has just been published. I did an endorsement for one. It's a much more philosophical, thoughtful read of Peterson, and it just came out a week or two ago. Then our book will be coming out, and it's already almost off the press. It'll be out in about a week. Okay. Well, what was that one that you were just mentioning before, the thoughtful, philosophical one? I didn't seem to find that one. Yeah, so it's by Mark Champagne. He teaches philosophy up here in the Fraser Valley at Kwantlen. It's called Myth, Meaning, and Anti-Fragile Individualism on the Ideas of Jordan Peterson. So I wrote an endorsement for it, but what it does, it tries to look at some of the ideas that Peterson is grappling with, the legitimacy of those concerns, how he's often misunderstood. So the first part of the book is really trying to honestly understand what Peterson is trying to do at a deeper philosophical level, and then this latter part of the book evaluates both the contributions that Peterson makes, but perhaps the Achilles' heels, the blind spot. So it's probably of all the books, from a more secular philosophical perspective, I think one of the best books out thus far, reflecting on the fact that Peterson is trying to do reflecting on the contrary, not reacting, in terms of sort of the loaded cannon of progressivism that just turns on him and fires, or sort of the naive hagiography of the right, that just thinks he can, you know, whatever he says is a sine eye oracle or something. So the book by Mark from Lower Mainland, I know Mark fairly well, and he's attended some of the lectures I've done at UBC on Peterson. So he asked if I would first read it as it was in process, and then if they, it's being published in England by a societies, it's called. But I think it's the best book out so far, just broadly speaking, from a thoughtful philosophical tradition, saying what's the good he's addressing in our post-Christendom, post-scientific world, not reacting one way or another, but judiciously reflecting on his ideas, and then saying, well, you know, there's some good critical questions to be asked philosophically, not in an antagonistic or demeaning way, but just saying these are things, if we're going to move the discussion forward at a substantive level, these are questions we have to ask. And so it's a nice book, as I said, just came out a couple of weeks ago, and it's certainly a book worth having from a perspective that's non-religious, just approaching it philosophically. Right. It's a great contribution. It's a nice contribution. I remember when Peterson was, again, I sort of mark the chapter of the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. We'll see if there's a second chapter or not, but it was sort of C-16 to about June 2019, when his wife's, some of the drama around his wife's illness was sort of wrapping up. But that's, of course, when he attempted to withdraw from this medication, and all of that happened, and that sort of book ended the wave that we saw. Okay, so I just found it on Amazon. I'm sure to put a link to that in the notes, too. I hadn't heard about that one yet. Well, that sounds very good and promising. A lot of the early books, I mean, Vox Day's book, that was just, I mean, a lot of the early books seemed either just quick money grabs, you know, quick write something on a hot topic and get it out there so you can sell some books. The biography that had, you know, Dennis Prager did the intro. So, I mean, if Dennis Prager's, I'm not saying, I'm not trying to, because I've got a lot of, I've got a variety of political people who watch the show. I'm not making a comment about Dennis Prager, but Dennis Prager's introduction, you know, introduction basically locates the biography in a certain way. Okay, I'll say it that way, because I haven't read the book. Reviews on the book were fairly, did you read that book, Savage Messiah? Yeah, yeah, it's of that right wing persuasion, both the, as you say, the Dennis Prager introduction and then the book by Proser. I think it distorts, I mean, the subtitle itself is, you know, Saving Western Civilization, which is a bit inflated and pretentious in that sense. I hardly think Peterson's going to stay Western Civilization, but the book slips into that hagiographical. Peterson's, you know, the man for the moment. He's the sergalahad on the horse. And Proser tends to, I think, distort Peterson to serve right-wing interests, which then feeds into a narrative of the progressive left. That's really what Peterson is. He's an apologist for the right, but doing it in a sophisticated, not a crude way. So I think the Proser book does Peterson a terrible disservice in that sense. Whereas the Mark Champagne book is much more nuanced and subtle and reflective. In a way, the Proser book is not. And so our books tried to avoid that sort of reducing Peterson to a right-wing agenda by selectively cherry-picking from his writings, his ideas, and avoiding also the progressive left, the cannon turning on him and firing without both sides misunderstanding and misreading him. The nice thing about Champagne's book, and I think our book, which we've tried to also find a via media or a middle way, unlike Champagne's book, we've really tried to get into the implicit, if not the explicit Christian thinking of Peterson and reflect on what that could mean through a series of, I think our book's also one of the first to collect the essays as well, not single authors. So it's coming at Peterson from a variety of spokes on the wheel that get to the core of his implicit Christianity, which is obviously explicit in some ways also, for example, when he does various mythical reads of Genesis or Exodus, which finds a middle way in terms of approaching the Bible between a secularism, which just ignores it, and a literalism which distorts you exegete the text. And so we have a series of essays, some of my former students and others, so probably half the book, the former students and others are from a broader swath who are interested in Peterson and want to contribute to a more in-depth understanding without either trashing him on the one hand or genuflecting them to the other. Well, and I'll just mention that a couple of the essays in your book are from a couple of essays from a couple of people that have been on my channel. Esther O'Reilly has been on my channel a number of times and she's been pretty active in the Discord server in some of the community conversations I've had about Peterson, Alistair Roberts as well. Both of them have really fine essays in the book. It's maybe it's appropriate when we're, so I was reading through the Goodreads reviews of Savage Messiah and looking at the, you know, reading a variety of reviews. Peterson's relationship with the political, let's say the political aspect of the culture war is obviously part of his meteoric rise. I mean, most of the things that he had been talking about, he had been talking about for years, and you can go back on YouTube and find, you know, early editions of Maps of Meaning at Harvard and a number of years, and he had been on Ontario Public Television quite regularly talking about a variety of issues. And so then to sort of cast him in primarily in a political frame, now he certainly, you know, had comments to make about Canadian and American politics, at least in terms of most of the people that I've been engaging, our interest hadn't been primarily his political focus, but more the personal impact, sometimes religious, sometimes pragmatic that he was happening on a whole variety of individuals. You know, it strikes me in thinking about the times and the politics, you know, there isn't a, I don't think it isn't a coincidence that we saw Peterson and his moment arise at the same time as we saw Trump arise in the United States, Brexit, a number of these populist movements, and of course, as someone who I grew up in the New York metropolitan area, and so Donald Trump was not a name that I was unfamiliar with in terms of a whole variety of things that he had been involved with. But what it seems to me that perhaps Trump and Peterson had in common was the negative, was interest because of their negative impact that they had on one's political adversaries. You know, for example, from the Christian Reformed Church in North America, probably 70, 75% Republican voting as a denomination, not quite like the Bible Belt, I mean, more diverse than that, but, and of course, Trump's sexual ethic and habit with his tongue doesn't really rise to the standard of the book of James, let's say. Yeah, a lot of people love him because he, you know, he whips their enemies. And I think, you know, thinking about Peterson on the political stage, there's a fair amount of that too, because someone who perhaps in Canadian politics would have sort of a centrist, you know, Canadian political posture, now suddenly to become the darling of a lot of folks on the political right seems like a strange transformation. But in that way, perhaps there's some similarity to the dynamics around Trump. I don't know, do you have any thoughts on that? Well, I think, first of all, one thing, Peterson is reacting to a lack of center in liberalism, culturally. And liberalism is fragmented in two directions, which I think Peterson is reacting to. We've discussed this before. One direction that all is perspective, and there is no right or wrong. There's just the hermeneutic of suspicion. And so there's just, we're all socialized beings and nothing is neither right nor wrong. There's just seeing things that we think are relevant and someone else is going to see it differently. So there's no foundation anymore. Or as Yates say, the center cannot hold mere energy. The flip side of that, of course, has been the politically correct social justice warriors that these are the boxes you check off if you're going to be a part of the tribe. And those particular interpretations tend to distort a more complex reality. But they give certainty. So the one leads to uncertainty, relativism, perspectives. The other gives a false certainty, similar to fundamentalism. I mean, it's just the social justice warriors are just the secular version of Puritanism or fundamentalism in that sense. And so he's, in that sense, Peterson's trying to find a middle way, in one sense, to recovering a more classic liberalism. It's saying be wary, a little more intellectual humility is in order on the politically correct stuff. But be wary of just sheer ambiguity, uncertainty, relativism. And this is where the myths come in, because in a post-structuralist approach, there is no structure. There is no order. We just sort of make reality. And so myth basically, in terms of that classical sense, says no, there in fact is a structure, whether it's classical civilizational myths or whether it's Hans Christian Andersen or Grimm's fairy tales or Walt Disney reworked myths in that sense, is that there is an order. And if we violate that order in our souls, in our psyches, in our lives, there are consequences to face. And I think a lot of people who are wary of those two wings of liberalism, the perspective post-structuralist and then the ideological politically correct recognize that he is saying something to them in which they're longing for meaning, longing for purpose. But it's been denied. All the landmarks have been obliterated. That's what my article in the book is on, Memoricide, Myth and Memoricide and the lack of memory. And so where Peterson would share an affinity with elements of the right, although he would differ with certainly Trump, is that both have appealed to a sense there's certain standards I stand by and liberalism has thinned out everything. Now the content of that, I think Peterson would part paths with elements of the right and say, listen, the myths that I'm trying to articulate give you a perspective that don't fit into right or left. And that sense, he transcends the tribalism of right and left. But usually those who take a position, either the social justice warriors or the conservative or both their positions that want to avoid perspectivalism or post-structuralism, they differ on the content of that. But the mindset is I'm right, you're wrong. The right and left, both elements of that have that mindset, a Manichaean mindset. They are at odds with the content of that. So I think Peterson, to see where he plays on the stage of these issues, he does fit into that position of saying there is order, there is structure. But I can't be equated with the politically correct social justice warriors and their notion of order, but I'm not exactly going to salute at the political right Trump stuff either. So people who don't understand the ambiguities of the culture wars say, well, if he's not on the social justice stuff, which he raised questions about, then he must be on the Trumpian side and the alt-right. And he's not that either. He's willing to critique both sides, but he's often seen on the right in a way that perhaps he would be, well, I know he would be suspicious of also. Does that sort of make sense? Well, it makes perfect sense. It makes perfect sense. I mean, I've been what's what's fast fascinated me most about Peterson, of course, has been the the response he elicited from not just and not just young men. I mean, most of most of those who I've found in my experience to have been deeply impacted by him tended to be men between the ages of 25 and 45. So not not, you know, college is just a little bit on the young side. Obviously, that's a generalization and their their their wings to that bell curve. But how do you think, you know, in many ways, Peterson, in some ways, like like others before him, you know, reinvigorated myth in to a community that was starving for it. Why why did myth, you know, why did let's say it this way, let's say applied myth, because obviously through what we've been seeing, Harry Potter, Star Wars, there's been a fair amount of of myth making in the movies. But Peterson, in a sense, invited people to apply myth more to their lives. I mean, why? Where was was there a was there a lack of has there been a lack of this in church institutional religion or other places that people have been looking for it, do you think, which then elicited this response that there was to him? Well, I mean, obviously, a good question. We do have these big myths at one level in our culture, like the Harry Potter like the Lord of the Rings, like the Star Wars, the various Walt Disney movies that come and go that, you know, redo variations of classical myths, either classical civilization, or as I mentioned earlier, the Grimm's fairy tales of the hands Christian Anderson and So I think, but what he has done, which I think you're you're right in saying, he's basically saying, okay, these are great myths in a post structural age, the transcend the tribalism is a bright enough, but how do they apply to each person specifically and so 12 rules for life or his work, obviously, as a psychologist and maps of meaning. He's very interested in not just a theoretical understanding. Interesting enough, I often find that, you know, someone who was very trendy on the liberal left a few decades ago and did the rounds with Miss Joseph Campbell, or the men's movement, you know, and for Robert Bly with his key mythic work, who's often seen on much more that popular cultural liberal left. Peterson is doing exactly the same thing with myth that he's seen as being on the right. And I think it has a lot to do with how he's applied his cultural analysis of myth and the contemporary relevance of it to a critique of the left. In the way, perhaps, Campbell was not quite so explicit in doing and Robert Bly obvious has not done in that way. So the question is like even the question, how do you interpret the Bible? Well, whose interpretation of myth or which myth and why I deal with this in my chapter myth and memoricide. Okay, we're getting a renaissance we have been over the last 200 years in some ways, even the interest in First Nations spirituality is a critique of scientism and rationalism and getting back to the myths, the stories of the ancients, the elders. And of course, the romantic tradition in the West has very much been about myths and story and what they say about the soul and the quest for meaning and the human journey. So the whole turn to myth and the application of myth is not new. And certainly the last 30, 40 years and Joseph Campbell, I remember in the 60s, 70s, he was like a guru, did the tour of the universities and his multiple books. Even Alan Watts and his some of his works on myth and then Robert Bly, of course, in the men's movement in the 90s, his work on myth, his poetry on myth. But I think as you mentioned is Peterson has gone as a psychologist. His concern is practical as well as cultural. And he wants to say, so what's this mean at a sort of a personal devotional level for your own transformation given the fact that people are stuck in terms of identity issues and they often feel paralyzed and they're not able to do anything about it. And he wants to say, so what's this mean at a sort of a personal devotional level for your own transformation given the fact that people are stuck in terms of identity issues and they often feel paralyzed and impotent given a certain cultural ethos that tends to see the male as the problem or the aggressive male or the uber male. And his argument is, there's something here, there's a mother load that can be applied personally, not just metanarrative, even though that's there. So he's really trying, but I think what hooks him into the right is some of the issues he's confronted on the left. So people miss his myth because of his politics in terms of the critiquing, what he sees as neo-Marxism or postmodernism or excessive feminism, ideological feminism. Obviously he's not against the important role of women in leadership. It's what he sees as ideological feminism or ideological Marxism or power imbalances and how that played itself into certain politically correct things as well. So he's an ambiguous figure because he doesn't fit into the right, left. And what he's doing with myth is very interesting in terms of application. And he comes at it from a psychologist. Joseph Campbell didn't come from that. Robert Bly doesn't come from that. So he has a certain understanding of the human heart, human identity, human choices or lack of the consequences. I don't know, does that sort of... Yeah. Well, I think also, you're highlighting his coming at it as a psychologist. One of the things that was quite evident in, let's say, the question and answer sessions that he would do on YouTube, many of the questions he would receive were questions that you would expect the psychologist to get. And again, this is something that Joseph Campbell or someone else likely wouldn't feel. They're looking for practical advice. And that 12 Rules for Life is in some ways a very practical book. These rules are...he's telling you this is what you should do and this will make your life better. And it is very interesting, though. I wonder what it says about the times or do you have any thoughts of what it says about the times in terms of the different reactions, let's say, to Joseph Campbell and to Jordan Peterson? Because many people have looked at these two, both of them, a fair amount of Jungian ideas behind them, mythology. What do you think it says about the times in terms of the different responses to these two individuals? Well, I think both Campbell and Bly and Peterson are responding to, on the one hand, a culture that's gone too far down the rationalist, technological, scientific direction. And they both hold up myth, not as the antidote, but as trying to balance off the limitations of reason and science as a means of answering the big human questions and the all too human journey in that sense. So in that sense, they share a certain affinity with myth as a means of addressing the human condition and its quest for meaning in that sense. Now, I think what you're saying is right is that Peterson tends to be more prescriptive in a way that Campbell and Bly were not quite so obviously prescriptive. They would allow you to interpret it for yourself. They also were never as overtly political as Campbell and Bly, or if they were, they would be seen on the left in that sense. So the question is whose version, which myth and whose version. So with Peterson, you've got a fairly complex human being in that you can come in through the door of psychology and what that means. You can come in in his work of trying to balance science and myth. You can come in through the bigger cultural critique he's engaged in. You can come in through the political portal to get into sort of the cathedral of his thought. So depending what aspect of Peterson people are reacting to or responding to, they're going to spin off in one or another direction. The book that Mark and I have tried to do, Mark as an individual author of mine, we're trying to get beyond just the surface political stuff and say there's a deeper structure, either within Christian myth or world myth or modern myth that underlay what he is doing and there's reasons for it. The actual epiphenomena of that in the conflict of the culture wars, there's the deeper reason for it. So try and understand the roots, the foundation of which he's coming for. Even if you have problems with some of the political way or sometimes how you can come across and sometimes can conflict you with, you know, rams and rutting season. At times anyone would get tired of constantly being attacked. I think, you know, anytime you're anyone's perpetually cornered, you either do the fight or flight sort of thing. And then, of course, just his own issues as a person, the family struggles, you know, wife, his daughter, Michaela. I mean, they've had difficult family life. You wouldn't wish that on any. And some of the terrible things, I think it's appalling that, you know, whether you agree with Peterson or not at various levels, the trip to Russia, you know, the psychological difficulties, the addictions, some of the appalling things that are just trashing him in his moment of suffering when a person is down. That sort of cancel culture that, OK, you deserve what you're getting and your family deserves. It shows a boorishness in elements of the culture that if you don't like someone, just firehose them rhetorically and demean them as a human being rather than being civil and respectful to them. So some of these responses to what the family is living through, I say it says a lot about a certain temperament that will have, you know, that does not deeply understand a human in their suffering and their painful, dark nights of soul. And whether any of us agree or disagree with someone, someone down in Shakespeare would say the milk of human kindness should be exercised. And that's a much wiser way forward, human kindness and graciousness in the future. But again, it reflects elements of our broader culture, which are somewhat barbaric in terms of how we deal with difference. Yeah, yeah. No, that was quite dramatic when Michaela's most recent video report on his situation came out. The response to that was just horrendous. I mean, I'm not going to do this, you know, I, you know, even if, you know, do it do on the other side, you know, you had, you know, you had Rush Limbaugh, I've never listened to a single episode of his radio on my life, but it comes out that he has cancer and people want to pile on. And I'm not going to do this, I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I'm not going to do this. I have people who would say do things. I was also mentioning another book. I don't know if you've seen it. It's another fellow from Toronto. It's called, Understanding Jordan Peterson, a Roadmap to the World's Most Controversial Academic by James Beverly. It's gone into a second edition. Yeah, I've got that one as a really handy reference on him. There's just a lot I mean at which, which when I was you know, whenever I have to do to do a more formal presentation on Peterson, I pull that out and because it nicely tracks, it has the dates, has links, has all of those things. It's a very, very helpful guide to really that period of time that things happened very quickly. I mean, it is one of the, I really enjoyed one of the chapters in your book that really struck me was the comparison with Kierkegaard. Yes, yes. That was, I found that chapter fascinating. And whereas, as you and I spoke before, we spoke about Erasmus, we spoke about Luther. Kierkegaard has been an individual that has come up, the work of Kierkegaard has come up regularly in my sort of corner of the Jordan Peterson discussion. Many people have, Peterson sort of triggered some of these associations with Kierkegaard. And I didn't see it as clearly as when I read that chapter and I thought, oh, that's another fascinating take on Peterson and this moment. Yes, well, Stephen Dunning who did that, he's a very dear friend of mine. He did his PhD on Charles Williams in Kierkegaard. Oh. Stephen, he lived in Abbotsford, taught at Trinity Western for many years. And so his PhD on, because Williams was a key figure in bringing Kierkegaard to England as a member of Oxford University Press. And it was actually Williams who, 1945, because for many years, CS Eliot and TS Eliot were at loggerheads. Caricatured one another, Eliot would not publish Lewis's stuff. The Inklings caricatured Eliot. And Williams thought this was like two silly little boys, scrapping, they were on the same agenda, the same mountain interested them. They were approaching it from different ways. And so 1945, because Oxford University Press had moved to Oxford at the time, Williams said to Lewis and Eliot, come on, let's have a dinner together. Let's end this silly dust-up. You're on the same page. So he brought them together for a dinner. And as a result of that, they became the dearest of friends, TS Eliot and TS Lewis. They worked together with the new prayer book for the Church of England, the Coverdale edition in updating the Psalter. And for the rest of their lives, they considered, until they both died in the 60s, the dearest of friends. But Charles Williams, so Stephen did his PhD on Williams and Kierkegaard. And I think where Peterson has affinity with Kierkegaard is Kierkegaard deeply internal, his agonized journey to have integrity, to have authenticity in the midst of a shallow Christianity, a culturally compromised Christianity. Obviously a brilliant thinker, an honest person grappling, the same with Peterson. And you can see it's understandable why the Kierkegaard-Peterson connection can be made. They both see themselves in the midst of a highly compromised culture that distorts integrity on the inner life, a deep internal struggle for integrity at a psychological spiritual level. And so the affinities between Kierkegaard and Peterson are, so obviously there, and Stephen has done a superb job, an A++ article in looking at why Kierkegaard and Peterson are almost brothers on the path, one a little later. Obviously Kierkegaard's at a different period of time in which Christianity is a little more dominant religion. So his struggles in that sense are within a compromised Lutheranism, whereas Peterson's are much more in a secular age, but they're still grappling with that internal longing for integrity and identity in how you live your life in a meaningful level that is meant to work itself out practically in time. But yes, definitely there's just huge affinities. I found that to be a, I found that, I mean, I enjoyed many of the chapters, but I found that connection to be of particular interest, especially how Peterson kicked up all kinds of conversations about Kierkegaard, but nobody I ever saw really make the connection between them like this chapter did. So I know some people who watch this will probably buy the book just for that chapter alone. Yeah, so yeah, and Stephen just knows who did the chapter. He both appreciates Jordan Peterson, but he also knows Kierkegaard inside out, having done his PhD on Kierkegaard and Charles Williams. And so very few people are experts in both Kierkegaard and Peterson. Yeah, and so Stephen has an expertise in both. And so his chapter reflects that obviously life journey with Kierkegaard and Williams and now Kierkegaard and Jordan Peterson. It's been, I mean, you, even before you and I spoke, you had done some video commentary on Peterson and that's where I became aware of you. So that's been, I mean, Peterson has been on the public radar screen for three and a half years or so, at least in a fairly, in a much larger way, obviously had been in a smaller way within Canada. What has, has anything changed in your mind about him or has, I mean, what has, because over time, you know, we think we do a lot of our best thinking slowly. What, how has that, how has time impacted your thoughts on Peterson, his importance or the times that really brought him to prominence? Well, I think there's probably three phases of Peterson's life and writings that probably have to be reflected. One is the pre-216 where he, most people are unaware of that history and at least to the, you know, the book by, the one on Savage Messiah by Jim Prosser, he gives you a little bit of that history for those who would have lived in Toronto at the time and some of the TV programs, some of the taping and which more or less, Peterson was not known that well but he was increasing and expanding in his influence and some of the issues he was confronting at U of T and then his time in the States as well. These were the years when his thinking was emerging and slowly maturing. Most people will start with Peterson in 216 and this is when he, you know, he takes front stage in a much more prominent way rather than a secondary or tertiary actor in the stage of culture. So that would be the first stage when, just trying to get it, you know, maps of meaning had come out in the 90s. He was brought out here in the late 90s. He gave a lecture at Trinity Western and he was still mostly known either in an academic context in which he was grappling with myths and psychology and counseling and raising questions about the limitations of liberal, a certain type of liberalism, shall I put it that way. And then the highly, the second phase would be the much more explicit, highly politicized Peterson from 216 in which he's been reviled or, you know, supported in a much more intense, highly charged political environment in which in some ways I don't think the best of Peterson has been able or he's been able to be criticized a little more because sometimes it was public performances, you know, going after people. And so the other side has come out of it in which he's also been probably more prolific in the last few years through his publications, through his video appearances, through his public dialogues as well. Say in Canada, the two major issues would have been on the one hand, the appreciative. I don't know if you saw the interview with Rex Murphy on Jordan Peterson. I didn't watch it. Yeah, you get a very vulnerable Peterson with someone who is one of our sort of leading more conservative CBC commentators versus the other one with Wendy Messley, which is a little more from the left and the right. So I would say the second phase is this last two or three years where you get him much more fighting for his life publicly in a much more larger forum in that sense. The third phase we're entering into now is on the one hand a spate of commentaries coming out on him, which my book would be one, and Mark's and, you know, the Prosner, the Beverly. There's a whole range of other books. So we're hitting a phase of sort of commentary on him that the question is whose version of Peterson, you know, what sort of the birds of appetite, you know, circling him. I think much hinges now in this next phase of his own life is how well can he slow down enough because this 216 forum, it's almost like he was on an accelerated public treadmill in which inevitably you lose your way in that. It becomes a drug, an addiction, and you can only keep up that pace for so long. So it will be interesting in this next phase, can he slow down enough to go deeper, not to become reactive, and to, in that sense, articulate a more thoughtful, less reactive perspective, which perhaps will give him greater longevity as an important cultural commentator. And much hinges on, you know, how he makes sense of the next couple of years, whether he'll just fade away as an epiphenomena, whose day in the sun has come in. He says that we're spoken to speech on the stage of life, and that's as far as he can go. Because there's no need to give personhood. Or he will mature to a new level in which his philosophical, cultural, economic, religious, political thinking will take the next step. And I think much will hinge on the friendships around him, the people who can be with him, who can give him a sense of, okay, be wary of this trail, say no to this invitation. It's sort of pointless. It's a bit of a dead end. And so I think this next few years will determine whether he ups the ante to a new level, or whether he just gets caught on a, he becomes the victim of his own popularity, and gets hooked into that. In a net sense, he'll lose his, a depth of soul that could emerge. And I think he has good people around him. I think a new, because he has the resources to go deep. And I think that's part of Peterson that a lot miss. And I think then he's managed to, perhaps too quickly surf a way, a cultural wave, which he's able to, at times been able to surf well, at other times he's been caught in the undertow of it. And I think anybody who unexpectedly becomes a preeminent cultural actor, if they're not careful, they become the victim of their own success. And then you get burnout, then you get reacting out of weariness, then un dealt with inner psychological things begin to surface. And so I think the next phase will really hinder, will really hinge on, if he can go to the places which he knows, but whether he can internalize and then live forth. And that will determine whether he stays on the stage or whether increasingly becomes marginalized. And some new actor, actress will come on the stage and take the cultural limelight in that sense. I hope for him and for others that in fact there is, and I think it's within him to do that, but it involves a sort of little inward searching in that sense and going to places which he knows are there. It's just the going to them and staying and being still and listening and then knowing where to say yes and no to invitations. Because when you're popular, everyone wants a piece of you. And at a certain point you have to be careful to say, no, I'm not going down that path, not there. I'll take me one invitation a month. I need my stillness and silence so I can go deep and then respond meaningfully to the big questions of our time. What do you think about that? I don't know what your thoughts would be. I very much agree with you in terms of what I'd really like to see him do. I'd like to see him say no to more things. I'd like to see him pace. I thought the, what was called a book tour that he did of a hundred and some odd cities and not too many more days. I thought, part of me, I think there were, I suspect there were two factors. One of them was he, it seems to me, has, and there've been many times that he has spoken of himself in terms of, he is a prophet who has a calling from God to save Western civilization. And so in that sense, the subtitle of the book, whether or not the author meant it as such, I sometimes would get the sense from Jordan that there's, you know, his calling is nothing short of that. And as a pastor, you know, there's something that we talk about in the clergy business, which is a Messiah complex. And it is not a good thing because as a Christian, we have one Messiah and I'm not him. And so I think part of what drove, I suspect drove Jordan was this, this a genuine desire to help individuals. And on that wave, I, you know, again, from what I had seen, it was a truly incredible and phenomenal moment where many, many, many people were helped at a very practical level. He helped make their lives better. And in our current context, hearing that from individuals is so powerful. You get the sense that if I stop, you know, it's almost, you know, at the end of the movie Schindler's List, he's going through, I could have saved one more, I could have saved one more. So you've got that driving him. The other thing that I feared was now suddenly he's in the, he's in the grips of the, what shall we call it? Of the media industrial complex that Jordan Peterson is a money machine. And every time he steps on stage, Jordan's making money, but his handlers are making money. The publishers are making money. You know, television would love to get him on television on and on and on and on. And those people are going to keep throwing opportunities at you. And it's one thing to say no as an academic, who's, you know, you're living the middle-class wage and maybe you got a little extra money coming from books. And, but now serious money is coming after you. And so you've got these two engines. One is thousands and thousands of people, you're hearing from these people one way or another that you are saving their life and you have made dramatic change in their life. And, you know, very quickly within the span of a couple of years, you're a multimillionaire. You have a best-selling book. And every time, you know, it's not only the book sales, it's the stage appearances, it's the after stage VIP picture, all of that, that is powerful, powerful stuff. And it not only, and just speaking as a pastor, I frankly wouldn't want anyone under my care to face such temptation. Yeah, it's a heady brew, both the messianic dilemma, and particularly when you think what you're doing legitimately or illegitimately so is assisting people at very fragmented and difficult places at your life, there's conscience kicks in and says, well, you know, this is, I'm grateful I can do this if it's helping these people. The dilemma always is often our motives are mixed between good and then, oh, I'm helping them, but they're really bloating me. So it becomes a tricky game. And people like Carl, I mean, Peterson would know all this is someone who knows Carl Jung, knows myths, knows that the good can often be distorted to serve the questionable, the worst case vice in destruction. And often the sense, often certain people, legitimately are motivated to do the good, but then the motives that creep in are more about them and they're using other people to serve their other ends. And anyone who's at that level has to always be checking their motives at the door, which isn't easy. That's why you need good friends. Then you say there's the allure of money is always one. And so, yeah, and this is why myth is so important, I think, is because all the great myths say we're complex beings and there's the shadow, there is the darker in Christian terms, there is the sinful side, there is the old Adam, there is the old Eve. That's not gonna go away magically or snake oil or silver bullet, not gonna take it away. And so one always has to be very careful that, I mean, Satan comes as an angel of light. It's easy to pick up darkness if it's horns and tails and fascism and Nazism, but when it comes clothed in light and service, that's when it becomes very deceptive. And you need the wisdom of a Solomon to say, I better be careful here. And popularity, of course, is quite a drug that can be quite heady and addictive. And so this is why I think the next phase of his life has to be one of perhaps recognizing the shadow at a more internalized level, knowing where to say no. We're doing the city of God, as I mentioned earlier, and Augustine makes it clear there are these two tendencies within all of us, cupidatos and paratos. And in that sense, he anticipates any great myth and is a part of a great mythic classical way. And so that level of flattering ourselves and being the Messiah or solving the problems, that's a very dangerous path to take. And I think if he had good pastoral friends, they would say, let's get off this treadmill. Let's slow down. Let's say no. People are just gonna burn you out and then they'll bring some new figure on the stage. Everyone in that sense dispensable to the media or to the money moguls in that sense. They use you, abuse you, then you're gone. We bring in someone else to obstruct their role on the stage and then we burn them out and we pay them well and then we bring on someone else. And so this disposable nature of anyone who we greet on the stage. And so this is why I think the next phase of his life is can he read the broader invitations in his own heart on the deeper way and respond from a more centered, what T.S. Eliot talks about, the still place in the moving world in the four quartets. So I think you're right. Those two temptations, I mean, Jesus faced them in the desert too, as we enter Lenten season. This is Sunday's text. I've always got Sunday's text rolling around in my head. Yeah, well, this is Shrove Tuesday. So we indulged yourself with pancakes tonight and then we start Lent tomorrow. So that's Wednesday. So Lent is a good time to reflect on the inner motivations, the complex ones and then how they work themselves out practically in the material, ecclesial, public, intellectual, cultural, political world. So I think, as I said, I think the next act in the play of his life will hinge on what he does with the last intense three years that he's lived through. I know our book has just tried to get into those deeper parts of Peterson that if he internalizes what he knows, which is always, it's one thing to cognitively know thing. It's another thing to have thoroughly internalized through soul and heart in the midst of the culture clashes what we intuitively and mythically know. And I think that will be his challenge, which we'll then determine. And then of course, he's got just the personal family issues as well, which you don't wanna say it's a gift. No one would wanna say it's a gift, but it has forced them to slow down. And the one element of that painful suffering thing is that obviously there's deeper places you go to when something so close to the bone as your daughter, your wife, yourself is suffering at that level. You can't keep accepting the newest invitation and running because that can be a form of escapism, an addiction, a diversion from the deeper issues. I'm now front stage on actor, everyone's booing or cheering, but at least I'm stimulated by external stimuli of the crowd. When you go to families which are suffering, you're in one sense a nobody. You're just in the midst of quietly suffering and trying to make sense of that where the crowds are not there anymore. Those are not easy places to be in. You're not on the stage anymore. I fear, one of the interesting things when you look at church history, we've talked a little bit about Augustine today. Augustine didn't live in the world of Instagram or YouTube or Twitter. Augustine on Twitter could have been very interesting. But it's, you know, and yeah, I agree with you completely in that, you know, we don't know ourselves until we've been tested and few of us have been tested by the kinds of things that Jordan has been tested by. And that's on many levels. By all appearances, he's had a very close, intimate relationship with his wife. His wife traveled with him on tour constantly. She, you know, she very serious brush with death with cancer, I don't know the state of her health right now. His daughter, clearly as he wrote about quite a bit in 12 Rules for Life, significant medical issues her entire life. And as those of us who have children know, it's dealing with our health is one thing. Watching our children suffer is a whole different thing. And you know, everything he's been through, I certainly hope he can take some time and you know, and I certainly also hope that medically he can take time to really heal, not just his body, but his soul. And as we also know, crises like these can deepen one and afford one new perspectives and new strength to engage temptations and other challenges too. And that's really what I hope for him, you know, now from this chapter since summer of 2019, that he will be able to engage, you know, with his already considerable gifts and talents and experience now, the questions that he's obviously been deeply interested in his whole life, he can engage these questions at new levels. And this can be something that through patient revelation and wise cultivation can actually continue to bless the world with. That's certainly my hope. Yeah, and suffering can be a real sacrament if understood properly in terms of transformation, in terms of deepening, in terms of wisdom and discernment. I mean, no one wants to, no one, unless there's something quite wrong with you, you know, makes a virtue of suffering, but when it comes our way, people either can react to it, become angry or bitter, or they can see it as a means of deeper wisdom. And much hinges on what we do with suffering and pain and tragedy in life will determine what we become as people. It's like William Blake, you know, the songs of innocence where people are born in a context where, you know, generally the sun shines, the sky is blue, the world is generally good. And then the next phase of life is the songs of experience where people hit suffering, they hit tragedy, they hit betrayal, they hit disappointment. And a person can go in one direction towards cynicism and anger and bitterness. You can't trust the world, you can't trust others, or that can be transformed into wisdom and insight and sensitivity to others who suffer, and so empathy. And so the very gift of suffering is the means of deeper empathy for others who suffer. And so one would hope that in some ways, you know, in terms of what Jordan Peters and his family are living through, is it could lead to a greater wisdom, deeper quietness, deeper insight. Because, I mean, his journey was obviously, for many years in psychology and counseling, he was concerned with the human soul, initially his own soul, his own struggle. And out of that, his suffering, concerned with other people's souls. It's just, as I mentioned earlier, any good thing can get twisted when you're, you know, offered the possibility to be on front stage, you get paid well. And so the good gift that he has been given in terms of his temperament and his gifts, I think in this, what I mentioned is the second phase, it can be a means of a deeper internalized understanding that he is a shepherd of souls, could offer a greater listening and healing to others. If he takes that next step into the songs of Ferb Blake, then you move into the songs of wisdom and the songs of love, the four levels of the human journey. And often suffering is the portal that you have to go through again and again to reach that internalized center in which you're there for people. So I think the next stage, as I mentioned, is much hinges on this very intense few years that he's lived through. I think he's probably wise enough and his friends are probably honest enough to say you don't wanna return to that. Hopefully something's been learned, but what next? That takes time, that's a mystery. Once you see I'm leaving this behind, it's one thing to say when I'm, you know, leaving behind, but one is never too sure what you're going towards. And that's a faith journey, it's a mystery. But he does know now where he shouldn't be, the question of where should he be on the journey. And I think that will hinge on good people who, good people who are willing to be honest and not either slip into trashing him as a human being, which doesn't help, or hagiography, just oh, Peterson's the most one, so whatever he does is de facto and infallible, well that's not help, that just feeds into a problem. The other is honest friends who tell the truth. And to the degree he hears, listens, responds to internalizing and live for it, I think you'll have a lot to offer if that next phase of his maturation takes place and only time will reveal that to us. Well good, any other things you wanted to touch on today, Ron, this has been wonderful. Hello? Okay. Okay. I will, so the book that you edited is coming out, I saw that it's on Amazon, it's on pre-order. Hello? Can you hear me? Did we get disconnected? Fading in and out a bit, yeah. Okay, so I'll re-ask the question, any other things you wanted to touch on today before we wrap up? Well I would just say I would encourage people to get the book if possible. Welcome reviews on Amazon. I hope it makes a contribution to Peterson studies with well avoiding the extremes of trashing and hagiography. I think it's the first book through a variety of authors that are trying to look at what he's doing with Christianity in a more substantive way. But I'll leave that up to reviewers to decide in that sense. So, but welcome, purchase, and obviously reviews, because reviews help us understand what we've missed, what we've contributed, and then the next step in understanding Peterson and where he has been, but where he might be, we await the next step of the journey. Absolutely, absolutely. Well thank you so much, Ron, for your time. And I will post this tomorrow, and I will have links to all of the books that we talked about, and yeah, we'll see in the comments section what people have to say about our advice for Jordan. Many thanks, have a good evening. Okay, take care, Ron. Yeah, bye-bye. Bye-bye.