https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vfF7uhssLCo

 All right, this is Paul. It's a good time to do CS Lewis's Chapter 4 here on Good Friday before Easter. I've been watching the Netflix documentary Wild Wild Country and thinking a bit about Peterson and truth and reason and nature through it. Now one of the interesting aspects of that whole story is this Rajneeshi bioattack that happened in 1984. And one of the things that happened was that there was a member of the US House of Representatives that represented that district named James Weaver. And Weaver went on to, you know, one of these CNN, not CNN, but C-SPAN, give a speech before on any empty house floor, decrying that he believed the Rajneeshis were behind this Salmonella outbreak that happened in the Dells in Oregon. And he made it very clear he had no evidence for this, but he simply believed that they were responsible for this very mysterious, very large outbreak of Salmonella in the town. At that point, the Rajneeshis were attempting to, they had, that's a fascinating story. That documentary has been fun to watch. But they, you know, they brought in all these homeless people trying to register them to vote so that they could have enough votes to overturn the county government and get control of it. But the homeless people weren't terribly easily. Those of you who know my story, I can just imagine busing in all of these folks from all over the country. And yeah, twice as many homeless people as they had in their commune. And wow, what a mess. So then they turned to try to suppress the vote by poisoning the town. And it was a very interesting story because the initial investigators who were now we're going to get into this nature reason thing and CS Lewis that were using reason blamed food handlers because, you know, probably the people from the Centers for Disease Control and the county health people said, you know, it just sounds a little crazy that this group of people, they might be a religious sect or they might be a little kooky or all of this stuff. We just can't imagine that they would intentionally poison people. And, you know, Salmonella can be a very serious thing and put all of these people at risk to, you know, to suppress an election to win over the county government. But James Weaver then goes on TV and says, you know, I suspect them. And this is intuition. Now, what the intuition versus reason thing brings up is that, okay, what is the state of our thinking? What is the state of our minds? When we know something via intuition, it's like our union great cloud of witnesses is back there and they're, you know, they're talking to us through our emotions. And we say things like, I just can't help believe it's not their Rajneeshis. But others would say, I just can't help believe that it would be them. And again, all of this, we would imagine, is our constructed thought. We're working from our biases. We're working from our assumptions. And so this then is playing out in 1984 in this very interesting drama. Now, Sheila, who was the former secretary, flies the coop. And then the Bhagawan, who was really angry with her, goes on TV and says that she orchestrated this thing, which, of course, sets the FBI and the rest of the government in motion and, you know, invites them then into the compound. And they do their own investigation, again, using reason. And then they blame it on the Rajneeshis. Now the question is, and then James Weaver is vindicated, but then the question becomes, what is the relationship between naturalism, intuition, reason, and truth? And in my last video on Chapter 3, we talked about C.S. Lewis's assertion that naturalism has an incredibly difficult challenge, which is that if all of our beliefs, if all of our mental events, if everything in this world is the product of the whole show, then can we actually make claims to truth? So naturalism says, you know, this is the whole show. Initial investigators inferred poor food handling because who would poison a town? James Weaver infers that it is the Rajneeshis because they are evil. Further investigation confirms that it is the Rajneeshi ordered by Secretary Sheila. And naturalism says all of these things are the same, that all of these things are simply products of our environment. Our thoughts are products of our biases, of our assumptions, of the information that's brought to us. And so then you have the question of truth. Where can you find truth? Now, this then gets into the question of debunking because if you want to debunk, well, you need to be able to make a claim, a truth claim of debunking. But if you're a naturalist, you've got a problem because all of your so-called, you know, killer points that you're using to debunk, whatever it is you wish to debunk, you need a truth claim in order to do that. And as I mentioned on the video I did about the debunking Jordan Peterson, when he makes his move to saying, well, Jordan Peterson makes the statement because he has a motive, well, this is what all of our statements are. They're all motivated. They're all the products of nature. Now, C.S. Lewis gets into this in Chapter 4 on nature and supernature. Throughout the long tradition of European thought, it has been said, not everybody, not everyone, but by most people or at any rate by most of those who have proved that they have a right to be heard, that nature, though it is a thing that really exists, is not a thing that exists in itself or in its own right, but a thing which depends for its existence upon something else. And again, if you go back to Lewis's Chapter 3, there's the whole show. Nature is one thing and it's the only thing. And this is the thought and belief of naturalism. And now we're going to see kind of the exam and the credentials between, say, naturalism and supernaturalism, which says that nature is not the whole thing or the only thing or the whole show. If our argument has been sound, acts of reasoning are not interlocked with the total interlocking system of nature as all its other items are interlocked with one another. They are connected with it in a different way, as the understanding of a machine is certainly connected with the machine, but not with the way the parts of the machine are connected with each other. Now Lewis is saying here that if, again, naturalism's assertion is that nature is the whole show. It's an interlocked system. And so the intuition by James Weaver and the assertions by the county health people in the CDC early on, and then the assertions by the FBI, these are all one in the same. Now, upon what basis do we say that this reasoning, which is this process by which we do things like look at evidence and come to a conclusion and make our case for truth, how is that any different from anything else in nature? It's all part of the same thing. And so what Lewis is saying here is that implicit in his argument, you have this idea that there's nature, then we have this other thing out here called reasoning. And this is different from nature. It's separate from nature. And in Chapter 4, he's going to say we have to look at what's the relationship between these two things, between reasoning and nature. Finish the sentence. In this sense, everything beyond nature operates wherever we, whenever we reason. I'm not maintaining that consciousness as a whole must necessarily be put in the same position. Pleasures, pains, fears, hopes, affections, mental images need not. No absurdity would follow from regarding them as parts of nature. No absurdity would follow from regarding them as parts of nature. The distinction we make, we have the distinction we have to make is not one between mind and matter, much less between soul and body. Hard words, all four of them, but between reason and nature, the frontier coming not where the outer world ends and what I should call a what I should ordinarily call myself begins, but between reason and the whole mass of non rational events, whether physical or psychological. In other words, he's saying that really the question here is between reason and non reason. And so nature is a thing of itself, a thing which kind of creates itself, sustains itself, although it is dependent on something else. And that's that's what he's been going through through the book. And so the naturalist says that your process of intuition, your process of reasoning are both products of the whole show. Intuition may be feelings derived from your Jungian cloud of witnesses. Reasoning is more a public, communal, socially and historically learned process, but it's still derived from the same source. So you have nature and reason. And these are two separate things. And the question is, how do they relate? And Lewis begins talking about their relationship as having a frontier. And this is in a sense where in my last video I talked about I talked about Thomas Nagel and how Thomas Nagel points out that the vast majority, the assumption of the vast majority of scientists is naturalism. And Nagel basically looks at these issues. And again, Nagel is an atheist. Nagel says there's a real flaw with naturalism and and you don't really live it. And again, I went through this all in my in my previous video. And for this, Nagel is regarded as a heretic amongst atheist high level philosophers. Now, Lewis is going to get into the frontier. At that frontier, we find a great deal of traffic, but it is all one way. It is a matter of daily experience that rational thoughts induce and enable us to alter the course of nature of physical nature. When we use mathematics to build a bridge or of psychological nature, when we apply arguments to alter our own emotions, we succeed in modifying physical nature more often and more completely than we success than we succeed in modifying psychological nature. But we do at least a little of both. On the other hand, nature is quite powerless to produce rational thought, not that she not that she never modifies our thinking, but that the moment she does so, it ceases for that very reason to be rational. For, as we have seen, a train of thought loses all rational credentials as soon as it can be shown to be wholly the result of non rational causes. Now, this is implicit in so much of what we do. And again, if you go back to the rationality rules video, the easiest way to kind of cut the legs out from someone's rational argument is with, as C.S. Lewis calls, a bulverism. Where you would say, oh, you only believe that because you're a Christian, or you only believe that because you're a man, or you only believe that because you're white, or you only believe that because you're black, or you only believe that because you're getting paid to believe this, or you only believe this because it's in your best interest for some other reason to do it. This is such standard, this finds such standard usage that we don't even think about it. And again, you might dismiss this video that you only say these things because you're a Christian pastor. Once you make that argument, in a sense, you've already cut the legs out from naturalism, or you've already showed us that you don't actually believe naturalism, because you really do believe that there's this thing, nature over here, that means I'm a pastor, I'm influenced by biases, by my race, by my sex, by my position, by my upbringing. I've got all of those biases, and all of those are off limits because that is natural. And the bar we hold is reason, hence rationality rules. Four, as we have seen, a train of thought that loses all rational credentials as soon as it can be shown to be wholly the result of non-rational causes. When nature, so to speak, attempts to do things to rational thought, she only succeeds in killing them. That is the particular state of affairs at the frontier. Nature can only raid reason to kill, but reason can invade nature to take prisoners and even colonize. Every object you see before you at this moment, the walls, ceiling, furniture, the book, your own washed hands and cut fingernails, bear witness to the colonization of nature by reason, hence the capital letters on both of them. For none of this matter would have been in these states of nature if nature had had her way. And if you are attending to my argument as closely as I hope, that attention also results from habit, which reason has imposed on the natural ramblings of consciousness. If, on the other hand, a toothache or an anxiety is at this very moment preventing you from attending, then nature is indeed interfering with your consciousness. But not to produce some new variety of reasoning, notice the small r, only as far as in her lies to suspend reason, notice the capital R, altogether. In other words, we all understand that things come into our mind. We're having a bad day. We have a headache. I get distracted. I'm dyslexic. I mean, all of these things happen. And what we say is that these things interfere with reason. This is in a sense nature undermining and destroying reason. Now, this gets very complicated in the naturalism conversation because as the brain scientists dig deeper and deeper, they keep coming up with more and more reasons for which our faculties are compromised. And again, if you look at Alan Jacob's book, How to Think, which again is an excellent book, we believe this to be true. But yet, even while we're having the whole conversation, we're not abandoning the project of reason. And this, I think, is the killer point against rationalism is that not rationalism, but naturalism. That naturalists can't play their own game. And this then gets into Jordan Peterson's complaints that I was just listening to an interview he gave to a former prime minister of Australia when Peterson wants to say that, you know, Sam Harris, for all his atheism, acts like a Christian because he assumes all of this stuff. Now, that's a very complicated statement. But I think Peterson is right that the naturalists, as Thomas Nagel likes to point out, are not rationalists. Thomas Nagel likes to point out, act like supernaturalists because they still believe in reason and they're certainly not giving it up. The frontier between nature and reason. Sheila, now back to the Baguane and the Wild Wild Country documentary. Sheila, motivated by taking control of the county of Wasco, directs her medical lab to use reason, I should have put a capital R in there, to harness nature, biology in that case, to consummate salad bars in this Oregon town. The CDC sees high rates of contamination and uses reason to blame bad food handling. James Weaver blames the Rajneeshi, but no charges are filed. Why? Well, he doesn't file charges because he's very clear in saying, I have no evidence. Well, what does that mean? It means that reason not only governs our philosophical arguments, reason not only governs our day to day life with people and our assumptions, reason governs our laws. You can't go into court and say, well, I think they're guilty because my Jungian cloud of witnesses says so. No, you need to produce evidence. You need to create a rational argument. Well, but can you do that as a naturalist? How are reason and nature related? In other words, the relation between reason and nature is what some people call unsymmetrical relation. Brotherhood is a symmetrical relation because if A is the brother of B, B is the brother of A. Father and son is an unsymmetrical relationship if A is the father of B, but B is not the father of A. The relationship between reason and nature is of this kind. Reason is not related to nature as nature is related to reason. But now we get a little bit later in this video, we're going to have the relationship between humanity and nature. And a little bit later, Lewis will continue in his book Miracles, keep talking about nature as our sister. Now, this is obviously a metaphor. And sometimes, for example, we might talk about nature as our mother. And it's helpful to understand that we don't hold these metaphors too tightly because, for example, in the Bible, Israel is sometimes the Lord's wife and Israel is sometimes the Lord's daughter. Now, if you look at those two relationships confused, things can get, things can become kind of an ugly mess. But now Lewis will say reason and nature are not really brother and sister. Reason and nature are more like father and son or father and daughter. If you can, even for the moment, endure the suggested picture of nature, let us now consider the other factor. The reasons or instances of reason which attacker, this is reason attacking nature. We have seen that rational thought is not a part of the system of nature. And again, this is, you know, now, now if you're a naturalist, you might argue this point. And it's fair to argue because this is, in fact, the debate we're having that, you know, is does nature, what's the relationship between nature and reason? Now, nature is saying here is the whole show. And we might look at nature and say, well, nature follows reason, but reason governs nature and think that through. In each man, there must be an area, however small of activity, which is outside or independent of her. In relation to nature, the rational, in relation to nature, rational thought goes on of its own account or exists on its own. It does not follow that rational thought exists absolutely on its own. And this is where you always get Lewis talking about us as, in a sense, another metaphor amphibians. We are, we are, we are the sister of nature, but reason is the father of nature. And if you get into the question of what is math? Well, this is kind of where we go with this kind of thing. It might be independent of nature by being dependent on something else, for it is not dependence for, for it is not dependence simply, but dependence on the non rational, which undermines the credentials of thought. One man's reason has been led to see things by the aid of another man's reason, and it is none the worse for it. In other words, why do we do these videos? Why does rationality rules try and use reason the way he does? Because reason is transferable between people. I cannot talk reason to bucko the lobster, partly because bucko is a blow up plastic toy. But even if bucko were a real lobster, I could not talk reason to bucko. Reason does not speak, lobsters do not speak reason. People do speak reason, and this is why we do videotapes back and forth. One man's reason has has been led to see things by the aid of another man's reason, and it is none the worse for it. It is thus still an open question whether each man's reason exists absolutely on its own, or whether it is the result of some rational cause. In fact, of some other reason, again capital R. That other reason, again capital R, might conceivably be found to depend on a third, and so on. It would not matter how far this process was carried, provided you found reason coming from reason at each state. And this, for example, when you have, do an investigation, you have what's called a chain of custody. Why? Because in a sense, you're preserving reason from nature. You're also preserving reason from other rational beings that might want to corrupt or disrupt the chain of evidence. So when the CDC is investigating the salmonella outbreak in this Oregon town in 1984, it is looking at a chain of, in a sense, a chain of evidence. It's looking at salmonella in a salad bar and trying to track that salmonella back to a source. And now it said, well, improper food handling. James Weaver said, no, I think it's the Rajneeshis after the incident. With a little bit more investigation and a little bit more reason, it gets pinned to the Rajneeshis and gets pinned all the way back, in fact, back to Sheila. Now, that doesn't mean that Sheila necessarily planted the salmonella in the salad bars. But again, here's the funny thing about the chain of reason. We hold Sheila accountable, not because she actually put salmonella in the salad bar. We hold her accountable because she gave the order, because there's this chain of reason that is, in fact, disconnected from the actual salmonella. And again, we work this way without even thinking about it. But this is the game we're playing. It is only when you begin to ask, it is only when you are asked to believe in reason coming from non-reason that you must halt. For, if you don't, all thought is discredited. It is therefore obvious that sooner or later you must admit a reason which exists absolutely on its own. The problem is whether you or I can be such a self-existent reason. Let's imagine that Sheila was schizophrenic and had a little dog. And let's imagine that finally Sheila gets hauled into a court to answer for the contamination of these salad bars in this Oregon town. And Sheila said, my dog told me to contaminate the salad bars. What would a court of law do? Now suddenly the court of law begins to say she can't be held to account by perhaps by reasons of insanity. Well, why does the insanity defense work anyway? Because we, in terms of this entire game that we live and have lived in for a very long time, don't hold nature accountable for rational things. This is why if a, well, if a bear marauds Yosemite National Park, they may put down the bear after trying to relocate it, but they don't punish the bear. Now, if a person marauds Yosemite National Park, we hold them to a different standard. Why? Reason. And this again is in fact the game that we've been playing for a very long time. And it is almost impossible to conceive of human civilization apart from this game. And this again is part of Peterson's point. This question almost answers itself the moment we remember that existence on one's on what existence on one's own means. It means that kind of existence which naturalists attribute to the whole show and supernaturalists attribute to God. For instance, what exists on its own must have existed for from all eternity. For if anything else could make it begin to exist, it would not exist on its own, but because of something else. Now, again, when we talk about eternity here, we're looking at kind of a monarchical vision because, you know, in a secular society, we don't actually talk about eternity, but we do. Eternity is kind of this frame of reference that we use. And so when we think about laws of science, when we think about, you know, all of the elements that we work with, good, bad, all of the good, bad, right or wrong, all of the elements that we imagine to be absolute eternity is in this. So then the question is, well, where does nature come from? Where does reason come from? For having one cease to be, I'm talking about reason now, it must also exist incessantly. That is, it cannot cease to exist and then to begin again. For having one cease to be, it obviously could not recall itself into existence. And if anything else recalled it, it would be a dependent being. And this, again, is true of both nature and if you're a naturalist and reason, if you're a supernaturalist, along the lines that Lewis is arguing. Now, it is clear that my reason has grown up gradually since my birth and it's interrupted for several hours each day. I therefore cannot, I therefore cannot be that eternal self-existent reason, again, capital R, which neither slumbers nor sleeps. There's a biblical reference. And again, if you don't know your Bible, you're going to have tough with a lot of documents in Western civilization. Yet, if any thought is valid, such a reason must exist and must be the source of my own imperfect and intermittent rationality. In other words, my reason is dependent on another reason. Human minds then are not the only supernatural entities that exist. And again, Lewis with supernatural, he's already hedged this and said, this is kind of supernatural in a special way. This isn't exactly the supernatural we're talking about when we talk about miracles, but they are related. They do not come from nowhere. Each has come into nature from super nature. Each has its taproot in an eternal self-existent rational being whom we call God. Each is an offshoot or spearhead or incursion of that supernatural reality into nature. Now, some of you have already jumped mentally to the question of, well, can't this kind of can't this God then be the whole show itself? And Lewis, in fact, will get to that. So again, what we have here is nature and reason and their two domains. And we're looking at the relationship between them. But now pragmatism comes into the conversation. Because essentially, if you listen to, let's say, Scott Adams, and for a while I was, you know, I read Scott Adams book and I was listening to some of the things he was saying. And Scott Adams, as a naturalist, wants to say, well, OK, I understand that naturalism has a problem when it comes to truth, but we can overcome this problem when it comes to truth by use of prediction. That if we make a prediction and we see it comes true, or in fact, we can repeat it, then we can know truth. Does this really satisfy or resolve the issues with naturalism? We know truth when we predict the outcome of reason controlling nature. But again, even when we're here, we've already and the naturalist has already in many ways given up the game. Because reason, the naturalist will assert, is separate from nature because we can't control nature, bend it to our will, employ it, evaluate it, take a step outside of it, unless we are, in fact, taking a step outside of it. And if we're taking a step outside of it via what C.S. Lewis is calling reason, there is no longer the whole show. We have, in fact, violated our own religion. And this is why Peterson says that that Sam Harris is acting like a Christian. You've already assumed the division between reason and nature in your reasoning. You are process. You're sorry, I made the mistake. Your process depends on reasoning. Intuition, a different part of the mind, has the same justification. In other words, when James Weaver comes and says, I'm vindicated, well, his intuition is his intuition. His intuition was right, but we publicly don't act like intuition is as valid as reason. And you might say, well, that's a deficiency. naturalist might say, OK, we should judge intuition to be just as valid as reason. But I don't think any naturalist would maintain that very long because we regularly use reason as the arbiter of intuition. Someone goes to court and says, I just feel they're guilty. Maybe you might argue that that's all the jurors have or that's all the judges have. But yet we still decide to dress it up in terms of reason. Why? They, of course, defer to probability, which is, of course, itself justified by reason and and in fact, even our own structure. One of the comments that I've made in a secular frame, one of the things that we have done is we have, in a sense, divinized the process. And that in a secular frame is how we try to accommodate what happened in the religious war. So we say, well, we can't really we can't really base our lives on these religious texts. So we're going to divinize the process and we're going to hold the process to be sacred. And that's when we look at what we've done in courts. Why does every everyone stand up when the judge comes in? Well, we've, in a sense, made the courtroom into a secular, into a sacred space, which is why everyone stands up, which is a very common cultic action. In an ancient monarchy, you would bow before the king. Often in religious services, you bow before the deity or you bow before another. I mean, this is this is all the same systems that we're using. And this, again, is a lot of what Peterson has been has been helpful with. Now, if naturalism, then this division of reason and nature is illusory. That's that's in a sense what that's not in a sense, but that is the assertion of naturalism that this division between reason and nature is illusory. The experience of control is no different in terms of truth seeking from I am hungry to the Rajneeshe did it. That's all part of nature. And then you have to ask yourself, why do we elevate the one above the other? And you would say, well, we seem to get better results from that one. OK, but if you find someone who is very good intuitively, do you trust them? Yes. But we do we use that as a public standard? We try to say no. Naturalism itself is not more truthful than supernaturalism. Peterson comes around the back through pragmatism and says, but if supernaturalism proves improve survivability, then therefore it's true. And this gets into some of the the wonkiness of Peterson that the rationality rules guy addressed because, well, does this does this definition of truth work? And I think you would have to say, well, that depends on your system. If you're if you're a natural, if you're a naturalist in denial, still maintaining your membership in the temple of reason, then you're going to object to Jordan Peterson's truth. Peterson is looking for a firmer foundation within pragmatism. And so he says, well, survivability is now the final definition of truth. Now, where does he get this idea? In a sense, he gets it from the temple of the others. And this is why Thomas Nagel and now in some ways, Jordan Peterson is a heretic in that temple. But all along the way, we're still using reason. Some people may hear raise the following question. If reason is sometimes present in my mind and sometimes not, then instead of saying that I am a product of eternal reason, would it not be wiser to simply to say simply that eternal reason itself occasionally works through my organism, leaving me a merely natural being? Now, there with our secular frame, with our buffered selves, not a lot of people make these arguments in public today. But these public these these ideas and frameworks are present throughout history and you might find some new agers in a sense, sneaking this kind of argument into the conversation. A wire does not become something other than a wire because an electric current has passed through it. But to talk thus is, in my opinion, to forget what reasoning is like. It is not an object which knocks against us or even a sensation which we feel. That would be more intuition. Reasoning doesn't happen to us. We do it now again. This is where you've got some naturalism coming in here because in a sense, within naturalism, the whole show is always doing something to us. And I know when I raise the issue of Calvinism, some of you jump to determinism, which is kind of a low resolution knock on Calvinism as it's been used. Got to answer the wife a second. Reasoning doesn't happen to us. We do it. Every train of thought is accompanied by what Kant called the I think the traditional doctrine that I am a creature to whom God has given reason. But who is distinct from God seems to me a much more seems to me much more philosophical than the theory that what happens to be my thinking is only God's thinking through me. On the latter view, it is very difficult to explain what happens when I think correctly but reach a false conclusion because I have been misinformed about facts. Why God, who presumably knows the real facts, should be at the pains to think one of his perfectly rational thoughts through a mind in which it is bound to produce error I do not understand. Nor indeed do I understand why, if all my valid thinking is really God's, he should either himself mistake it for mine or cause me to mistake it for mine. It seems much more likely that human thought is not God's, but God kindled. In a pond whose surface was completely covered with scum and floating vegetation, there might be a few water lilies. And you might, of course, be interested in them for their beauty. But you might also be interested in them because from their structure you could deduce that they had stalks underneath which went down to the roots in the bottom. The naturalist thinks that the pond, nature, the great event in time and space and time, is of infinite depth and that there is nothing but water wherever, however far down you go. My claim, that some of the things on the surface, in other words, our experience, show the contrary. These things, rational minds, reveal on inspection that they are at least not floating but attached by stalks to the bottom. Therefore the pond has a bottom. It is not pond, pond forever or turtles all the way down. Go deep enough and you will come to something that is not pond, to mud and earth and then to rock and finally the whole bulk of earth and the subterranean fire. And again, this is Lewis again basically saying, this is how we work. And Peterson follows up and says, if you want to see what we believe, look at how we behave. Even if you're a naturalist, you act as if reason is a valid guide to truth. At this point it is tempting to try whether rational, whether naturalism cannot still be saved. I point out in Chapter 2 that one could remain a naturalist and yet believe in a certain kind of God, a cosmic consciousness to which the whole show somehow gives rise. And I'm not sure, and one of you commenters will probably put in there, I'm not sure how this perhaps does or doesn't relate to Jung. We might, what we might call an emergent God. Would not an emergent God give us all we need? Is it really necessary to bring in a supernatural God distinct from and outside the whole interlocking system? Notice modern reader, how your spirits rise, how much at home you feel, you would feel with an emergent than a transcendent God. How much less primitive, repugnant and naive the emergent conception seems to you. For by that, as you will later see, there hangs a tale. And Lewis's point is very similar to what Thomas Nagel, the point Thomas Nagel makes in his book, where he says, you know, I'm an atheist and I find Christian philosophers like Alvin Plantinga to be very brilliant, but I want to be an atheist. I don't want there to be a transcendent God. And I think this is a critical point that we come round and round to again and again, because the implications of a transcendent God impinge on my assumption of where I stand and who I imagine myself to be and the kind of world we live in. If there's an emergent God, then, and I think this gets into the question of the implicit hierarchy we have between things that have will and things that don't. The reason we eat cows, the reason we don't try tigers for theft, if they kill a goat, we might kill the tiger, but we don't try the tiger. And the reason that we maintain an insanity defense, because in a sense, we declare someone to be insane if they have lost their faculty of reason. And again, this shows in our practice how often we default to reason. But if, in a sense, the whole show, we decide to call the whole show God, but we keep it impersonal or we keep that God emergent, we feel more comfortable with this because then we don't have anyone to answer to. We don't finally answer to a bear or to a lion or to a tiger or to a rock or to the weather or to anything like this. We answer to persons, persons who have wills, persons who have agency, persons who act. And again, this is so implicit in all of our systems. But I'm afraid it will not do. It is, of course, possible to suppose that when all the atoms of the universe got into a certain relation, which they are bound to get into sooner or later, they would give rise to a universal consciousness. And it might have thoughts and it might cause those thoughts to pass through our minds. But unfortunately, it is our own thoughts on this supposition would be the product of non rational causes. And therefore, by the rule which we use daily, they would have no validity. The cosmic mind would be such as much as our own minds, the product of mindless nature. We have not escaped from the difficulty. We have only put it state, put it a stage further back. The cosmic mind will help us only if we put it at the beginning, if we suppose it to be not the product of the total system, but the basic original self existent fact, capital F, which exists in its own right. But to admit that sort of cosmic mind is to admit a God outside nature, a transcendent and supernatural God. This route, which looks like offering an escape, really leads us round again to the place that we started from. And so here again, now we're going to see the beginnings of Lewis's argument about pantheism, where Lewis essentially says that pantheism is kind of natural religion. And that's where we always go naturally. And only in certain cases do we actually rise above pantheism when we're actually beginning to use reason and to think things through. The relations which rise from that frontier are indeed the most complicated and intimate sort. That spearhead of the supernatural, again capital S, which I call my reason, links up with all my natural, all my natural contents, my sensations, emotions and the like. So completely that I call the mixture by the single word me. In other words, me is a hybrid of nature and reason. Now if you look at, let's say, the Genesis 2 creation narrative, what is the man? The man is made of the stuff of the earth. He's made of clay and God breathes in him. In a few weeks I'm going to be talking about the post resurrection account in John where Jesus breathes on his disciples. And that in the Septuagint, which is the Greek translation of the Old Testament, which the New Testament often uses, is the same word that's used in Ezekiel's vision of the Valley of Dry Bones. Can these bones live? And in a sense what the Bible says human beings are, are the stuff of nature. We're the same stuff as the animals, but the breath of God. And this is where we get the imago dei. Peterson continues to use words like spark of divinity. I've got some theological, yeah, butts about that terminology, but this is what we're talking about. We're talking about the same thing. And so what we're seeing here that there's a frontier here, but reason can control nature. And we see that by the fact that we're pushing electrons through this internet. We're using this amazing technology, these amazing devices. You know, this even gets in a sense into the net neutrality conversation where, you know, we want our internet carriers to be dumb pipes and we want them to pass the packets through. And now you see in the defense of Facebook about, you know, fake news and these kinds of arguments, Facebook wants to say, we're just a platform. We're not a medium. And you begin to see how complicated this line is back and forth. And this, again, this line, this division between nature and reason, this is so completely fundamental to our civilization that every brain book I've read by net neutrality, I've read by naturalists who come to the point of basically saying, you know, we're all constructed by our past events, by our biology, by our genetics, by our environment, by the whole show. At the end of the book, when they finish saying that, they kind of throw up their hands and say, but to really employ this, to really practice this would be the undoing of civilization itself. And this is in a sense what Peterson keeps saying. He's saying, go ahead and treat a human being like a non-human being. You know, folks over on the activist left, that's in fact what they are protesting against. And while at the same time decrying, oh, we don't want to have a God. We don't want to have a God who judges. We don't want to have a God who reveals himself. We don't want to have any of these things. And what in a sense we're saying is we want to have these things. But in another sense, we're saying I want to be this thing. And so, you know, for as much as, for as popularism as naturalism is, Peterson's critique, I think, is just dead on and devastating. Where he says, you know, it's a load of crap. And okay, pastors lie. Yeah, but so does everyone else. Naturalists lie or are willfully blind about their system because they can't even live it. What's more, they can't even imagine how such a system would be lived. Now, we might argue that perhaps Huxley and Brave New World comes the closest to imagining this. But the whole point of the novel itself is that reason invades once more as it keeps doing. And in fact, Brave New World, in a sense, reveals that this, the constructed selves, the alphas, the betas, the gammas, the deltas, the epsilons, you know, these are all run by, of course, an elite. And so what do we have? Again, we're back to a system of reason ruling over nature. To believe that nature produces, produced God or even the human mind is, as we have seen, absurd. To believe that the two are both independently self-existent is impossible. At least the attempt to do so leaves me unable to say that I am thinking of anything at all. It is true that dualism, now I skipped a chapter here on dualism or a paragraph on dualism, it is true that dualism has a certain theological attraction. It seems to make the problem of evil easier. In other words, maybe we can conceive of two gods. And if you go back in history, the Manichean, if you want to read a, if you want to read a really interesting ancient philosophy, read the Manicheans. It's one of the, a number of dualistic systems. Well, the Manicheans basically had a good God and a bad God and these gods are fighting. The difficulty that you have is what context, within what context are these gods fighting? Because then suddenly you have to attribute, you have to find, you have to figure out where that context comes from. But if we cannot, in fact, think dualism out to the end, this attractive promise can never be kept. And I think there are better solutions of the problem of evil. They remain then the belief that God created nature. This at once supplied, supplies a relation between them and gets rid of the difficulty of sheer otherness. This also fits in with the observed frontier situation in which everything looks as if nature were not resisting an alien invader, but rebelling against a lawful sovereign. This and perhaps this also fits in with the fact that nature, though not apparently intelligent, is intelligible. That events in the remotest parts of space appear to obey the laws of rational thought. Even the act of creation itself presents none of the intolerable difficulties which seem to meet us on every other hypothesis. There is in my own human mind something that bears a faint resemblance to it. We can imagine that is we can cause to exist the mental pictures of material objects and even human characters and events. We fall short of creation in two ways. In the first place, we can only recombine elements borrowed from the real universe. No one can imagine a new primary color or a sixth sense. In the second place, we can imagine what we imagine exists only from our consciousness, though we can, by words, induce other people to build for themselves pictures in their own minds, which can be roughly similar to it. In other words, Lewis is saying, our use is dependent upon this other creation. We are, he's in a sense making Tolkien's argument that we are sub-creators here. And when we create things, we create things that are always derivative from the stuff and the place that we are created within. We should to attribute to God the power of both producing the basic elements of inventing not only colors, but color itself, the senses themselves, space, time, matter themselves, and also imposing what he has invented on created minds. This seems to be no intolerable assumption. It is certainly easier than the idea of God and nature as wholly unrelated entities and far easier than the idea of nature producing valid thought. And again, if you look, if you go back and let's say, let's talk about Marduk and Tiamat and their great battle. Well, you've always got the same issues that come up about that. And this is the way that although, you know, in the early conception of Israel, you know, that the Lord and Marduk might in a sense be rivals. And this plays out in the Hebrew prophets, as I've been talking about in the in my examination of the Book of Ezekiel. The finally the God and again, if you listen to Philip Carey's lectures that I've mentioned very often on philosophy and religion, the God that finally emerges from Judaism and Christianity and is also there in Islam and the Latter-day Saints Church changes the story in some dramatic way. This God is you can't, I sometimes draw a circle and say, OK, imagine another omnipotent omniscient all-knowing God. Well, how many could there be? Those systems just don't finally work. And then Lewis makes the point earlier in the paragraph that we rely on this. And in fact, when, you know, when let's say the NASA was putting together the Apollo mission to the moon, no one suggested that gravity would work different and physics would work different on the moon than it does on Earth. And we said, no, this this works all the way through. But again, pay attention to what we're doing. We are setting ourselves apart from nature with this monarchical vision, seeing the whole thing as a static system, as an eternal system and saying this thing works. The thing is that we know we didn't make this system because if, let's say, the system were subject to the moon, it would be a different thing. If, let's say, the system were subject to politics, which are the other systems that we have. Well, would you send someone to the moon if politics was driving physics? Well, probably not, because you get halfway there and there's a coup and then your astronauts fly off into space. Again, this we don't live this way. I do not maintain that God's creation of nature can be proved as rigorously as God's existence, but it seems to me overwhelmingly probable, so probable that no one who approaches the question with an open mind would very seriously entertain any other hypothesis. In fact, one seldom meets people who have who have grasped the existence of a supernatural natural God and yet deny that he is the creator. So when we get into the Jordan Peterson conversation with respect to the resurrection and can metaphysics and physics meet when and how? Well, in a sense, we're always banking on this. We're always assuming this stable system. We're always assuming we can take a step out of nature with this faculty called reason, and we can dominate nature. We can send an Apollo mission to the moon. We can we can do the math. We can create this because of this. Again, this whole system, we believe we can dominate and control nature. Well, not perfectly. All the evidence we have points in that direction. The difficulty spring up on every side if we try to believe otherwise. No philosophical theory, which I have yet come across, is a radical improvement on the words of Genesis that in the beginning, God made heaven and earth. I say radical improvement because the story in Genesis, as St. Jerome said long ago, is told in the matter of a popular poet, or as we should say, in the form of a folk tale. But if you compare it with the creation, if you compare it with the creation legends of other people, with all these delightful absurdities in which giants, in which giants to be cut up and floods to be dried up are made to exist before creation, the depth and originality of the Hebrew folk tale would soon be apparent. The idea of creation in the rigorous sense of the word is there fully grasped. And again, I think part of what we're seeing in the Jordan Peterson phenomenon is that Peterson is seeing this stuff. And I don't know if he can quite articulate it the way Lewis has articulated it. But this is why, and it's shocking to the naturalist, I mean, this is why Sam Harris and Brett Weinstein are having a real problem with Jordan Peterson because Peterson is seeing this in Genesis. He is a heretic. He is a heretic. But in a sense, he is turning the tables on them and saying, but your system doesn't really work. You abandon your system and betray your system and deny your system. Your system turns you into a liar every day. So why are you maintaining it? Maybe you'd better actually look at your system honestly and try and figure it out. And I think, again, this is in a bunch of the after Jordan Peterson released his book, 12 Rules, there's all kinds of debates. Is he an idiot? Is he a jerk? Is he a bigot? Is he a racist? Jordan Peterson is, in all honesty, working through the issues and he's working through the issues as best he can. And so when he arrives at the question of the resurrection, and if you watch my rough draft of Sunday, I'll talk a little bit what C.S. Lewis does in miracles with the resurrection, Peterson is coming to terms with it. And I think one of the things that attracted me to Peterson was how he I think he seriously wrestles with the problem of naturalism. Now, now he comes at it from pragmatism, and I'm not sure that way is finally going to to to prove out. And I think actually when he comes at it acting as if this other stuff were true, which is in fact how we actually behave. Well, at some point you're going to want to take another step and say, well, if I if I really love Star Wars, maybe I'll dress up and go to the theater. If if I really want to act as if sacrifice works, well, then maybe really and this based on, you know, hundreds of thousands of years of our watchers watching and seeing that the sacrifice of Abel is a better sacrifice than the sacrifice of Kane. Well, take Jordan Peterson's advice and be an Abel. This is where this goes. And so therefore, people after watching Jordan Peterson, all of their watchers are watching it. They might not be able to articulate all this stuff, but they start to have feelings. Their intuitions are coming up and it's starting to ping their reason and their reason is starting to get employed. And they're starting to say things like he's leading me to question. In fact, he's calling into serious question the temple of naturalism in which the majority not even who knows, I'm not counting people in which many people of high status worship. And I'm starting to have questions about that temple and I'm starting to look for a new temple. Psalm seventy four. Did I finish Lewis's paragraph? Yeah, that was that was the end of chapter four. And I think, you know, when I when I ran through this this morning and put together the PowerPoint, I thought of I thought of Psalm seventy four. But God is my king from long ago. He brings salvation on the earth. Now, those of you who have seen a bunch of my sermons or my classes know when someone offers this word salvation, I usually pause and stop them. Because an unfortunate legacy of evangelical success in America is that salvation has come to equate has come to be the same thing as hell avoidance, not going to hell when you die. Now, this word in the Bible is a far broader and richer word. And I think you see this here in Psalm seventy four where, you know, at this point in the Bible, there's, you know, dead people who are in the dead. They don't have a theology of hell worked out. And and so what, in fact, salvation is God bringing on earth? Well, he who it was you who split open the sea by your power, who broke the heads of the monster in the waters. Now, again, if you're watching Jordan Peterson and you're looking at this mythological language, this all of the things that you've seen in the Bible, you're going to see that this is the same thing that you saw in the Bible. And you're looking at this mythological language. This all sounds very familiar. You have the waters of chaos, the great primordial sea. You have Leviathan, the monster within the waters. Now, what's interesting, and this is a very good example of how the Bible uses metaphors in two ways. The the the sea and all of this, the Lord is seen as as master of this domain. He is in a sense, Tom Bombadil in in this little segment in Lord of the Rings where where nature bows to his song. He's also the creator of it. And so he's both of these things. And that's where you get the sense. Well, why does nature bow to his song? Because he sung it into being. This is for all you older Christian nerds out there. This is the trilogy by Calvin Miller, and it's it's pretty it's pretty 70 ish. This is the story of Jesus retold by Calvin Miller. Let's see. InterVarsity Press, 1975. I read this in high school and I read this in college and I absolutely loved it. And I, you know, again, part of doing these videos for me is just remembering stuff because if you like Tolkien, if you like this image of God singing creation into being, and basically it's the singer, which is the Gospels, the song, which is the Book of Acts, and the finale, which is the Book of Revelation. And Miller, Miller does this in his own imaginative way. This is the way the Bible talks. This is this is the fun of the Bible. This is the the art of the Bible. So so but God is my king from long ago. He brings salvation on the earth. And what is this salvation that he's bringing? That's that's that's that's hard for us to think about. But it's this is where Lewis and Tolkien and Calvin Miller come. It's it's this grand story. It's this grand adventure. It was you who split open the sea by your power, who broke the heads of the monster in the waters. It was you who crushed the heads of Leviathan and gave it as food to the creatures of the desert. You know, you've got you know, you've got the desert of water and you've got the desert of waterlessness. Those are kind of your archetypal extremes here. It was you who opened up springs and streams, who dried up the ever flowing rivers. The day is yours and also the night you established the sun and the moon. It was you who set all the boundaries of the earth. You made both summer and winter. And so this is a song of worship to God and saying this world is your playground. And and you both made it and kind of like Tom Bombadil. You come down into it and enjoy it. And that's very much the image we see in Genesis two and three where we're you know, you have the garden and the man and the woman are in the garden. And God comes in and enjoys it and inhabits it and you know, makes the makes the Leviathan to be scary and dramatic. But then also is lord of it. And and this is this is the stuff of every good story. Now, now, naturalism says that nature creates reason. But but that then becomes its own problem because, well, if nature creates reason, then reason is always subject to nature. And this entire chapter where C.S. Lewis says the relationship with nature and reason is nature can kill reason, but reason can dominate, colonize and be nature's master. And so what happens actually with with environmental devastation is that we take reason and we use it against nature. And so then what in a sense we have is this this ongoing this ongoing fight. And now to get into this this archetypal masculinity, femininity, you know, nature is feminine. Reason is masculine. And and these two are always in a fight. Now, if you listen to naturalism story, who wins in the end? Nature wins. You get killed by your mama. Marduk loses the battle against Tiamat and and all of us in the world die. I always I always like I always like watching the nature programs because, you know, well, the sun run out of fuel. The bad news. Yes. The good news. You'll die long before it does. Well, that's encouraging. The bad news is the whole universe dies. The good news is I die sooner. I don't understand how that's supposed to be good news. But this is how and no one denies this in the temple of naturalism that this is the story. You know, the story in Genesis is that there's a king and the king has a steward and the steward is, as Lewis says many times in his book on book miracles, nature is our sister. And and so now notice here that this isn't the relationship between the rational and nature. This is the relationship between the steward and nature because we are again made of clay with the breath of God. Now, this is how we're created to be. What happens in the rebellion is we rebel against God and we continue to try to dominate our sister. Hey, but our sister's no pushover. Our sister, in fact, knows how to kill us real good because we are made of her. And and then we're and this is in a sense, if you look at the history of the world, first magic was our attempt to dominate nature and now science and technology, a far more successful attempt to dominate nature. But notice every time we seem to get the upper hand over nature, there's always these unintended consequences. We make DDT and oops, DDT has problem. Well, there's there's the new chemical that Monsanto is putting in. I forget the name of it. That's all hot on the on the boards and everyone's talking about, you know, how this is in our food and in our wine. Well, we create the pest of pesticides and well, here is the problem. We try to dominate nature. OK, but we are part of nature, nature. We are made of earth with the breath of God. So so we try to dominate nature with what? With reason. But we can't fully do it. And so you look at the whole history of the world and this is this is what we do when you look at all our apocalyptic stories. This is the story. This is the story. And I don't know why we have such difficulty seeing it. And again, I think this is part of the part of the reason that Peterson is so popular because he is showing us the story. And now I think my yeah, but when it comes to Peterson is going to be but you're not really giving us an answer to the story. You're laying out the problem. But you can't really give us hope for the end of the story because the only way that the story finally really happily ends is what we find in Psalm 74 in terms of this salvation. That that the stewards finally. Obediently perfectly submit themselves to the king. And so we have renewed stewards governing over a renewed creation. And this is the story of resurrection. This this is in fact what the Easter story is all about. This is in fact what the Christian story is all about. And this is why Christians who are high enough in openness, I think, and I just read an excellent article by Alistair Roberts blog post that maybe I'll put in the links here or maybe I'll just do a little short video talking about it. I think some of the most thoughtful Christians and looking at Peterson, who are high in openness and don't get too reactive. Look at Peterson and say, you know, you're, yeah, no wonder you're a gateway drug to Christianity. No wonder our watchers are watching you and having doubts about the temple of naturalism. No wonder we're engaged in this. You know, what kind of a world do you want to live in? Well, this is the kind of world you want to live in. But you have to say, yeah, but that means I have to be obedient. Well, now, now the game is in play. Now we're now we're asking ourselves, where do we want to be? Where do we want to go? And now you can begin to bring in the questions of. See, heaven is really the wrong world. It's really the new creation versus the abandonment and the the final, the great divorce of C.S. Lewis calls it in his book, The Great Divorce, the great divorce from God. Do we finally want to be renewed and redeemed or do we finally want God to leave us alone? And in a sense, what what Christianity says at the end is, yeah, you get to choose, you get to choose. If you want to live with God or not live with God and then C.S. Lewis and the great divorce begins to map out what some of the implications of not wanting to submit to God finally means. But that's the story. And that's Lewis's Miracles, Chapter four. I'm sorry I'm not as fluent a reader as I could be. It's it's my old dyslexia. I've used the audiobooks and tried to do that, but that then gets into copyright issues. So I'm just reading it. But read the chapter yourself. And again, this isn't easy stuff. I've read this book five or six times and I'm rereading chapters two or three times before I present them because we are so steeped. Here's the irony. On one side, our reason is so steeped in the temple of God. And on the other side, our reason is so steeped in the temple of naturalism that it's really hard for us to see the problems. And in fact, the problems are so hard to see really smart people like Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins aren't seeing them. Other really smart atheists like like Thomas Nagel are other Christians see them. But the Christians, in a sense, are are set up to see them again by our tribalism. And so you have the ongoing fight between reason and nature that this seems to go all the way down. And and and we seem to when we keep digging into it in terms of the material world, we seem to always have nature at the bottom. But I think what Peterson, you know, following Jung, in a sense, is showing is that, well, underneath nature is these other things. And you can't divorce yourself from these other things. In fact, you need are the are these other things or or it all falls apart. If you in fact make if you in fact make nature the source, you lose reason. And and then, in fact, you're you're stuck in this perpetual tug of war with nature, which in fact you by your own admission say nature will finally win. And the Christian story says it's a much happier story where, no, finally, we are in a wrestling match with God and we have made nature our enemy because we've rebelled against God. And the final restoration or salvation is the alignment once again being restored where we serve our king and nature serves us. And if you continue to read ahead and see us as CS Lewis's book on miracles, CS Lewis plays this out. And one of the one of the things that CS Lewis finally achieves with his Narnia Chronicles is that he better than most has been able to capture this in mythopedic form. Now, now, Peterson is. Peterson is playing in the realm of psychology playing. I don't mean that pejoratively. He's working in the realm of psychology. He's working in the realm of philosophy. Lewis worked in the realm of literature and in terms of mythmaking. And so when it comes to the Narnia stories, in a sense, Lewis wanted to tell a myth. And that's not different from from Calvin Miller in his trilogy. They wanted to tell a myth. And I know some of you out there have been writing me and expressing that finally, you know, the best evangelists are like Lewis and probably more so Tolkien, because what Tolkien does with the Lord of the Rings is he is it is pre evangelism. He is in a sense, you know, we try to figure out where to locate Peterson. Now, Peterson doesn't go to church that speaks to us about his his final commitments. He does not see the need to. Worship in community now. I'm talking to him this Wednesday. And this might come up because this is certainly something on my mind in terms of my conversation with him as a pragmatist. His actions, although, you know, with all of our yeah, buts, because none of us are finally out of us are all sorted out or put together his, his, his non going to church is an expression of disbelief. It's an expression of unbelief. And you might say, well, he's doing spiritual things on his own. Yeah, but I've heard him talk about New Agers. He doesn't have a lot of respect for them. They're in a sense doing the same thing. And perhaps what separates Peterson from the New Agers are that he the New Agers are, in a sense, practicing a pantheism and they're making it up on their own. There's lots of nominal Christians out there that are kind of holding on to traditional religion, but not participating in church. So they're kind of doing it on their own. Peterson is kind of halfway in between. He's not he's not fully gotten to the point. Now, will he get there? I mean, this again is a big discussion that we're having. But he's kind of in between. And so by using his own measure, you know, I've some of you have heard me use this in sermons before. OK, well, let's let's hold you. Let's hold you accountable to your own standard. And this is, you know, it's pastors lie because we fail our own standards. We are given this we are given this gospel, this ethical system that that we ourselves can't maintain personally, which is why, in a sense, evangelical always evangelicalism. And Christians in general always retreat to saying, I do not yet fully embody the new creation that I am. I will finally be. And this is part of the reason Christians that this frustrates a lot of non-Christians. I totally get that that Christians finally say, I am not fully put together and I will not fully be sorted until the day that Jesus sorts me out. And this, again, is part of the reason that for Christians, we don't save ourselves. This is why if we jump back to to Psalm 74, my king comes and saves me and he needs to save me through and through the part of me that is nature and the part of me that is reason. He is the source of both of them for me, both the breath that he breathes into me in the Genesis story and the stuff of earth that I embody. And again, when you read that story, you have to give this credit to Peterson that he that he sees that he talks that through and our watchers see that and get excited. But but at some point, the king comes. And what will you do? Well, what will you do? When the king comes, do you want to be found in the court of the king? And this is, in a sense, what, say, the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics done a lot of thinking actually over my vacation on the relationship of Protestantism. I'm talking with Jonathan Peugeot and Rachel. I keep forgetting your name about doing a talk about Mary. But, you know, in terms of Mary, that's kind of the place that a lot of this stuff comes together. But when the king comes, what will you do? And from what we've seen of this king, this king comes and the man and the woman rebel. And unlike Nebuchadnezzar in the Book of Daniel, he doesn't just kill them. He says, OK, I'll exile you. And in a sense, when the king comes again and we say and he says to us, what would you like me to do with you? And and I think some will say, I want to be with you. You're a lot to take. And I'm scared to death. And, you know, to to use a colloquial phrase, you scare the hell out of me. But I'm with you. And where you go, I go. And your people will be my people. Again, these are the these are the this is the language of Ruth in the Old Testament. And God says, I will take you and I will clean you up and I will make you mine. And that process has already begun. And so that's in a sense, a lot of people have questions about church. That is what church is. That is what church does. And you go to a church and say, yeah, but the pastor is an idiot or the music is horrible or the people are hypocrites. Yeah, all of that. You won't find a perfect church. But this is the process that we're involved in. Or when the king comes, do you finally say, I want to be my own king? And he says, OK. But as in the story of the prodigal son, well, actually not in the story of the prodigal son, because, again, we see the heart of the king in that story. And if you don't don't know the story of the prodigal son, Luke 15, what happens if the king comes and you say to him, I don't want to be with you? OK. What then? The king will say, OK, but nature, your sister belongs to me. And in a sense, and this is what Peterson gets kind of right, in a sense, we're already living in that space because we already taste hell, which is separation from God. And we already sometimes taste heaven, which is communion with God and and in a sense, harmony with our sister nature. And so all of these things are among us and present. And so we're in the shadow lands, as Lewis would say. We're in the foothills. We're not there. And so every day we take a step one way or the other. But the question finally does come down to this rather binary choice. God comes to us as king and asks, do you wish to follow? Do you wish to be my faithful subject? And we might say, well, I'm a pretty lousy subject. I'm I'm faithless. I'm heartless. I'm a liar. I'm duplicitous. I've got all kinds of bad habits that I'm trying to shake. And some of them I don't even want to shake. But I do want to go with you. And well, then the church is the place for you because it's really hard to do this on your own. And I'd say it's not even it's it's a little disingenuous to try and do this on your own. Now, if he comes to you and says, will you be my subject? And you say, no, I don't want to have anything to do with you. By everything we see in the Bible, he's the kind of king that says, OK, I respect the part of you. I respect my image that I've put in you. But I'll warn you that that path has been trod by others. Christianity, we talk about devils and demons, that this path has been trod by others. And this is what they become in the long term. And this is why Lewis and mere Christianity will get into this portion where he says every day we take a step one way or the other. And this is why Lewis was an apologist where an evangelist when he said, take the steps towards your master, because that is the step towards recreation and restoration. And that is the step towards all of the good dreams of nature. And then Lewis and Narnia tries to embody this in his mythology. And Calvin Miller tries to do this in his trilogy. Tolkien doesn't quite get there. Tolkien is kind of pre evangelism. Well, I've gone on for an hour and a half. That's probably way too long. My reading is probably way too stuttered. My video is probably way too dull. But again, this is this is what I do. I'm thinking this stuff through. I'm thinking it out loud with you. And yeah, I hope it's helpful.