https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bVlTvX5VziM

 Hi, this is Paul. We're about halfway through the Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot commentary. Sort of the way the stuff works for me is I listen to it once, maybe listen to it twice, and then I do a commentary and you just sort of ... Part of me is still quite surprised that any of ... I never watch these videos, but I profit tremendously from the comments, the feedback through Discord, from the conversations I have with you. So I just keep doing this as long as it still seems productive in terms of the ends that I'm pursuing, which is learning more by talking about this content. Now we're about halfway through this and these comments of mine are sort of a first draft, but already after doing comments on the first half of it, I get to the point of starting to get like little snippets of it, memorable moments in it where I sort of go back on it and I go back on deeper questions. Because part of what happens as I talk to people about this stuff is, is Jordan going to become a Christian and what would that mean? And so part of what I go over in my head are the categories that we're working on. And so then other new video ideas come to mind. But if I start making those videos, I won't finish this video and I want to finish this video, I want to get all the way to the end, and then I can start taking little snippets of it and putting that together with some other things. So let's keep going. You're either aiming at Christ or something lesser. Or if things get really out of hand, you're aiming at something opposite and you don't want to be doing that. But you'd been making the point that he couldn't seem to convince Sam Harris of this. Many have tried to convince Sam Harris of a great number of things. One of the videos I want to make is how we colonize each other anyway. And this is a matter of definition in some sense. What's actually not impossible to understand is that you aim at something better, generally speaking. I mean, maybe you're out to cause pain, but forget about that. You aim at something better. Now this better, again, those of you who watch a lot of my content, you know that one of the things I try to figure out is, okay, how do we know the good? How do we navigate towards the good? And a big part of how we do this is better or worse. It's a little A-B testing. I'm going to play some of a conversation between John Vervecky and Sam from the Discord server because they just had a conversation and I thought it was an outstanding conversation. I'm so interested in that conversation. And they get into this a little bit because part of the reason John Vervecky is such a helpful conversation partner in this is partly because he isn't a Christian, at least not yet. But he's so smart, you know, so much theology and philosophy and cognitive science that he, you know, he keeps us Christians honest. And he does it so gently and so respectfully. You can't help but love him. So that's John Vervecky. And I really look forward. I really hope that the Thunder Bay Conference happens in September, perhaps. And that would be awesome because I've never met Jonathan Peugeot or John Vervecky in my life. And that's going to be a time when Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecky and I meet in person. And hopefully I'll have my COVID shot by then and we can travel by air and we can do all these things that we haven't been able to do for a year. So looking forward to that. So sometimes people ask about what this is. This is this is my little mask. OK, because people come to the church and so on and so forth. And the whole mask thing is complicated socially and all those things. So it's just easy to have have one on and just to do it anyway. Back to this conversation. See, this is this is where I start getting beyond just the one through commentary thing. I start to dig down in certain issues that this conversation touches in. And one is, OK, how do we how are we to think about Jordan Peterson? Is he a Christian? Is he not a Christian? And I have this conversation with a lot of people fairly regularly, and a lot of it boils down to the definition. Well, how do you how do you define a Christian if someone self identifies as Christian? And of course, Tom Holland completely throws this into the mix by making the statement that while we've all been so deeply impacted by Christianity and on and on and on and on and on. So Jordan here is talking about the better. And so we go for the better. And well, let's let him say what he's going to say. And do it unless it was better. In fact, it virtually defines better. Like the whole idea of better is predicated on the idea that there's an aim that's beyond you. And then the highest. And OK, so there's an aim that's now pay attention to all the spatial metaphors that we're using to orient ourselves, all this exeptation. I get another fancy vervekey word that I learned from him. All this exeptation. So there's an aim that's higher from you. And of course, the higher thing is what Jonathan Peugeot tried to challenge Brett Weinstein on. There's an aim that's higher from us. And so we go better. And the idea is obviously that, well, how to work this a little bit more fat in the ice cream makes it taste better. Is fat better or worse? A little bit more money is better, but too much money can disorient us. And so we're always doing this dead reckoning, this little A-B testing to look for better, to look for better. And the assumption is that, in fact, there is such a thing as better. We're not we're not moral nihilists in this. We're we're navigating and we're trying to go somewhere. We're trying to arrive someplace. And of course, Peugeot has been talking about theosis in this conversation. The highest aim is the amalgamation of all higher aims. And so then if you start doing this, you begin to realize that, well, there's better in this way and better in that way and better in this way. And then the combination of those, of course, you've got combinatorial explosion also going on in this. But bit by bit by bit by bit, we can make our life better. Well, what's a better life? Well, that I'm able to pay my bills instead of getting bank instead of getting foreclosure notices, that I'm able to give better things to my children. Well, what does that mean? Maybe a car that runs instead of a car that breaks down or to give them adequate clothing instead of inadequate clothing or perhaps adequate clothing with style instead of just adequate clothing and on and on and on and on and on. And then there's there's no end to this. That's a perfect mode of being. And that by definition, that's a psychological perspective again, that by definition is Christ. And then but then there seems to be something too convenient. Now, again, before we get to see us, Lewis here, that by definition is Christ. OK, that's the ideal. But many people will read the New Testament and say, well, you know, I could I could imagine, you know, getting not crucified is better than getting crucified. I like my heroes untortured rather than captured and tortured. And so you can see very quickly this thing gets very complicated. And about C.S. Lewis's insistence that that also had to manifest itself concretely in reality at one point in history. And I'm not like I. And OK, so if there's a better Lewis basically says, and this is where the. The ontological argument for me is a really interesting thing, because on one hand, just because you can posit something doesn't mean it exists. And we all know that I I can posit a smarter me, a stronger me, a a me who doesn't have all of the moral defects that I have. And maybe a me with who didn't lose his hair because you don't you don't realize what a wonderful thing hair is until you lose it. You have to wear a cap all the time because otherwise the the California sun just makes your head all how crumbly and and dry. And how do I know that? Because I've seen a lot of pasty skinned white guys in California in their 70s and 80s. And their their skin is just destroyed by the hot California sun. So maybe a better me doesn't live in California. Maybe a better me continues to live in the in the north, the northern Frisian regions of the Netherlands, where two, three generations ago, my ancestors came from, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So so we say, OK, so Christ is Christ is at this point. And Lewis basically makes the point that, well, it's sort of an ontological argument that, well, what good is the story if it never instantiated? And in fact, this is a point that Lewis not only makes with respect to Christ, but Lewis keeps making with respect to us and our dreams and all of this better. That if it doesn't actually. Actually, it's too convenient to word. If it doesn't put us in a trajectory that leads to glory. If your desires for if your desire for joy. Can never lead you to joy. If your desire for strength can never lead you to strength. If your desire for justice can never lead you to justice. Then the desire. Is some is a gift you should probably. Turn back in read or listen to see us. Lewis's life and atomic age. Peugeot's going to mention. Gnosticism here, and so that's where I'm going to jump into Sam's video. I don't understand why I should believe that. Should there is a really interesting word to. Because should in terms of a moral obligation, a moral obligation that if there's a God that you're a little bit terrified of, he will hold you to account. Should in terms of well, I should exercise more, but I don't. Because if I exercised more, I would be in better shape. Maybe I'd have a longer life. Etc. Should is a very funny word. It would be better that and so Jordan sort of should I should I dare to dream that the universe is the kind of place where the truth of Christ is real. And this gets into these naughty questions of should Jordan be a Christian? Well, how would we understand that? And this gets into these naughty questions of should Jordan be a Christian? Well, how would we understand Christian? I was. Having a conversation with my drug dealer and I call him my drug dealer, even though I don't buy drugs and I've never bought any drugs from him, but he lives in the neighborhood and he supplies drugs to a lot of the homeless people I know. And we've become friends over the years and he'll often come into the parking lot when I get here in the morning and he'll come out and he'll have a question for me. And this drug dealer, his father is a Christian or his father is a pastor and his sister is a pastor. And so, you know, I was talking to my drug dealer this morning and, you know, we're talking about Christians and evil and right and wrong. And very quickly, I shared with him my definition of who a Christian is. I said a Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. That's not the only definition of a Christian, but I find it pastors are often looking for. I'd say they're like little pocket tools that we can have in our pocket when someone comes up to us and they have a question and they don't have three hours to listen to a video of me talking to try and define things. I need something that can do some work right here and right now. And that's what pastors look for. And so that's a little tool I keep in my pocket. A Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than he or she trusts him or herself. And perhaps a Christian organization trusts Jesus more than they trust their power, etc, etc. So should Jordan believe this? It's a really complicated question because, well, should Jordan believe that he's going to have a life without the level of pain that he's had? You might say, well, if you don't believe that, you might not live. Should Jordan believe that his daughter will have a level of freedom from the illness that she has been suffering from? Yeah, because if she doesn't, she's not going to have hope. And so this is almost connected to Jordan's better. Okay. Now someone might come around, similar to the ontological argument, and say, well, maybe Jordan, maybe Jordan shouldn't believe this. Maybe this is a false hope. Maybe Jordan, for the rest of his life, is going to have to, I mean, when he talks about what he has to deal with just to function. And Peugeot is right. I mean, for him to have written this book, well, he wrote it, you know, I think he wrote some of it before, a lot of this, but to edit this book. And I just, the book just came out today and I just downloaded it. The book just came out today and I just downloaded the audio book, which I'm going to listen to. And I think about the fact that he recorded this audio book in the midst of all this pain. I'm just dumbfounded by it. I can't even manage to write a book. If you want some insight into that, ask John Verbecky and Christopher Mastropietro. But it very much gets to the question of Christianity because the charges often made that Christians have a false hope and it's sort of like a false hanging onto the ontological argument. But that rings true of just about everything in this world. Those who died under Mao or Stalin or Hitler or Pol Pot or Idi Amin or Papa Doc and Baby Doc or Trujillo or any government you want. In materialist frame, they have no hope. Well, maybe they have hope for a better reputation, but does that really do you any good from the grave? And so Lewis comes and basically says, you know, if there is in fact an ideal. And in a way, Lewis says, I like my ideals to have been instantiated. And I think a good materialist or a good pragmatist would want to embrace something like that. Because we know in this world that all of our all of our all symphonies remain unfinished. As Carl Reiner says. And so this this this this place where Jordan kind of pauses here. Is a is an important one. And you can really argue it from both sides because there's whole ranges of our life that well, if I can't actually. If I can't actually accomplish any of my goals. Well, sure, there might be other goods that come along the way towards the goal. But if you just simply dismiss the goal out of hand. Is it reasonable to pursue? So. Yeah, let's let it go. And then Peugeot is going to get into anastasis. I'm going to play some of Sam's and I don't I tend not to believe things without a why. There's always a why. And yeah, and I there's there's a hurdle there that I that that. Well, that I waver on constantly because I already said that when you think these things through at least my experience has been if you think them through sufficiently, you end up with the choice between impossible alternatives. And so. But it has to do one of the ways to see it maybe is is. It has to do with the recognizing of the goodness of the world or the goodness of creation. That is foundational right there. And we're going to let's let Jonathan play. And then I want to play Sam and John Verbeke's conversation or at least a little bit of it. That that the world is capable of manifesting these patterns. Right. So if you want to understand, for example, the big conflict between the early Gnostics and the Gnostics and the Gnostics, then I think you need to understand that. That's what it was all about. Because the Gnostics basically wanted a disincarnated Christ. They were saying, you know, and they have viewed the world as utterly fallen as having no value, having to be escaped, having to be fled in every way. Whereas Christianity posits that it's a non dual. It's a non dual proposition. It's saying it's it all comes together. That's what it's saying. It all comes together. That's the that's the promise. It all comes together. And so it has to come down. Right. And so it has to come down at every level. And not only does it have to come down into the person of Christ who's incarnated, but that person has to go down, down into death to the very bottom of the world, you know, to the belly of the Leviathan and then come back up. And so the whole world is declared as once again declared as being capable of participating in this good. And so and so you could say, well, maybe maybe it wasn't that one. Maybe it wasn't, you know, it's like, why would it be that particular particular place where it happened? Well, it had to be some place. That's the story. I mean, that's where that's the there is no other story like that story that we have. And so once you recognize that this is part of the declaration that the world does embody these patterns, that it leads to this, it leads to the story of a man who embodied them absolutely and is bringing us in him to also embody them in a way that will transform us. You know, like the ultimate goal of orthodox vision of Christianity is is theosis. It's to become God, to become God through through transformation and participation in God. So that's the final goal of everything is to become participant in the divine. Now, I talked about theosis in the last video, but I do want to go back. I do want to go to Sam's video because Sam made this point to me. And when he said it, it was about Bret Weinstein and his repeated take on evolution. And when he said it, I saw it immediately. I thought, oh, that's genius, Sam. But Sam says a lot better than I do, which is, you know, that's just the way these things work. So Sam has been on my channel. And some of you know Sam because he grew up an evangelical non-trinitarian, which I didn't know any of them existed. But there he was. And, you know, when he kind of came into the realm of my channel and all these Christians who were at least the ones who could who liked me could tolerate atheists and could be very welcome and alluring because, of course, we have our traps for them. And then a lot comes Sam and he denies the Trinity. It's like hackles. But Sam, Sam had a terrific conversation with Brett Sackle about a whole number of issues. And Sam is super smart and he's very articulate and he's got a day job. So we'll just leave it at Sam. But he's been running his own little YouTube channel. And again, some of these YouTube channels that have started since I've done mine of the people around me, Mary and Karen. And I just I feel like I feel like a mama bear. So proud of these channels. I love the randos. I love these guys and these channels. And this is where Sam really lays down the argument to John Vervecky. And and it gets into. You know, I think so. So when Peterson is sort of stuck here, I think part of the reason he's stuck here is sort of this implicit Gnosticism in this very common view of evolution right now. I saw a debate discussion between Richard Dawkins and Brett Weinstein one time back before COVID. They were in Chicago and I'm in Chicago. So I went and saw that. And I think that so one of so if there's so if Christianity and neoplatonism are close siblings, there's a third sibling in the family of Gnosticism. Very much. And I think that is also interconnected with that. And it's sort of the estranged sibling in many ways. But if I could, you know, like Gnosticism would often say that somehow something wrong in the cascade of being happened. Right. Either there was a malevolent god, right. You know, subordinate to the main god or or some god acted in ignorance or, you know, either either badness or ignorance or some combination of those things led to where we are now. Right. Whereas a neoplatonist would say, no, it's it's a cascade of goodness. Right. Maybe there are degrees of goodness, but there's not a bad step somewhere in the process. And Christianity is actually interesting in that it says, well, the creation process was good, but there's badness in the creation now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It tries to split the difference. Yeah. Right. Right. So that's the thing that cascade or that caused us to come into being. It was sort of after that. Right. And so what I think is interesting connecting that idea to Bret Weinstein and a lot of sort of like Sam Harris, I think, will say these sorts of things that that basically evolution is sort of like this malevolent force in in their imagination. That. Ah. I will say evolution is a cosmic spelling bee that ends in genocide or something like that. And that we need to transcend our programming to escape it as if it had. And this, of course, is a point that I keep making when I listen to these guys like, OK, so I'm going to wake up one morning in my Android phone is running IOS. No. has this meta purpose to it that is somehow we can recognize as evil from where we're standing now. And I think that it's strangely Gnostic in that kind of way. I think that's brilliant what you're saying. Brilliant. And it's sort of like he... so we need to transcend our programming. Okay, so like, how are we doing that? The Gnostics at least said we can hopscotch the bad god to get back to the good god, right? Yeah, we were made by a bad god, but perhaps our soul or our mind or something is good and we need to jump back up the ladder to the good rungs and escape the bad rungs. But without anything like that, I don't understand how sort of the kind of pretty strictly materialistic evolution is a malevolent force that has some... there's something in it that desires badness. It desires genocide, it desires death, it desires competition, it desires, you know, conquering of the fittest and that sort of thing. Yeah, and Stanovich does something within cognitive psychology very similar. He talks about the robot's rebellion. He's very influenced by Dennett's idea of means and Dawkins' selfish gene. But what I can say again is biology, you know, cutting edge biology, philosophy of biology, really abandoning those models to a very significant degree. I agree with you and it sort of reminds me of Jung's idea that the default spirituality of human beings is Gnostics because it's a way of... And I had never known that. I don't know anywhere near enough Jung to really Jung. I was called Jung, Jung, Jung, I don't know, to... it's that whole Dutch throat thing. But I found this idea from Verbeke very interesting. Projecting a naturality of human beings is Gnostics because it's a way of projecting a narrative that redeems you from your insignificance and your powerlessness. It gives you a central role. And I try to... I have a very ambivalent attitude towards Gnostics because I think I agree with Pongjotis. The Gnostics are sort of like proto-existentialists. They're talking about how we often find ourselves caught in sort of existential ignorance and existential inertia. We're stuck. That's a common thing people say when they go into therapy. We're stuck and we don't know how to get unstuck. We don't know who we really are. And so we seek Gnosis. We seek the kind of knowing, deeply participating in ourselves that will heal us from our existential inertia, our existential ignorance. So I'm very interested in Gnosis. And I'm interested in the Gnostics because they were creating this mythos that we're trying to give expression to that. And just to interrupt my friend here, it's also interesting because in Christianity, of course, we're looking for participation in Christ. And it is this participation in Christ that actually draws us out of ourself. And it's through Christ that we begin to transcend. And if you want to listen to someone talk about agape, no one... I can't find anything on the internet as good as what John Vervecky did in Awakening from the Meaning Crisis where he sets up agape. And it's via agape that Christ pulls us into him. And I love the way John Vervecky talked about how it's agape that's the agape of the mother, the self-donating love that raises that child into her and into adulthood and into the family. And in many ways, Christ does this to us. And he does it through narrative. He does it through story, the big conversation that Vervecky and Peugeot and I and some others are having in his channel is this whole debate over telos and over narrative. And this conversation he had with Sam was very much a part of that. But I'm also very critical of them because they're sort of like you said, it's a pervasive temptation of human thought that puts us into what Jules Evans calls conspirituality. There's a grand conspiracy, right? And spirituality is response to the grand conspiracy. And so I really appreciate what you just said. I thought that was really beautiful. And first of all, it shows how people like Weinstein and others are deeply, deeply spiritual and even mythopoetic without realizing it. So congratulations on that. I think that's a very well said thing. I'm going to keep that. I've made similar. Yeah, he's going to keep it. I'm going to keep it. A lot of us are going to keep it, that idea that Sam had as a keeper. Okay, so back to Jordan and Jonathan. In the videos where I'm wrestling with this question of history and where I'm dealing with the history of fundamentalism in American culture, and when I think about where the lines really lie between belief and unbelief currently in our culture, and part of why I'm fascinated by Jordan is that she's just, not only has he organized himself right on this line in terms of the culture that has put him right there in Thor's, you know, in Thor's trap, but he's got himself right there on so many of these lines. And so, you know, in just chatting with how many people online, you know, and the Christians, of course, tend to be, you know, why won't Jordan cross the line? And I think, okay, what exactly is that line? And certainly we know the outward manifestations of that line. If Jordan was raised in a United Church of Canada, he might very well have been baptized as an infant. I don't know. But, you know, baptism. And so Jordan starts going to church, and God help his priest or pastor. You have quite a project on your hands. Not the easiest parishioner I would imagine. I shouldn't laugh too hard. But I wrangle a lot of tough characters. Jordan's just smarter than most and argues better than most. So yeah, to be his pastor, not an easy challenge. But yeah, let's keep going. How do you distinguish that from Catholicism? No, I mean, in terms of that, I think that it's a difference of emphasis. I think, for sure, the Orthodox emphasize theosis more than the Catholics. The Catholics are kind of iffy about theosis in terms of, it's there in some of the thinkers, but I would say it's probably not official Catholic doctrine. Now, this has been debated now in my YouTube comment section quite a bit, a debate that no one will win. And I think in some ways, the question, so Jonathan uses theosis here, which is what has been a mainstay, at least from what I've seen in terms of the Orthodox world, it gets into this question of, okay, what exactly do we mean by this word salvation? And I would say most traditions assume definitely some participation in Christ, and it's just Pauline. Okay, well, how are we to talk around that? What are the images? And now, my friend Sam, the non-Trinitarian, I know some people get, they don't have a lot of patience with Sam because he's not a Trinitarian, but I have a lot of patience with Sam and some people say, well, you have a lot of patience with everybody. Well, okay, almost everybody. And you'd seem to like it when I lose my patience with some anyway, which maybe isn't helping me. But part of the reason I like Sam around is he challenges me, not that I'm defecting from my subscription to the Trinity, but he challenges me on, okay, so Jesus is God. What do you mean by that sentence? What do you mean by this word God? And so, it's easy to sort of whip out a word like theosis, and I just talked about how I just whip out a Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. Pastors need these little things, these little cards to play in conversations with people because you just get a moment to, in fact, I also was thinking about this too. So we have these conversations. What are these conversations? Conversations are in the hope of relationship. What are relationships in the hope of? Relationships are in the hope of communion. And so, our relationship with Christ is in the hope of communion, in the hope of participation, in the hope of being able to in the hope of transformation. When Peter sees Jesus walking on the water, it was Peter who says, bid me come, Lord, and Peter gets out of the boat and starts walking on water, but then of course, famously looks at the waves and starts to sink. And Jesus takes him by the hand and says, okay, toddler, you go back in the boat. But this participation, James and John, their mother come to Jesus and say, well, when you're regime, Jesus is supposed to lead a mob and storm the Capitol and take over Jerusalem and kick out the Romans. That's what John's mom is looking for. And she's hoping that James and John get to be, you know, head revolutionaries, lieutenants in Jesus' grand revolt. And so, let them sit at your right and left hand. Jesus looks at him and says, are they able to drink from my cup? Well, what cup is that? And so, this is where in the last video, that really got me thinking about, okay, well, what are we asking for? And what is Jordan asking for? So on one hand, we're asking for, well, participation, bid me, Lord, to come to you and walk on water. I want to walk on water. I want to be able to still the storm. I want to be able to raise the dead. You know, there have been many times when, as a pastor, I sit down with someone and their addiction or their mental illness or the addictions or mental illness of a loved one, a parent or a child, and I want to lay hands on the afflicted and release them from their pain. But that gift has not been given to me, and maybe because I don't have the faith, maybe because I don't have the discipline, maybe because I don't want it bad enough. But this question of participation, and one of the early things I wrote on my blog was a bit about hell. I've just triggered a whole debate right in the Discord section again. If there's participation, then there's not participation. And I want to participate, or how badly do I want it? And so, Jordan, I don't have, I totally understand where he's at. I think many of us do. Do you really want to drink from the cup that Jesus has to drink from? And in some ways, he goes first, and in many ways, he does it instead of us. So what really do we want? But I think without theosis, you're missing the point of the whole thing. The point of the whole thing. You're missing the point of everything. Why do things exist? Why do things exist? And so I think that the idea that they exist to participate fully in their most perfect form, that's what they're called to do. And it ends up being a declaration of the ultimate possibility for goodness in the world. I think- Why? What does Jordan want for his daughter? What does any parent want for their, any good parent want for their child? They want strength, and they want beauty, and they want courage, and they want, you know, all of this virtue, all of this good. And then of course, in this world, we might get inklings and glimpses of it, but then we see the loss and catastrophe. I think that that's, yeah. Well, it seems to me, I've observed, let's say, that it's possible to- It isn't obvious to me that anyone wants to live a meaningless existence. I don't think you can live a meaningless existence without becoming corrupted, because the pain of existence will corrupt you without a saving meaning. And it also seems to- This is again why I say for Jordan, meaning is a sacrament. That you can sell the story that meaning is to be found in responsibility. When I've tried to sell that story to myself, I seem to buy it. And when I've tried to communicate it with other people, it renders them silent, large crowds of people silent. And that's strange because I'm not sure why that is. It's perhaps because the connection between responsibility and meaning had never been made for, in that explicitly somehow. One of the really interesting things is that there's been a lot of people out there talking about meaning and responsibility for a long time. And it's been in the church for a long time. And so it isn't just that, well, you just use those words, meaning and responsibility. Before Jordan came on the scene, it was pretty common parlance in certain corners of the world and certainly in certain churches. Jordan did it in a different way. Because meaning gets contaminated with happiness or something like that, but it's to be found in responsibility. And then you could say, well, there isn't any responsibility that's more compelling than trying to aid things in the manifestation of their divine form. That should be an adventure that could be sold. And I don't know why the church can't do it. But I'm trying to think if I've ever heard a pastor articulate it in the way that Jordan just did there. So I thought about, there were some rumblings around my sermon last Sunday, some people didn't hear me correctly on some things or projected some things onto the sermon and mostly don't get rumblings. And I thought about the fact that I know how to preach safe sermons. And I don't want to for the meaning issue. And even though it's quite clear in this video that Jonathan and Jordan are talking about Christ and Christianity, and Jordan turned a whole generation on to something, it's very difficult to figure out how to do that. And I think that's a very important point. And Jordan turned a whole generation on to something. It's very difficult to figure out exactly, you know, I started my whole channel because I watched Jordan doing something. I thought, okay, bid me Jordan on upon the YouTube waters. And well, he didn't bid me, I went out anyway. But yeah, Jordan's got a point, but it's not just responsibility. There's a lot more going on, a lot more to it. I don't understand that. And because it seems to me that that's something that I've done, at least in part. And also, but he sort of bid people out into the meaning. And when John Vervecki said meaning crisis, it was like, yeah, that's right. Jordan turned a whole generation on to something. And I think that's a very important point. And also, but he sort of bid people out into the meaning. And also, but he sort of bid people out into the meaning. And also, but he said meaning crisis, it was like, yeah, that's right. Jordan should have used those words. But part of the reason I got going here was Jordan didn't have, and I've often used the illustration of the Billy Graham crusade. Before the Billy Graham crusade, he was a crusader. He was a crusader. He was a crusader. He had a lot of things. And Jordan's done a remarkable job as a crusader along these lines. But he didn't build much of anything for the people around them to help people get into small groups. And this is why I started making meetups and working with the people who in my meetup to have the discord server. And this is why I do question and answers on the gather sheep. And I look for sheep dogs who can gather sheep and get them in a fold and help them thrive and multiply and do what sheep need to do. And every now and then you got to wrangle a lion or a bear or something. But that's what pastors do. And so, yeah, you can gather people, but you really need to also figure out how to help them do what people do, which is develop institutions and develop platforms and develop spaces and help those sheep not get parasites and protect them from wolves and bears and lions. And that's all that needs to happen. And I'm not in any way getting defensive for the sake of the church. Like I've said before, I've got my long list of things from the church. And so that's why when I saw Jordan doing this, I thought, okay, churches, let's, you know, Billy, a new, very different Billy Graham has gotten to town and he doesn't have an organization around him. So let's get busy. And that accounts for the strange popularity of the biblical lectures in particular. Yeah. And but I've also, and I do believe that I do believe that that the right striving is to attempt with all your heart to encourage things to develop along that towards that divine goal. Like what else would you possibly do once you think that through? It's like you're always aiming at something that's better or you wouldn't be aiming. You're always moving towards something that's better or you wouldn't be moving. So then why wouldn't you move towards the greatest good? Yeah. Well, it's because it's terrifying, I suppose in part. Again, it's sort of the ontological argument. But then as you know, I've tried to put that into practice in my life and it's tearing me into pieces. Yeah. Well, it's Thor and of course it's tearing you to pieces. Jonathan's about to say. I don't know though, if, if one of the reasons is because you're also alone. And I, you know, because you, I mean, at least to my understanding, you're not in a, in a, in a community. Well, it's hard to say. I mean, it's hard to say. Cause fans aren't a community. Well, they've been a community. I mean, one of the things that has held me together certainly is the commitment that I feel to, to the people who've been so positive towards me and my family. I do feel that as a community, I understand what you mean. Why the hell not go to church? You know, I know. Wasn't going to come right out and say it, Jordan. It's not just going to church. And so again, I've done a lot of thinking too about institutionally about this and my videos on the civil rights movement, sort of there was a, there's an institutional pivot that happened and there's been a lot of these institutional pivots. I mean, Netflix and the movie industry and radio. I mean, a lot of this has, has moved sort of church functions out and the government has in some ways replaced whole sections of the church sort of reversing what happens with the decline of, of the Roman empire. And so there's, there's a lot going here. And so even, even this phrase, okay, going to church, well, what do you mean? And Jonathan's going to spell it out a little bit. I know you're not that blunt about it. But it's not just that, you know, it's, it's not just about going to church. I, one time I, I told you something and, and I don't know if I could drive, if I was able to drive it through there, there's something about being in a hierarchy that is that, because there's an aspect of being in a hierarchy that you talk about, which is this kind of striving to, to kind of be the best within that hierarchy, but there's an aspect of being in a hierarchy, which is that the hierarchy covers you. Oh, definitely. There's no doubt about that. Yeah. And so there's something about submitting. That's why the lowest lem, the lowest status members of a chimp group will still fight off interlopers. Yeah. And so there's, there's a value in being in a community and a, and a hierarchy where you, like, I go to confession, right? I go to confession, I go to my priest and I confess my sins. And, and I give that to him. He actually takes responsibility for, for an aspect of listening to my sins and, and kind of participating in my salvation. And he, and so the weight ends up being distributed across the community. It's not, so you don't actually just bear it on your, on yourself. And it's not just even that, and it's not just the living community. It's a, it's not just those that are alive in the, in the hierarchy, but those that are, that have left their story. All the saints are part of this hierarchy that you engage in, that you participate in, and that you see as consolation, as examples, as, you know, as examples of people who have lived through difficult things that you can kind of, that you can shoulder up against, you know? And so. I can't listen to this discussion and not think of chapter two in CS Lewis's screw tape letters. My dear Wormwood, I note with grave displeasure that your patient has become a Christian. Do not indulge the hope that you will escape the usual penalties. Indeed, in your best moments, I trust you would hardly ever wish to do so. In the meantime, we must make the best of the situation. There is no need to despair. Hundreds of these adult converts have been reclaimed after a brief sojourn in the enemy's camp and are now with us. All the habits of the patient, both, all the habits of the patient, both mental and bodily, are still in our favor. One of our great allies at present is the church itself. Do not misunderstand me. I do not, I do not mean the church as we see her, spread out through all time and space and rooted in eternable, in eternity, terrible as an army with banners. That, I confess, is a spectacle which makes our boldest tempters uneasy. And that, of course, is what Peugeot was talking about. But fortunately, it is quite invisible to these humans. All your patient sees is the half-finished sham gothic erection on the new building estate. When he goes, he sees the local grocer with a rather oily expression on his face, bustling up to offer him one shiny little book containing a liturgy which neither of them understands. And one shabby little book contains corrupt texts of a number of religious lyrics, mostly bad and in very small print. When he gets to his pew and looks around, he sees just that selection of his neighbors whom he has hitherto avoided. You want to lean pretty heavily on those neighbors. Make his mind flit to and from between an expression like the body of Christ and the actual faces in the next pew. It matters very little, of course, what kind of people that next pew really contains. You may know one of them to be a great warrior in the enemy's side. No matter. Your patient, thanks to our father below, is a fool, provided that any of these neighbors sing out of tune or have boots that squeak or double chins or odd clothing. The patient will quite easily believe that their religion must therefore be somehow ridiculous. At his present stage, you see, he has an idea of Christians in his mind, which he supposes to be spiritual, but which, in fact, is largely pictorial. His mind is full of togas and sandals and armor and bare legs, and the mere fact that the other people in church wear modern clothes is a real, though of course unconscious, difficulty to him. Never let it come to the surface. Never let him ask what he expects them to look like. Keep everything hazy in his mind now, and you will have all eternity wherein to amuse yourself by producing in him the peculiar kind of clarity which hell affords. I love that image of Louis, an army terrible, a terrible army with banners, an army terrible with banners, exactly how he did it, but that's what Peugeot was bringing out. That's one of the reasons why I kind of insist with, at least for the people that watch my videos, is when I say go to church, it's not just because I'm trying to moralize you into doing something, it's because it's actually a participation in how the best vision of reality works. I've got no objection to any of that. I'm probably one of the only people in the world that has actually seen you in church and seen you squirm and squirm in church. Why? I do think, okay, what kind of church would be helpful to Jordan? Oh gosh, oh gosh. Pray for whatever pastor or priest has to wrangle Jordan. See, the other thing, I was reading, again, I was reading this book and it's mostly a jumping off place for me to think. It's like, there's also something, because I'm not inside the church, so to speak, it's hard to say what the utility of that is. The utility of being inside the church. Being outside it. Because I'm an outsider talking about religious matters. I know why, at least for me, why I have fantasies about being outside the church sometimes, because then I get to do what I want. Then I get to... See, so if the idea is that we project up onto the sky our idea of God, which of course isn't a dumb idea, except Louis of course comes back and says, well, if that was all there is, what kind of a God would we be looking at? And in fact, you can find many people who are like that, certainly not a God who judges you at all or makes requests of you or demands of you. That's not the God Jordan Peterson is fearing, of course, but outside the church, outside of subscription to the dogmas of the faith, all the dogmas, I get to be God. And on one hand, I think, oh, what a delightful prospect, but I'm a poor God. Anybody who would have me as a God, I would be a poor God. I'm a, you know, anybody who would have me as a God is a fool. And so if I would have me as a God, I'm a fool. And anyone who finally comes to terms with their own limitations, their own fallibility, that their own propensity for continuously missing the mark should be looking for a better God. And if in fact that God somehow revealed himself in this world, and if in fact that God somehow is associated with a group of people or a tradition or a book or an institution or any of that, one who is not a fool should bind himself to that people and that book and that tradition and that organization, even though it be not that vision of the army as Wormwood and Screwtape see it, but the vision that we see today because, yeah, it's easy for me to look down on. I remember the things that you remember, I was sitting with my father. This was before I was a preacher, but I was in seminary or something, and I was sitting with my father and we were talking about something. I think we were in a church or something, visiting a church, and I had made a rather immature comment about, well, if I had a church, it would be successful. My father just looks at me like, oh, really? Because my father, like me, was dramatically unsuccessful for his career. He pastored a little church in Patterson, bingo, our drinking game. Pastored that little church in Patterson that never grew very big and then another church in Baldwin'sville, New York, never grew very big. So, in this world of market-driven churches, nothing makes you the ugly preacher like a small church. I think that it has played a great role. I've often said that you're something like King Cyrus. If you know the story of King Cyrus, in scripture, King Cyrus was a Persian king who told the Jews to go back to Israel and build their temple. So, he wasn't Jewish, he wasn't an Israelite, he wasn't believing in the God of the Israelites, but he was like, hey, that temple of yours looks pretty nice. Why don't you just go back there and rebuild your own thing? I love how he said that. That temple of yours looks pretty nice. You mean the one in ruins? So, that's definitely an effect that I've seen you have. The number of people that have become Christian. No, it's the unauthorized exorcist. Jonathan's illustration is very interesting though. Because of you is hilarious. Sorry, it's not hilarious, but it's just kind of this strange thing because you kind of stand outside and you're looking at the door and you're looking at the church and you're saying, hey, this isn't not so bad. Look at this. What is going on here? What is this about? And then because of that- No, it's also, do you think you've got something better? I was talking to a friend of mine the other day when we were walking, because as I said, I walk about 10 miles a day right now, trying to keep myself under control. And, you know, he was raised a communist in Poland and then an atheist. And he was complaining, I think this is what he told me, that he was complaining to his parents at one point about a religious wedding that they were going to despite not believing. And he said, as he got older, he realized he had nothing to replace that with. It's like, okay, throw it out. Fine. Okay. Now where are you? Well, you're just as bad off as you were before, but you also don't have that beautiful thing. It's like, what would happen if we dispensed with Christmas? Well, it's logical. It's a good thing to ask Sam Harris and the new atheist. It's like, let's get rid of Christmas. Or we could say we could make it entirely secular, but then it would just disappear. But you know, that's not what's going to happen, because religion is inevitable. And we're seeing it coming back in very strange ways. It's going to be a weird, woke, identitarian religion, which is going to come back. That's why- And primitive, you know, part of it's going to be- Tribalist. ... doesn't matter. I don't think wokeness wins. I don't think it's reached its apex yet, but I don't think it wins. It's parasitic. I don't think it wins. Just like it never fully wins, but that doesn't mean it won't be a bumpy, if not bloody ride. ... doesn't matter. Can you believe that? Yeah. So it's a scary thing. You could say that that's one of the failures of the new atheists is that they partly led to the new woke phenomenon, because they didn't realize that you can't get rid of religion. You can't get rid of rituals. You can't get rid of the problems and opportunities of identity. All of these things are going to come back. If you try to brush them aside, then they're going to come back in very weird ways. And without you realizing what's going on, you'll have people kneeling to a shrine of a man who was killed by police and putting a halo on his head and, you know, and self-mortifying themselves and doing all kinds of insane things that look to you insane, but that you need to understand it's just this religious impulse gone off the rails. Yes. And then the question is, what's the right place for it? That's right. You know, I've thought in my, I suppose it's a form of comedy that Catholicism is as sane as people get, you know, it's Baroque, right? And it's Gothic, not Baroque. It's Gothic. It's dark. It has the same aesthetic in some sense as a horror film. And I'm not saying something denigrating by that. I mean, it's- And what he's saying is really actually quite important. Part of it's strange mystery. And all that strangeness is necessary because people would be much more insane without it than they are with it. It's a container for that religious impulse. And that impulse is to the good. Yeah. And the image of the crucified Christ and also the act of communion gathers in all the extremes together, right? If you think of the symbolism of communion, you'll notice that it gathers in every extreme from the highest to the most transgressive. All of it comes together. It's worth unpacking that. It's ritual cannibalism in the service of God. You know, part of what, when I listen to Jordan get on this and Jonathan, you know, why am I a Protestant? I can't help it. The, these church traditions develop and amazingly are potent even as they, you know, the conversation I had with Kale, Zeldin, and Brett Sockold about Vatican II. You know, as a Protestant, I think long and hard about, okay, Lord, what church, what church do you need next? Now, that's a very Protestant thing because in a sense, the Orthodox, Nathan Jacobs, we don't need a next church. We already have one. Just go back to the one you have and the Roman Catholics. But Jordan, quite rightly, okay, but the Roman, the Roman church, that's the Latin church. That's the, that's the Gothic church. And of course, the Protestants and all of, you know, my conversation with Jonathan Peugeot, when I saw the, when I saw the aerial acrobats, I checked out. So, so I, you know, as a pastor, so this institution of the church is, is, is where my mind wanders and I say, okay, Lord, what, what do you need from your church now? What do you need from your church now? You know, a church that can, can unfold and, and help Jordan and those who have responded to his call. And, and I don't know, I don't know. And it, you know, clearly many have gone Orthodox. Will they stay there? How will they change the Orthodox church? I, I don't know those questions, but I do know, I do know they need, they need something. Yeah. But it's also, it's also seen as a, as a normal like meal of communion, and it's also seen as a, a, a sexual union, because there's a relationship, there's a notion in which then in the altar and in that moment of communion, there's this joining of heaven and earth, you know, they raise up the chalice and there's this joining, which is a, a, a, a, a, a, a they raise up the chalice and there's this joining, which is, which is this image of this, the sexual union between God and the soul, between God and his church. And so all of it, it just jammed into this, into, into this ritual as a, as a kind of center of reality, we'd call it. And so, like you said, if you get rid of that, then you're going to have all kinds of strange, factitious versions of it that are going to pop up and are going to try to replace it. And it's leading to the fragmentation of our world and to the breakdown of the West for sure. So back to this idea of the, the, the, the mythological level and the historical level conjoining, and I thought of that as convenient, you know, it's that, that's a stumbling point for me in relationship to the Christian story. It's, you say, it has to be like this if the world is constituted in a good manner and it's the has to be, I mean, is that so, let me say this one thing, because I've been struggling towards it this whole, it's an act of faith. And so let's say that your faith is that you decide to make the notion that reality is good, the cornerstone of your faith. It's something that you, that you what, that you believe or is it something that you courageously assume? And is there a difference between that belief? And if you courageously assume, I was, that was the words that I wanted to courageously assume. I think that's a, there's a, that's a really good idea. Okay. What is faith? It's a courageous assumption upon which you act. You courageously assume. And is there a difference between that belief? And if you courageously assume that the world is good, that reality is good, then the touching of the narrative and the objective in this manner that's demonstrated by Christ, that becomes necessary. Is that the idea? So I, to me, it's funny. I don't see it as an act of faith in the way that we think of an act of faith, like this jump of faith or whatever. I see it as an act of trust, faith as trust, you would say. That's fine. That would be a courageous assumption if it's trust. And, and it's trust in the sense also of, so when we talk about the good, we always have to be careful not to just limit it to the good, to the moral good. There, there is the moral good, but when we talk about the good, we're talking about the good in a, in a much larger way. And the good is the, the, is the pattern of, of the things, right? And, and the sense that the, the fact that the world- Tolkien's elves, the magic of the elves is the magic of the elves in Tolkien, unlike the magic of Sauron or of Morgoth. I've been watching Nerd of the Rings lately. What a great channel. What a great channel. I love it. The power of the elves is that their rope is more ropey. It's stronger. The knots hold and un, and loosen. That the clothes, that the bread nourishes better. The, the capes and the garments protect better and conceal better. Everything does its, everything, everything pursues its telos better. That's the magic of the elves, that the magic of, of Morgoth and the magic of Sauron is a twisting away from the better, away from, from what it's made for into service of a rebellious will. Lays its, right? And, and, and this is the pattern of, of the things, right? And, and, and the sense that the, the fact that the world lays itself out as ordered, as patterned, inevitably, that there is no way around it. You cannot avoid the order of the world because, because the, in order for you to even perceive anything, it has to have an identity. It has to have a hierarchy, has to have a margin, has to have all these things. It's all there in every aspect. Every active perception. Exactly. And so in every act of perception. And so it's that- Every active perception presumes a value hierarchy. Exactly. You can't avoid it. And so it's not, so it's not like an act of faith in the sense that I, I, I, you know, I at the outset think the world is nihilistic and, and, and, and chaotic. It's like, no, I don't. I think that on the contrary, I think that you could say it in a religious way that the love of God holds the world together and it's inevitable that things are held together by these, by these, these patterns of being that are always aiming towards the good, even in the very identity of whatever it is that you're, you're encountering. Let me ask you something personal then. I mean, you, you weren't born an Orthodox Christian. This is something you came to. How? Well, I think that it has something to do with what you said before. It does have something to do with the sense that Christianity had fallen away from its original story and its original, all encompassing, let's say cosmic narrative. And so it was really, I would say in searching for that and kind of discovering symbolic thinking on other fronts and feeling like I was confronted by this, like, okay, so I can see these patterns. I can see the world through these, through this coherence. And it's like, why is it then that, that Christianity doesn't have this? And then, then after more looking and more searching, I realized that it did, that not only it did, but that some of the earliest more, some of the most, you know, powerful early saints talked about the world exactly this way, you know? And, and so when I discovered that, then I looked around and I saw, for example, that iconography, that the relationship between icons and architecture and liturgy, and, and all of this was like this amazing giant pattern, which was reinforcing, manifesting, making you participate in the way the world actually existed. Now, now it's interesting because in that way, Peugeot and Peterson are sort of pairs, but it's helpful to remember that Peugeot is the son of a deeply committed Christian. And so Jonathan is not a rebellious sort. And Jonathan's brother is not rebellious. And so Jonathan and his brother went after and, and discovered, you know, they had, they had their own map of meaning, but in a, in a different way. Where's, where's, where's, where's the Peugeot book? It's here somewhere. Oh, here it is. So, so Jordan went maps of meaning and the Peugeot brothers went symbolism of creation or the language of creation. And of course, this gets into the, the Marsden book, American Fundamentalism and American Culture. This gets into the trajectories of these and, you know, Peugeot had talked about the fact that for all of the, the failures of all the reasons he left his evangelical upbringing, some of the things that benefited him were of course, that, that delivered the Bible to him. So the Bible stories got inside of him and that helped him with the orientation. And so it's interesting where he and Jordan sort of come together, but Jordan's United Church of Canada mainline upbringing didn't hold him. And, and, and Jonathan's did. And Jonathan managed to find yet within the Christian tent that which he was looking for. And, and so in that way, it's a little easier on Jonathan than, than it is on Jordan. I mentioned in my last video, and some of you, so I know some of you out there have roots in the same tradition I have, you know, the, the Frisian mothers. So the, my one friend who he's passed away now, who came to this church and it was an AA for 25 years. Part of the reason he came to the Christian Reformed Church is he went in there and he said, those children are so well behaved in church. They sit still, they don't go out and leave for the sermon. They sit and listen to the whole sermon. He says, yeah, cause we're in, we're in fear of death from our Frisian mothers. But the, the, you know, the fundamentalist church for all of its shortcomings held people at least and, and continued to maintain a degree of discipline that, that afforded them, not all, of course, cause you know, we've had John Verbeke in this video and he's been more and more free to tell his story and he tells it in a very respectful way. And maybe at some point John and I should talk about the unforgivable sin and how that has played, cause it's a very common, it's a very common thing. And, and for many people that I meet, what I, what I wish they had had were better pastors. So it's very interesting how, how Jonathan found this, but he didn't have to go too far. So it was like this kind of self, you know, this, this, this, this positive feedback loop, I guess you could say it in a good way, where it's like you, you, you, you recognize these patterns, you engage in them, you see them, you, you sing them. It's like this whole thing where you're engaged. And so I realized that it was really in the Orthodox church that this was the most, that had been the most preserved and the most alive. And that I would hear, you know, contemporary Orthodox speakers or thinkers or philologians who talked about the world exactly in that way. And so I thought, okay, so this is the place. And also because they kept the idea of theosis as the ultimate goal. Because I think that that's, you know, very, very early St. Irenaeus, which is, you know, like early third century said the Logos became man so that man would become God. That's one of the earth, some of the earliest saints said that, you know, and so it's like, that's really what Christianity is. And so that's what, that's what ultimately led me to, to, to, well, it is the greatest of all possible visions. Yeah. Yeah. And so, but I think, again, sort of the ontological argument again, there, that, you know, I think that it's their latent, even in, in, in other forms of Christianity. And I, one of the things that I've been trying to do is help people kind of wake up to that reality and try to see it wherever they are. And how's that going for you? No, no, I'm damn really serious. I haven't talked to you for a long time. I mean, you've got this, I mean, you've had a strange few years as well. I've had a strange few years as well. It's all your fault, by the way. Yeah. It certainly feels like a lot of us have Jordan to blame. It feels that way. And to credit. But it's a, it's a good, it's a good, in that sense. I mean, I've, I've been surprised in the past four years since I met you and you kind of put me on out there in the world, you know, now I have like 90,000 people following me on YouTube and there's a community of, I would say symbolic thinkers. I'm giving them a place to, to, to write like on my website, I'm putting up a blog. There's communities that kind of get together and talk about, about this, trying to reinvigorate it in their own communities, whether that wherever it is they come from. And so I've been just nonstop excited about, I mean, in a way sad to see that I think the breakdown of Christianity is, is going to continue. Like I'm not, I don't have short-term hope for, let's say the situation, but I do believe that there are, that there are seeds which are kind of being planted and there are people who are getting ready and, and, and will bear fruit. So, so it's been just, it's been amazing, I have to say. And thanks for that, by the way. I hope, I guess you're welcome to the degree that I had something to do with it. Yeah. You know, used by God. I, I, I get, I know some Christians kind of curl and recoil, but I, can't get away from it. Did you want, I know one on Twitter you, you asked about the Virgin birth. I don't know if you want it, if you still have juice, if you still have energy to talk about that or if, or if, or. Sure. Why not? Well, the, the, the, the, one of the things that is important, I would say in Christianity, is understanding that the, the role that Mary has to play, let's say in the same, in the same, in the same way that we talk about how the reality of Christ. I thought about skipping the Virgin Mary stuff, not for any reason that should excite Protestant Catholic Orthodox debates on her, because actually I learned a tremendous amount from this answer, but I don't know. I, I'm running out of time, but oh, sure. Why not? Well, the, the, the, the, one of the things that is important, I would say in Christianity, is understanding that the, the role that Mary has to play, let's say in the same, in the same, in the same way that we talk about how the reality of Christ came, let's say, had to manifest itself in the world for us to understand that the possibility of this thing, the possibility of how everything comes together, right? In the same way, so in, for example, in the Old Testament, you have Theophanies, you have places where God and humanity meet. So on the mountain of Moses, in the temple, in the garden of Eden as well. So you have these, they're usually at the top of a mountain, or they're at the end of a temple. Okay, so it's still a mountain in that sense. So that's a place where two worlds meet. That's the narrative world and the objective world, really. Exactly. So the, the, the invisible world and the visible world, the world of, of, of logos, the world of pattern, and then the world of possibility, right? They come together. And then that's when the coming together, that point is where you see something. So it's like that for, for everything. That's where miracles occur. Yeah. But that's it. Yeah. Miracles are like super events. Like they, they, they show us the pattern of reality in a more, in a, in a more concise way, but everything is like that, right? So even a chair is a bunch of possibilities, right? That encounters an idea, can encounter the purpose and logos. And then, then you have a chair. You can't have just a bunch of stuff or else you don't have a chair. You need that to meet. So at the center of every thing, of everything that exists, there's a little temple, a mini temple, and there's a little incarnation, right? A little, like a mini one. It's not, I'm not, I don't want to, don't want to seem heretical or anything, but there's this little like mini thing that happens. And so that aspect has a, has a, a lower part, which is the, the nexus of possibilities, the coming together possibilities, and then this thing that, this logos, which comes down. So this nexus of possibilities, you could call it a mountain, a house, temple, a body. That's Mary, right? That's, that's her, that she's the place of manifestation. So she's the arc of the covenant. She's the temple. She's the mountain. She's all of that. And so, and then, and then we play that role. You could say the church, the body of Christ, we play that role. We come together in love. And then the divine logos descends and manifests to unite the body, right? Together and to reveal himself in that unity of the body. So we see Christ in the unity of love. So Christ says, they will know you by how you love each other, because that's how you know that a body exists, is that it's coherent. It holds together as a body. And so this body has to be dedicated, it has to be dedicated to the thing which it's manifesting. So like, let's say, let's say you have a turkey, you know, a car, and two bits of grass, and you think, I'm going to make a chair out of that. Well, it's not going to happen. Right? It's not going to happen. Are we going to think you were going to go that route? But that's what this is it. This is what it's about. It's not going to happen because that's not dedicated. And so in the same way of a woman and her husband, so a woman has to be dedicated to her husband for the union to be recognized and fruitful. So if a woman is not faithful to her husband, then there's confusion on the identity of the child. But if a woman is dedicated to her husband, which means that she's actually a virgin to all other identities. She's virginal to all other identities, and she's dedicated only to the one thing. So this idea of virginity is super important because it's about dedication. It's about not being mixed or not. That's known uncontamination, uncontamination. And so then you can understand that in order for something to manifest the entirety of the whole pattern, right? So it's like, so for someone to be the place of manifestation for the whole thing. Well, that is what a mother does. Like, right. What a mother does because she dedicates herself to a greater or lesser degree to bringing someone perfect into being. And the more she loves, the more she dedicates herself to that in every possible way. You can connect that to Verveckis. I should just play that for you because it's really outstanding. And I'm going to play it from, I started a little clips channel called Advander Clips and I've sort of abandoned it, but I want to get back to it. And I put some stuff on from some of my own stuff and a little bit from Jordan and this one from John Verveckis, because I thought it was outstanding. Its capacity for producing Kairos through Logos has been identified. Now Kairos is important because that's one. So you've got Kronos, which is time this way and Kairos, which is time this way. And it sort of connects with what Jonathan is saying about dedication and the connecting here. Use an older term, incarnated in a particular individual. That Jesus of Nazareth is actually the ultimate Kairos, that all the other Kairos's were pointing to him and are summed up in him. That he represents the ultimate turning point. And he represents it not only historically, he represents it personally. Because he is a person, you can identify with him and that Kairos can come to take place in you personally. Just like Socrates personalizes the Axio revolution and brings it into a direct personal confrontation. The encounter with Jesus means that you too can experience a profoundly personal Kairos, which Jesus seems to have spoken about using a metaphor of being born again. About such a radical metanoia, a radical shifting. This is often translated as conversion, until you read about that. But this word is much closer to awakening. Noia means noticing. This is your perspectival awareness. And meta means beyond. This means a radical transformation in your salience landscape. A radical transformation of what it's like to be you. It's this deeply perspectival and participatory transformation. And Jesus is saying he incarnates the principle by which you can intervene in your own personal history. Or by which maybe you want to say intervention can occur in your own personal history. Such that this metanoia, you will have a new mind, a new heart, a new modal existence. You will be born again. What? What's going on there? What was, what does this Kairos look like? What could possibly so radically transform my salience landscape, my sense of self, my processes of co-identification? What could bring that about? And now I'm going to say the word and then you're going to laugh because it sounds like a hallmark card. The Christian answer is love and now we all titter. That's so quaint. Love. Sounds like oh love. Okay, the problem with that, as you've seen many times, is that this word is trivialized for us. We use one word to talk about so many different things. Like I love peanut butter cookies. I love Canada. I love Sara. I love my son. I love a really good, right, game of tennis. Are those the same? We're even confused about this. We think that love is an emotion. No, it's not. Love is a modal way of being. Love isn't a feeling and it is not an emotion. How do I know this? Because loving someone can be expressed by being sad when they're absent, being happy when they're present, being jealous when there's somebody else around, being angry when they're neglecting you. Love isn't a feeling. It isn't an emotion. It is a modal way of being. It is an agent arena relationship. And what Jesus seemed to be incarnating as a kairos to change the history of the world and to offer you to change your own personal history is a different kind of love. This is agape. We have to distinguish between three kinds of love, eros, phylia, and agape. See, eros is the love that seeks to be one with something and that can be spiritual, like being one with nature, or it can be being one with a cookie by eating it. Of course, we come to think of eros erotically, right, being one with somebody by having sex with them. But remember, Socrates knew ta erotica, which wasn't just sex. Socrates knew what to care about. This is phylia. So this is the love that is satisfied through consummation. Phylia, this is the love that seeks cooperation. This is the love in which we experience reciprocity. We love the cookie because we can consume it. We love our friends because we are in reciprocity with them. What kind of love is this? And this is what Jesus claimed was how God loved individuals. This is the love that a parent has for a child. This is not the love of consummation. You're not trying to consume the child. That's evil. And it's not friendship. You're not, like, when you bring a child home from the hospital, and I've done this twice, right, that's not your friend. It's not even a person. You can't, it's like, it's basically a slug. But here's the astonishing thing. You love it, not because of any way you can consume it or be one with it. Eww. Eww. You don't love it because, hey, you know, great friendship. You love it, right? You love it because by loving it, you turn a non-person into a person. It's the closest thing to a miracle, and that sounds hackney, I know, but stop that and think about this. You depend on agape. It's because people loved you before you were a person that you have become the person you are. Love turns non-person animals into moral agent persons. It's like, like, it's like somehow if I could just care about, right, my sofa enough, it would turn into a Ferrari or something. It's that powerful. And here's what Jesus was offering. That love is, can be made, it can be accepted and made available for all. Here's what is on offer. Here's why Christianity will take the Roman Empire culturally. With agape, Christianity can say to all of the non-persons of the Roman Empire, all the women, all the children, all the non-male citizens, all the sick, all the poor, all the widowed, can take all of those non-persons and say, we will turn you into persons. Persons that belong to the kingdom of God. We'll take another look at this in more detail next time. Thank you very much. Love that clip. So now the Virgin Mary is the extreme cosmic version of that where she has to be perpetual virgin. She is a cosmic virgin. She is perpetually virginal because she's like, you can imagine, like in order for the sun to... And I have to, you know, I have to confess that when Jonathan laid this out, it's like, oh, that's what they were talking about with respect to the Catholic Church. Oh, well, I can understand that. Now, someone left a comment in my comment section how Jonathan denies the, as we would say in modernity, the historicity or perhaps the physicality of the virgin birth. This happens with Jonathan all the time. And the more I'm learning from Jonathan, the more it's happening to me. And but unless you know Jonathan, no, he's not because earlier he was just emphasizing the physicality that there's potential in that. And yet this has to happen. And that's what we began talking this particular segment of the commentary about. And so you don't catch Jonathan being skeptical about the virgin birth for materialist reasons at all. To reflect upon the waters. You know, and all those men who don't believe that sort of thing should take careful stock of the fact that they're frequently terrified out of their skull whenever they encounter someone they're attracted to. They project that or see it instantly and it demolishes them. And then if they're rejected, they're crushed. And you can think of that as a projection, but you can also think of it as seeing more deeply what's there and that you only see that when you're actually attracted to someone. And then that attraction has a basis because you're seeing what they could be, even if you're not seeing what's there. And so that's why the necessity of virgin birth. Because she is revealing the highest, right? She's like a still ocean on which the sun is reflecting. And if it was mitigated, then it would only reflect a mitigated manner. And then everything in between is mitigated. Like I said, it's like a woman who's faithful to her husband obviously is not a virgin in a technical sense. You could say she's a virginal to others. She's untouched by others. She's a virginal to others. She's untouched by others, but she's dedicated to the one man. Just like... Well, and you know, the degree to which that's entangled with genuine virginity off also isn't the case, also isn't so obvious. You know, it isn't, we don't know what the preconditions are for setting up the ideal relationship. And it's certainly the case that we bring the baggage of our previous relationships into our current relationship. And maybe sometimes that's for the better and maybe the virginity can be symbolic, but... People can certainly be sullied by their past behavior and sometimes in a way that they can't figure out how to repair. Yeah. Well, for sure, the Christian ideal has always been the union of virgins in the sense that then the dedication ends up being tighter. And so you are dedicated to your husband and your husband is dedicated to you and then you're unmitigated, mentally even, right? Like in terms of memories and in terms of comparing and in terms of all of these things which we do as human beings. And so it can prevent slippage in terms of your dedication. Yeah. So I don't know if that makes sense in terms of... Yes, well, I mean, you know, these things, grasping these things slips out in and out of my capacity. And I mean, you did a lovely job there of making a symbolic account for the virginity of Mary. I understand that. I understand. Well, but no one's going to prove the virginity of Mary historically. I mean, that's something which is not that obviously is not possible. It's a secret. There's a secret aspect to virginity, which is actually part of its function. And it's also part of its... How can I say this? It's part of its mystery, right? Which is something which is not public. It belongs to the identity. It belongs to the... It's like the dedication of something belongs to that which is dedicated. We can talk about this to some degree. I mean, I... Imagine that you wanted to form the perfect union with someone. Let's say it's the perfect sexual union for that matter. I think that requires love. I... Whenever I've had in my life a sexual experience that wasn't associated with love, I didn't feel right about it. My conscience bothered me very much, very rapidly. And maybe that makes me an outlier, although I don't think so. I think that that is how people react, but they refuse to notice. Well, and I think here... So you had Verveki's Eros. I mean, that drives it to us. But what Peterson is saying is that it should be all of the love should come together, should be Eros, Filia, and Agape. And that will be the highest love. And without that, you have missed the mark. And for Peterson, of course, that's the conscience. Now, I might be wrong about that. Maybe I'm a prude. It's possible, although I don't think so. But it's possible. But it always struck me that sex was best undertaken within the confines of a committed... Of an ultimately committed relationship. Otherwise, it was lesser. It was the lesser... It was less than it should be. It was sullied. Hmm. And... Now, well, I don't have anything more to say about that than that that's been my experience. And so... And I don't know what the preconditions are for establishing the perfect marriage, let's say. And the perfect marriage would be one that brought about the best possible children. These are not trivial things. They're very difficult things to get right. Yeah. Yeah, go for it. Go for it. Interesting how we keep looping back in this conversation. It's, oh, we're going to go back here. Now, we're going to go back here. Now, back to theosis. And Jordan's sort of, you know, feeling his way through this thing. It's lack of... I'm tormented by the possibility that it's lack of courage that stops people from... From bringing into being that union with God. Yes. You think that possibility, that possibility sits there in front of all of us, and it was actually realized once in history. I think this gets back to the reason for it being physically actualized being physically actualized is in fact... And then the story being given to us is in fact, to give us courage. But it's, you know, it's again, I brought in the last video this image of, we have this presumption, this karmic presumption that if we do everything right then, and then I'll finish that sentence for yourself, then I'll have lots of money, then I'll have lots of power, then I'll have lots of pleasure. You know, you almost hit the book of Ecclesiastes and the story of Christ says, if you are sinless, this is how the world will treat you. And so you might say, well, then what is the value of being sinless? And that's where, that's really where Philippians 2 comes in. Therefore, if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, and again, I think that this union with Christ is part of this theosis that Peugeot is talking about. If any comfort from his love, if any sharing in the spirit, if any tenderness and compassion, then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and of one mind, doing nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, rather in humility value others above yourselves. So in other words, it's this, this, this perfection is, is ultimate humility, and it's agapic, it's valuing others when, when the mother agapes the child into, into humanity with her, when God agapes through Christ agapes us into union with him, this is the path, okay? Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, rather in humidity, humidity, humility, value others above yourself, not looking to your own interest, but each of you to the interests of others. In your relationships with one another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who being very nature God did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage, but rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness, being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. Read Tom Holland, read the, read the introduction to dominion. Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth, that's the going all the way down that Jonathan Pichot was talking about, and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. That's the story. Well it, I would say that at least in the, in the tradition of the church, it was perfectly manifested in Christ, but there are, there are other saints that have reached theosis, and that, that's what we're all called to, that we're all called to, to become one with God to the extent that that's, that that's possible. Well then I guess we're stuck with the old problem, which is if that's the case then why does the world seem so unredeemed? Yeah. That is the hard question, but we are not left with that question without hope, and the, and the reason we have hope, and again this is Christianity 101, the reason we have hope is because we have someone who went ahead of us. Hebrews 4, Therefore since we have a great high priest who has ascended into heaven, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold firmly to the faith he we profess, for we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way since as we are, yet he did not sin, just as we are yet he did not sin. Let us then approach God's throne of grace with confidence so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need. Every high priest is selected from among the people and is appointed to represent the people in matters related to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sin. He is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and are going astray since he himself is subject to weakness. This is why he has to offer sacrifices for his own sins as well as for the sins of the people. And no one takes this honor on himself, but he receives it when called by God, just as Aaron was. In the same way Christ did not take on himself the glory of becoming a high priest, but God said to him, you are my son, today I have become your father. One of the most oft-quoted psalms in the New Testament. And he says in another place, you are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek. During the days of Jesus' life he offered prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to one who would save him from death. And he was heard because of his reverent submission. Son, though he was, he learned obedience from what he suffered. And once made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him and was dedicated by God to be high priest in the order of Melchizedek. Well, because we're distracted, you know, with reason, where we tend to attend to the lower things, you know, we get distracted by our emotions, we get distracted by all these things around us that are trying to get our attention. And then we aim towards these smaller things. You know, we aim towards whatever it is, right? We aim towards making money, we aim towards getting this or having some prestige. And these, because the problem is that these things all give us a small sense of satisfaction. And so they're like little idols, I guess you could call them. And so we just aim towards these lower things. And and that's one of the reasons why we struggle to see this higher ideal, you know. And so that's one of the reasons why I guess what's one of the reasons for church as well is that, you know, it's kind of forces you even if you're distracted or whatever to come together at least once a week or whatever, stand together and sing together. Yes, well, and to constant, I know, I understand that. Yeah. No, you know, I remember cynicism that was sort of in the air, I suppose, when the Christianity of my youth started to decompose, when people started to not attend church in droves, the cynical justification in part was, well, those are one hour a week Christians, how hypocritical can you get to claim allegiance to this high ideal and then to go back and live your tawdry life? How could anyone participate in anything like that? And what we've replaced it with is never doing it even for an hour a week, which is actually quite a lot of time compared to none. Yeah. So the replacement has not been an improvement by any stretch of the imagination. Yeah. And so and then we replace it because we need to come together and we need to commune and we need to celebrate. And so we end up doing it in these kind of secondary places like sports or politics and all these other places, you know, we'll replace that. But ultimately, like I said, one of the things that help us to trust, let's say, or to find some respite is that we do it together, like we're doing this together. And so when you see there's some comfort in knowing that some people have dedicated their life to God and have lived that way. And it serves as a smaller example, but also as a comfort in those moments. Because usually in the stories of the saints, you'll find times when they're struggling, when they're completely off the rails, when they're not, you know, when they're struggling with thoughts, with passions, with desires. I mentioned this book sometimes, reading Mother Teresa by James C. Scop. And I'm not blurbed on a lot of books. I'm not high enough status to be blurbed on a lot of books, but this is the blurb I wrote for him. The high spiritual voltage of a saint is supposed to inspire, but can simultaneously expose our own insecurities and deficiencies. Through Mother Teresa's secret darkness, James Scop invites us in this lovely book to look at our faith, doubts, and marriage to Jesus. How do saints, how do shining saints cast shadows and common saints bear light? Read on. A Calvinist looks lovingly at the little bride of Christ. And what James Scop, he's a retired professor of English at Doart University in Sousa, Iowa, what he points to is that this poor woman had so little of what we assume to be the internal necessity of what significant sacrifice and saintliness looks like. I'm going to put it down here so you can see it. And yeah, saints. I guess it goes on the stack here. As you see that in the Old Testament stories, I mean, Abraham is all of the, all the patriarchs, I mean, they lived full lives, complete with catastrophic failure and malevolence and murder and genocide and war and yet we're redeemed. So we might say that Jordan is living a life of biblical proportions. And so I think that that's one of the things that helps us to, like you said, to see. It's like you don't have to, obviously you don't look at the person who goes to church once a year or whatever. That person has their own thing to deal with. You find and you see these people that are the opposite, that really live. And everybody has met, I would say probably a few people like that. At least I've met a few that are just, I've met some monk priests that are glowing. They're just glowing. And you see it in their eyes that they live at a level of peace and acceptance that I don't have access to. And so it's like that type of encounter is also part of your transformation because it gives you, it tells you, like, oh yeah, I see it in your eyes. Like I can see that this exists. It's not just something we talk about. I want to talk a little bit about heaven. So I talked to Matt Ridley a while back and Bjorn Lomborg and I'm interested in their thinking because they're trying to plot an optimistic course for the future. One where at the highest levels of social integration we decide how human society should look. At least insofar as we conceptualize how it might look if we address some of the major problems that beset us. But it's an attempt and it's an attempt to make things better. It's an attempt to bring about something increasingly resembling heaven on earth. I mean heaven is generally conceptualized. You can conceptualize it as a state of being. It might be the state of being that those people that you described live in. I've had paradisal experiences where everything transformed itself into something that was perfect, that appeared perfect. And I was unable to stay in those frames of mind. Now I want to bring something in here again because it's become a theme in this where I think there's real value and Jordan does it particularly well in terms of understanding, let's call it the symbolic resonance of heaven and earth in this dispensation. And you know Peugeot isn't going to use my phrase that when you try to bring down heaven you always bring up hell. And there's definitely truth in that symbolic resonance that we see here. But again, one of the things that I don't hear a lot of people mention, especially you won't hear it in a prosperity gospel church, is the reality that if you manage to live like Jesus you will get the reaction that he got. That is something worth seriously thinking about because the assertion is often, and it's sold this way, a little bit earlier Jordan was talking about selling, it's sold this way. Well if you, and I watch the Seeker church do this, if you come into this church we will make your life better. And that's often the case. We will offer, it's very interesting how in the in the Vervecke corner we're talking about wisdom. And actually Sam and John start talking about wisdom there. But the assumption is always that wisdom will make your life better. Well what do you mean by that? Well you mean well more money is better than less money. And finer clothes are better than poorer clothes. And better food is better than lesser clothes. And that in biblical cadence is very real. And it's very Old Testament-ish in many ways. And then the New Testament comes around and says in in in some ways the life of Christ in the New Testament is an extrapolation on the book of Job. Because the book of Job looks karma square in the face and says that's not all there is. And Christ's life basically deconstructs karma. Because my name is Earl, watch that old sitcom. Do good things, good things happen. Do bad things, bad things happen. That's true. But it's it's not the whole story. And the book of Job brings that out. And and so then you get to this question of well we want heaven. And so what the Seeker church did a generation before we talked about this meaning crisis was the Seeker church preachers like Bill Hybels and Rick Warren and the Seeker pastors, they would preach almost all the time from Proverbs. And they would turn sermons into wisdom. Which was very interesting because it was a difference from earlier fundamentalism that would turn sermons into altar calls in order to save your soul. And so you actually see the development of these layers. And so the Seeker church comes along and basically what they offer Americans is they say hey you've been chasing all of this well-being. You're doing it in you know if you believe Eric Weinstein you're doing it in the most affluent time and the most affluent places. I mean the northern suburbs of Chicago, Lake Forest, Southern California, Orange County. And and they're saying even even your great wealth and success and security that is unprecedented on the scale of the world hasn't yet fulfilled you. Let me offer you more wisdom and wisdom in terms of managing your money better. Wisdom in terms of doing better in your marriage. Wisdom in terms of learning to manage the appetites which are within you which actually more affluence won't curb because your prosperity is in many ways a product of having some curbs at least on those appetites. So those Seeker churches preached wisdom and and it worked in that these churches grew very large. Then of course the Emergent Church, the Emergent movement came after called them Evangelifish. And then the Emergent Church sort of split between Justicy churches and then the Young Restless and Reformed churches or Be Grungy for Jesus churches in some cases. So so that's sort of where that went. So this question of heaven is again Jordan I think does a good job in in articulating the symbolic resonance of heaven and hell in this dispensation but that gets tricky in in this in these in this dispensation here now. The the heaven is that something we build? Is that something I don't understand the relationship between the heaven that awaits us let's say after we die that's the the idea and what we build here on earth? Do those touch? Is that the is that the doctrine? There's so much of that. And this also gets into part of the problem with Jordan's book came out today. There's two or three other videos that came out now about Jordan in this video. So suddenly you know I've got two and a half years of nothing and suddenly I've got a glut and over the last two and a half years I've been building all sorts of other projects and I don't want them just go out the window while Jordan sort of rushes to the top of the of the salience hierarchy. But this entire when you look at the woke questions and Christian nationalism and all of these things that are currently in the news you have to understand the history of Protestantism and Christianity in America where you know I had that conversation about the founding of New Haven Connecticut as the city of God and and the the Puritans did this and so you know after the Civil War you had this post-millennialism that was a you had post-millennialism and then you had the rise of millenarian movements that were imagining that the what we have nearly built the kingdom of God and it's about the the millennium is about to happen but then of course you had the inversion with the pre-millennialists and the dispensationalists and all of that is a big part of the story that leads then into the rise in the at the peak at the end of the 19th century beginning of the 20th century the crash in the first world war the split of this evangelical unity between the fundamentalist and the modernist and this question that Jordan is asking right now is really at the center of it. This doctrine I don't understand at all. I think a way to to see it has to do with with attention again and it has to do with a hierarchy of attention. If you try to build heaven you're going to fail you're going to fail miserably because you because you're not aiming high enough right you're aiming and then you you get stuck in this You cannot build it in the age of decay. This is fundamentally what the resurrection is about. Read 1st Corinthians 15. These weird world of opposites that you don't even understand the understand the side effects of what you're doing you know and so for one person heaven will look like if everything could be perfectly ordered then right and then we know what that looks like and another person who look at heaven and think if everything could be free if we could all just be free and then that we know what that looks like and so the idea is to look higher you know there's a there's a there's a story that we have to strive for something better but then we end up in which is what you're saying is that we end up with the tower of babel or we end up with the flood or we end up with yeah with the catastrophe continual catastrophe of unintended consequences but as you yourself said we are aiming for something better and so so the question is how do you pursue pursue utopia while avoiding the pitfalls well i go back to acts one after the crucifixion after the resurrection right before the ascension acts one the disciples say now will you restore the kingdom to israel and jesus says you will be you will receive power when the holy spirit comes upon you and you will be my witnesses the job in this dispensation is to bear witness and that's a theological question and and the witness isn't merely success and and that's where this gets confusing because the witness is cruciform and it's success it's both of those things come together and i would yeah it is and i i think it i know this people are going to hate that i say this but it has to do with worship it's it has to do with what you worship so if you worship if you worship those things that you're aiming towards the lower things if you worship the the making a safer society if you worship the making a freer society if you worship making a stronger society all of these things are going to go off the rails because they they have unintended consequences that you don't understand well i would say it differently that you want a freer society you want a safer society you want all of these things and as peugeot and peterson say they were formed in a hierarchy and also as peterson said way back in the first biblical series you need something at the top of the hierarchy that's what peugeot is saying you need something at the top of the higher hierarchy that is actually not here in play and that's why god has to be at the top of the hierarchy is the frame of frames is the system of systems it's the only it's the only thing at the top of the hierarchy that can in fact include the whole which is why if and this is about what jonathan is about to say because they're they're a fragment of reality they need to be encompassed together in order to reach something higher and so that's the danger of ideology it's the part takes the place of the whole so the idea that the idea is that if you actually if you worship god then those other things will will kind of lay themselves out slowly and you won't be able to force them they'll kind of lay themselves out slowly and they'll start to manifest you know progressively and and as you but you have to attend to the highest or else like i said you know and there's a there's even like a there's an image of anti-christ which is related to this problem you know in scripture you could one of the first anti-christ you could say was judas who betrayed christ well there's a story with judas which is very fascinating because christ doesn't talk to judas very often but one of the places where christ talks to judas is when a woman comes in and wants to anoint and wash christ's feet with a very expensive perfume and then judas says what what are you doing like why are you doing this you need to why don't we give this to the poor right and christ says you know the poor will always be with you but the bridegroom christ the messiah is there for a short time yes that's the other kind of story it's very difficult to understand how anyone could have invented that story like it's not the story of propagandists no it's in fact it's the opposite yeah but that story has to do with attention so christ obviously isn't saying you shouldn't help the poor christ has said to help the poor he said it many times you have to help the poor give to the poor of course but he's saying get your hierarchy in order and you'll help the poor more effectively that way than any other that's that's the case there is that is like it starts with worship and the acts that she's doing if you look at what she's doing she's first of all she bought something expensive she's sacrificing it she's she's sacrificing it to to to bow down and to wash the feet to submit to sacrifice to and to worship so those three things like when i talk about the aim how you end up having to submit to that aim and so this is what so christ is saying first comes worship then the world lays itself out below that in an appropriate way and those that are sermon on mount says too yeah and those that are are saying help the poor as their ultimate goal in the in scripture it says that judas didn't even want to help the poor he wanted to take the money for himself really like he was a thief actually and he was taking the money out of the purse and so those that just want to reduce well i suppose the truth of the matter is is that the there's this there's this great story on this documentary that bern pointed me to where there's you know you had malcolm x in the u.s. we had mike x in the uk and he became this radical revolutionary and he was doing all of this stuff but eventually he just became a thief and and actually in some ways that's everybody sort of has a story that they believe judas was that to me is sort of the story of judas that you know jesus is going to clean out the romans and jesus is going to bring justice and jesus is going to do what's right and eliminate the contamination and then if judas is actually paying closer attention than peter and many others he will figure out that jesus is not going to clean out the antonia fortress and and clear the romans out of jerusalem and have harrod strung up in in the streets and and bring in exactly what judas is looking for so the money genuineness of your desire to help the poor is precisely proportional to the degree that you embody christ and if your aim is helping the poor if that is your aim itself you're probably you're going to basically you're going to look down on the poor but what you do when you help the poor is that you actually instantiate through dedication all this virginal stuff he just you instantiate christ who does what he gives out it's this self donation self donation it's this agape and it's it's the if you if you treat the poor with agape rather than just oh you lack money here's money but if you treat the poor with agape you you invoke this saving power that transforms and you avoid some of the things that happens in attempts to help the poor donor resentment all kinds of and i've you know seen all my life all kinds of the ways that this this just doesn't work it has to be agapic that's right and it can't be otherwise it cannot be otherwise i i i see that i see that clearly because otherwise things will go astray so that's one of the problems with the modern projects of utopia is that they're they're babblesque in their attempts and you can see like the type of gestures that the world authorities are posing in terms of in terms of safety extreme like you know with covid and everything this desire to create absolute safety this desire to create absolute identification and and tracing and all of these weird these kind of weird gestures that show that they think they can control reality is is uh it's leading us toward a very dangerous place well one of the things i noticed i did some work on a committee at one point that was advising the un in relationship to the establishment of its millennial goals and there was hundreds of goals never not rank ordered and so it was a tower of babble because you can't have hundreds of goals that aren't rank ordered and have any goals at all because the goal to have a goal means a hierarchy something has to be more important than something else and there isn't anything more important than getting your act together so to speak you know well i'm going to have to think about all this a lot so we're not gonna have to wait another three years are we jordan yeah but there's a question that keeps lurking in in the back of my mind which is does the fact that that's how it should be mean that that's the way that it is or maybe the should be is what we're anticipating and we long again lewis and his argument in mere christianity we're built for another world which sounds frustrating but if you imagine there is one who can conquer death then it's also hopeful because i've been to the mountaintop we're going to get to the promised land and that's trust that's a question of trust yeah yeah it's a it's a it's a question of trust with which ends up manifesting itself in love you know um and i think that like the love that you have for the world which is which is which is clear anyways it shows me that you might be closer to that to that trust than than you might want to admit to yourself maybe well i don't know what to do with it i suppose is the real problem especially in my current circumstances oh it does with you you're the one that says people don't have ideas ideas have people uh it sounds like the most powerful idea in the world which is a gopik love you're in its crosshairs yeah i'm i'm i'm the most confused person i've ever met i would say yeah you're not the most confused person i've ever met far from it and i've met some pretty confused people so so i wonder if i could match i don't know i've met a lot of confused people well thank you that was really something yeah you know it's a it's a really a joy to talk to jordan and you know like i said there are thousands of people who are praying for you and and well they're keeping me alive and your story isn't isn't your story isn't over yet you know no so much the pity for me no no well i'm gonna pray i i never pray in my monologues but i want to pray for jordan i'll pray for jonathan lord you are the story maker and uh few of us have seen a story like jordan's lord you know all things and we believe that history isn't random but you are in fact as sam harris said as a tractor beam pulling us into the future and so i ask lord that you be with jordan i pray lord that you give him relief from his pain or you make his pain productive lord you do amazing things in this world and you surprise us in big and little ways and part of why i love talking to all these randos is that that there's so much surprise in so many stories and there's so many good ones so i pray lord that you would be with jordan that you would help him i pray lord that you would be with jordan that you would help him help him see that that um he that you are not you are not ideas that he is trying to come to terms with that uh that's a that's a that's a frame confusion i ask lord that you would continue to move through his life which you clearly have been doing and that you move in his heart and and that you give him some of what he's seeking whether that be insight or relief from his pain or rest for his soul bless his family that he so dearly loves be with jonathan as well and continue to use jonathan and bless him and watch over him and hear my prayer in the name of jesus amen um there's a reason i don't pray in monologues and i know it makes people uncomfortable but there i went through the whole thing now i can start to i can have a clean conscience and i can start chewing on these little really highlight moments and come to terms with them so if you've gotten all the all the way to the end of this video thanks for watching