https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=q_hH6mudwsk

 the following case, right? Again, if you don't care about meaning or know that it's an issue until Jordan points to it. And then I think, I'm not sure that I could do this. This is a tall order, but I think that if pressed and given enough time, I could fit all of Jordan's stuff in Verveki's meeting framework very easily. Like I think it drops right in. A lot of stuff drops in very quickly. There's a few things that I would, I'm not sure. Like I'm just not sure, right? I don't know, right? But I would make the case that that can be done. And then I think that when you have a science of meaning, now you can talk to people about it. And the thing for me was, oh, well, now there's a vocabulary for this. And then, wait a minute, all these people are running around in a meaning crisis? Like, how did that happen? Like, I don't have a meaning crisis. What's wrong with these people? Like, wait a minute, I had a meaning crisis. I was homeless living in the car in the winter in New England, man, like I fixed all this. Like, I can help. Like, I can do something to fix these people. Like, now that I can talk about it, now that I have language to talk about it. And then I went and I knew what Jordan did. I know exactly what Jordan did. He took people, and I'm gonna invoke Descartes here, and I'm always very careful when I do that because you should be. He took people in a particular location, we'll say in life, right? And like location's a fuzzy thing, right? It's a big sphere of something, right? And he built them a path and walked them along the path. And that path leads you from, we'll say, scientific thinking into religious thinking, right? And that's basically how he saved those people. Now, my theory is, or my hypothesis, I should say, I'm trying to be rigorous. My hypothesis is that we need more of those paths. So we need more paths, same ending point maybe, but different starting points. And then how do we build those? And that is what launched the project Manuel and Andre, and now we've got guys like Nathan and Michelle and too many other people to name. Matthew's helping us out, Jonathan's helping us out, a bunch of people, all helping us out. Some of them are helping out just by asking what they deem as dumb questions, which aren't dumb questions. If you've got to ask me what the parabolic is, that's my failure to explain. Hi, this is Paul, and today, Mark, I don't know how to say your last name unless you don't want to say it. Lefever, okay, I thought it was something like that. So I'm on today with Mark Lefever, and some of you know Mark from the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord server. Some of you know him from the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. Some of you know him from talking with Mary Cohen on her channel with Manuel. He's done a couple of conversations, and I've been really interested in what Mark and Manuel have done, but I've gotten to know Manuel a little bit on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server, but I never had a conversation with Mark. So I said, Mark, you and I gotta talk because you got a lot of interesting ideas, and I wanna be able to pick at them a little bit. But before I do any of that, I wanna know who you are because I think part of the reason we're having such poor conversations is because we know each other in these little siloed spaces, and if we know each other more broadly, then maybe we'll actually know each other better, and that gets it. I mean, I think we're probably gonna do a lot of talk about knowing and how to know today. So Mark, thanks for being willing to come in this morning and open yourself up to my pastoral nosiness, and I'm not gonna try and make you say anything you don't want to say, but I am curious about who you are. So let's begin at the beginning. Let's start talking about yourself, and I'll start asking nosy questions. All right, Paul, I wonder, I've been, ever since the possibility of talking to you came up, I was like, oh no, he's gonna ask me all these questions about me, and then I was like, oh wait, I don't have answers for this stuff. What am I gonna do? So I was wondering if maybe, I was thinking, maybe the approach would be, I can give you a proximal history of how I got to this corner of the internet, and then we could go back and just do a whole thing. Does that sound like a fun thing to try? Let's give it a shot. Sure, so I fell into the Jordan Peterson thing at an important time of my life. My mother was going through cancer treatments, and so that was like a whole thing, obviously, right? And I was basically, I'm an information hound, so I was just watching Jordan Peterson. I'd watch two Maps of Meaning lectures, and then one of his other talks, and at the time, partially because I was taking care of my mother, and partially because of the fact that I could get away with it, I wasn't actually engaged in full-time employment, so I was able to do, you know. What'd you do today, Mark? I watched 20 hours of YouTube, you know? Oh really, yes, that's why I'm sleep deprived. And then that led me to, so like I've literally absorbed like 90% of Jordan's, anything that I know of that Jordan's put out, right? I've watched almost all of it. And then that led me to some other folks, but mostly, you know, John Vervecky's work, and I feel like I've been tricked, actually. John doesn't know this story. So what happened was, I caught the first drop of Awakened from the Meaning crisis. And either it was made clear, and I'm an idiot, which is totally possible, because I'm an idiot all the time. Or it was never made clear that they were 50 hours of lectures, and they were dropping them one a week, because had they told me that, I would have waited for them to drop, and then watched them all, because that's what I do. Interestingly, I do not binge TV shows very often, but I do binge like lectures, because I want to get the whole flavor of the thing. So, yeah, I feel cheated, and I'm still angry at John, literally, because that's part of me, right? And then interestingly, what happened was, he dropped this meditation series. And I was like, oh, well, I want to support him. Like, I can't support him financially, because jobs and whatever. But I owe it to him to support him. And I had done meditation when I was younger, and I had my own method, and my own strategy for meditation, and it was based around efficiency and all of this. And so I was like, oh, whatever, I just want to support the guy. So I was there, and I was on the YouTube live chat, because there were live streams. And I'm talking to people in a live chat, because, and this is the problem, right? Like, who are you, Mark? So Mark found out, as the result of that, that I grew up online. Like, I literally grew up in the old days on bulletin board systems. That's how I learned to socialize. So when I go someplace online, I build community. I'm a professional online community builder in some real sense. Like, I just, I know how to do this. I've been doing it my whole, literally my whole life, more than my adult life will say. And so I built, or helped to build this Sangha for him, because I was there all the time. And he comments on it in the meditation sits. So he's constantly dropping my name. And then another weird thing happens, right? So he's dropping my name, and I'm going, this is oddly satisfying. Why do I care? Like, I am super disagreeable, ridiculously independent. Why do I get a rush off of this guy saying, I'm so glad Mark's here, you know, all the things, he gave me some really nice praise. And John is extraordinarily generous, you know, with praise of others and crediting others. I mean, right from the start, you notice that with his stuff. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And yeah, to your point. Yeah, that's what I was about to say. You know, John's so good at that, right? He's so good, and he's so aware that he's Canadian, which will be, is important, and we'll become clear why later it's important. Because don't worry, I'll get back to that. That he's really good at being sincere and coming across the right way about the whole thing, and most other Canadians aren't. But yeah, we'll loop back on that one. So I'm figuring this out. I'm like, wow, what is going on? And then Brett comes on, and he's the one who started the awakening from the meaning crisis Discord server. And he says, hey guys, I got a Discord server. We should all do this, you know, and we should watch, but we'll be on the Discord, but we'll be watching on our own computers, and we weren't doing the streaming thing at that time. And I was like, oh, okay, you know, whatever, I'll check that out too. And you know, at this point, I don't think I was quite fully aware that, oh, I build communities. Like, I just, like, that's what I do. Like, it's just a natural thing. I don't even think about it. It's like breathing, you know? Like, doesn't everybody do this? So I jump on there, and we're getting organized, and you know, we have a nice little group of people, and then we're doing these things together, and then John starts promoting the Discord server, and John comes on to the Discord server, and gives, you know, these Q&A sessions. And at one point, in one of the sessions, I'm like, John, like, you're like, I haven't had a teacher in years. You're like the first teacher I've had in so long, you know, I can't even remember. And, you know, thank you for that. And of course, he was very humble, and received that with the good grace that only John can, apparently. Like, he's amazing, right? And so, yeah, it was like a real revelation. Like, wow, I have a teacher. Like, somebody taught me a thing I didn't learn on my own, because everything else I learned on my own. So it was very gratifying. And then, you know, we got together, Manuel in particular did a lot of work putting together videos. So now we have John's teaching us every day. We sit every day on the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord server in the meditation, and we also discuss his other course, Cultivating Wisdom, which is based on the book, Wisdom of Hypatia. And we have very deep conversations after the meditation. Some of your people actually floated over to hear some of the, they're very deep conversations. And anybody's welcome. You don't have to sit with our video. You don't have to sit in John's style or any of that. And, you know, it was interesting too, because as I went through the meditation series, I'm slowly realizing like, wow, this is a pretty interesting approach to meditation. And granted, my knowledge of meditation is old. I did it when I was basically a kid. I don't think I was 18 when I came up with all my meditation strategies. And I used to sit like four times a day. Like it was, you know, I was very rigorous. I'm a very rigorous person under normal circumstances. And so, you know, I have my method. It was the best method ever, duh, right? And then I realized like, John's method is better. Damn it. Why did you do that? So I'm angry about that too. I haven't told John that, but now he knows. It's on the internet. So I'm still angry. The discord people get a kick out of this, right? Cause it does come up from time to time. Yeah, there's little things like John comes up with this chanting thing. And I actually know the science on chanting pretty well. And he goes, you know, oh, it's one chant, om. It's like, yeah, no kidding. That's all chance start with om. Like big deal. A lot of them end with om too, like whatever. And then he goes, you only need one other syllable. And my brain's going like, yeah, this is why academic shouldn't be allowed to engage. You know, I was just so, I was like, there's no way. There's no way, this ridiculous. And then it's one, and I'm like, that's even dumber. Like you're not even staying in the Eastern study. This is stupid. Like John's just like, he's off the rails. He's lost it. I don't know what's going on with John. And then, you know, so we have the lesson. And then we do the chanting and the lesson, right? And then like, I'm like, I don't know what just happened to me, but a bunch of changes just happened to me. And I'm like freaked out. I'm like, why did that work? How did that work? Holy macaroni, what is going on? Like, it was really stunning. And then of course everybody else is like, well, I didn't get anything out of it. And I'm like, guys, I'm an experienced meditator. Like this is, like, you can't compare you to me. You guys have just started. I was doing meditation, you know, pretty much on and off my whole life. So that was very interesting. So yeah, that's sort of how I, you know, ended up. And then, and then we got into, you know, this types of knowing thing, right? John doesn't like our model. John likes John's model. Of course, of course he should, right? He's got friends in Cogsci. He's the director of Cogsci at the university, right? And I don't have any friends in Cogsci, at least none that I know of. And if I did, then, you know, maybe I lose a few friends, but like our models for a different purpose, right? It's not to please cognitive scientists. So, so yeah, and I, you know, I've had a lot of great help. You know, we couldn't, we couldn't come up with the model, especially the name Parabolic without, without Andre and without Manuel. You know, Manuel has been just, you know, he's a, he's brilliant. It's really hard to tell who's leading the thought on the server, right? Sometimes it's Manuel, sometimes it's Mark, right? And every once in a while, somebody else, right? And it just like blows us all away with one little sentence or line. And, and, you know, sometimes they're not even aware, right? They're not even aware of how, how big what they said was and how much it helped everybody else, you know, think things through. So, so yeah, that's sort of how I ended up as a result of that model, of course, right? You guys, you guys, right? Your community got interested in it. And then, you know, basically, you know, Manuel sort of, I don't know, poisoned the well, right? And he's just like, oh, Paul, you're gonna pay attention to this, right? And then once you get interested in it, your whole community gets into it and then I'm getting bombarded and I'm like, well, now I have to go over there and spend some time over there, right? And that's been great. I mean, you're, you know, you're, thank you for building such a wonderful community and being such a great exemplar that they have these difficult conversations, you know, that can get very contentious. Yeah. And, and despite the fact that, you know, I say this with the most love, crazy Christians, they seem to do pretty well, right? They're not out there trying to convert people to whatever odd cult-like version of Christianity they all seem to have, which is not uncommon. It's like, what do you all believe together? Jesus. Oh, okay. As long as we have the one thing, I guess we're all Christians, it's good, right? So yeah, it's sort of interesting. That's about it. So it's about as much commonality as you're gonna find on that server. Exactly. And not even that much. I mean, some people come in and they've got the postmodern ethos and they're like, no, your religion sucks. And it's like, why are you here again? Cause people are nice. The people, well, the people are nice and people wanna be with other people. And yeah. Well, I am going to, I am going to go back and I want, cause see what you just told me just makes me even more interested and more nosy. So now I'm gonna start doing my thing. Tell me about the home you grew up in. Sure. So I was gonna get there, Paul, don't worry. Oh, I know you were gonna get there. I was gonna make you get there. So let's start there. So let's see. My father is French Canadian on one side and French Canadian on the other. Oh, interesting. Hence the Le Fever name, right? And then I don't know if you know this, but like imagine a world where you were in the gorgeousness of France with the beautiful weather all year round. And the people were so miserable that you said, you know what I'm gonna do? I'm gonna pack up. I'm gonna take a boat ride over to the coldest country livable on the planet. And I'm gonna hunt beavers in the woods rather than hang out with these people. That's right. Wow. Like, I don't know. Anyway, my mother's side, my mother's mother was Irish. She just passed away last year. Yeah, last round Thanksgiving, I think. And my mother's father was Greek. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah, very interesting. It's very interesting. Weird. And how did your parents meet? That I don't know, actually. No idea. Really? No idea. Interesting. No, don't remember. I know that the families knew each other. Did you grow up in America or Canada? No, no. So my grandparents were both born, I think, in Maine on my father's side. And then I think Nana, my mother's mother, was born here. And actually, I don't know where. And I think it's the same. It's one generation out for Grampy, too, if I remember correctly. So what happened is they went to the immigrant city, Lowell, because that's where the immigrants were going for years. Yeah, yeah. Oh, you do? I got Massachusetts roots, yeah. Oh, I grew up in Lowell, so I'm a Lowell man. I visited Lowell, the factories and all that stuff. Amazing stuff. So my mother's family, and that's actually where my mother lives now, is in Whiteensville, Massachusetts, which is down near Rhode Island. So yeah, I know Massachusetts. Yeah, no, I grew up in Massachusetts. I was primarily Lowell when I was younger. My parents moved out to Kansas for about four years, so my father got his PhD at Kansas State University. Oh, in what? And his, in basically literature, so nothing useful. Yeah. Now, did your parents go to church? No, no, no. I was gonna get there, Paul. Yeah. I'm, you know, I don't have all morning. And you're a talker, so I gotta keep interrupting you. I'm from New Jersey. I don't have any, all these polite people, oh, I'm sorry, interrupted. I'm thinking, how do you have a conversation without interrupting? I don't know, this came into the culture and I'm still a little peeved by it, but anyway, keep going. So my, yeah, yeah, my parents, my parents sort of were both disaffected Catholics, as you can imagine. Yep, yep. Right? And the whole family is disaffected Catholics, basically, right? So they're all like, oh, the Catholic church, the nuns beat me with rulers. And it's like, fair enough, but really? Like that's your complaint? Like, you know, better complaint than that. So- I grew up in Jersey. I heard a lot of people complaining about the parochial school and the nuns. So I- All the time. It's a thing, it's a thing. All the time. Well, that's actually the Protestant's fault. So thank you for that. Because had you not tried to indoctrinate the children of the Catholics, they would have been happy to go to your damn public schools. Oh, putting it on your shoulders. Dutch reformed, I didn't go to public school either. We were too Protestant to go to public school. Oh, that's funny. I like that. But they were parent run, not by the Pope. There we go. There we go. Yeah, there's no papal conspiracy there. Yeah, so they were very much, you know, seventies hippie ethos, right? Oh no, let him pick his own religion when he's ready. So like my mother brought me to a bunch of different churches. And I got to tell you, look, look, if you're going to celebrate your God, it's gospel baby. You got to get up and you got to sing and you got to dance. I was like, right on. Like, that's great. That's absolutely great. Those people know how to have fun in church. If you're not going to have fun in church, why be there? How else can you participate in the glory of God? You dance and sing? That's right. That works. That works. So yeah, so they, you know, I wasn't grown up with any particular religion, you know, my, you know, my parents got divorced when I was seven years old. Yeah. And I was a last key kid. So did you move to Kansas or did you stay in Massachusetts? We were in Kansas for four years when I was super young. And then we moved back to Massachusetts. Oh, and that's why I didn't even go to school. I did go to a Montessori school actually in Kansas when I was really young. So I remember something like, I know forever Jaka because I remember it from the Montessori school, but it was an experimental school on Kansas State's campus. And I remember I had a Snoopy lunchbox. It was blue with a white Snoopy on it. It was very great. So a little academic bubble in the middle of Kansas. Yeah. Yeah. And I got to see a baby tornado once and yeah, we had tornado bunkers. Yeah, it's very different. It's like, whoa. And that screwed up my New England accent. So then I would go back to New England. Because I was like four years old and I've got this hybrid accent and then all my relatives are making fun of me, and fair enough, but yeah, it was interesting. So what did you like studying in high school? Well, what happened was in junior high, well, I had a lot of problems with school, right? Because they're trying to teach you stuff at the pace of a snail. I'm trying to learn stuff. Yeah, the school's getting in the way of learning. Oh, it's terrible. It's absolutely terrible. And my father's got Encyclopedia Britannica and this how it works, right? So I knew I could just read stuff. And there was a thing back then where you could get a project sent to you every month. I know they've revived that recently. It went away for a while. So we do projects every once in a while, but basically because my parents were divorced and I was living with my father somehow, which turned out to be a good thing because my mother is completely nuts. Yeah. I didn't really find out how crazy she was until she was dying from cancer and then things started to fall apart. So yeah, it was interesting. But that's how I ended up down in South Carolina. So I- Wow. Yeah, yeah. So I was, my wife and I, we homeschooled and very quickly learned at school. Too often gets in the way of learning, especially for a lot of kids, especially if you have a really smart kid at school. I mean, because they just have to teach to this mass of students, they have to teach to the average. And so if you've got a bright kid, that kid that you want to unleash that kid and have that kid go, but obviously with your parents splitting up, I'm sure, then you've got, parenting is hard enough when there's two of you, but when there's one of you, it's a bit overwhelming. So where did you go to college? Did you go to college? No. You didn't go to college. No, not at all. Not a lick. I know where college is. Like I can point them out. Well, now this- Now, see, this is why I ask all these nosy questions because now the picture's starting- I would have gotten there. You're an autodidact. I know you're gonna get, I know you'd get there, but you'd take a while and I'm nosy and impatient. So, and it's my show. I get to ask the questions I want to ask. So, okay. So did you graduate high school? Yes, yes. But, and I think this is important. Okay, I'll back off. I'll let you tell it. So when junior high came around, because I had some problems in school, because they wanted me to do homework and I was like, I'm not doing homework. What are you high? Like, come on, I got things to do. So I ended up in some private schools. And so I went to a very exclusive private school, a hundred kids, junior high and high school, a hundred kids in the school. And yeah, and the interesting story about that is the ethics course. So they listed an ethics course. So I said, well, I'm not taking no religion, man. Give me the ethics course. So they have me read C.S. Lewis, The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe. And I'm sitting in a room by myself because it's basically- This is not a Christian school. It is, it is. They were required by law, by state law, to offer an ethics course. And I was the only one who was like, I was completely, I mean, I'm disagreeable, obviously. I'm super disagreeable. So I was like, I want the ethics course. It says I can take an ethics course. I wanna take an ethics course. So they put me literally in a room by myself for the ethics course and I had to read the book. And I'm going through the book and I get to the end of the book and he's like, so what did you think about The Lion? And I'm like, it's a children's fantasy novel. What do you mean? What did I think about The Lion? Are you looking for structural components here? What are you looking for? And he said, oh, oh, the lion is Jesus. And I'm like, what are you talking about? I don't know what you're, what do you want about, what's wrong with you? Where are you getting this from? Totally, ironically, missing the parabolic. If I had only known, but I was the kind of kid that we had to buy our books. So my father brings me down, we buy all the books about two weeks before school. I get into school and the first thing they tell me is, all right, we're only gonna go through half of this book this year. And I'm looking at the guy like, I already read the damn book. What do you mean you're only going through half of it? I've read all of the books I bought. What do you mean we're only going through half of it? What is wrong with you people? I thought we were gonna get another set of books midway through. And then people wonder why I don't wanna go to college because, oh, it's six years to get a PhD. I'm like, all right, yeah, if it's more than two, I'm out. I am not doing it, like no way. Like I just, I got things to do. I got things to do. Okay, so what did you do? So what I did was, my father got remarried when I was, what was I, like 15 or 16 or something. And I basically, he went off and bought a new house. My mother just bopping around wherever she was bopping. I don't even know where she was. There were attempts to get back together and all that, all the craziness. You know all the craziness. I can't tell you stories you haven't heard better versions of. Yeah, and then basically, I was kept in Lowell for, because I had transitioned back into public school. I got back into public school basically for sophomore year of high school. So I was basically staying with my uncle at the family home when my father grew up. So right in the Highlands of Lowell, the Upper Highlands. And my uncle was the black sheep on that side. I had black sheep on each side, right? He was master mechanic, absolutely brilliant with tools and with mechanical things. And super lovable, like he was just well liked. And every drug he could get his hands on, every single one. Love to party. Yeah. You're 16, 17. Yeah, no, no, and he was excellent with it. He was like, he would not even smoke marijuana with me in the house, right? He'd say like, I'll buy if you fly, right? And so I'd get free meal, you know, and I was working at UPS and going to school. And so I'd come out of school, not right away, but at 6 p.m. I'd go in for the UPS shift and shuffle boxes. And, you know, that was a union shop, learned all about union shops, union shops bad, right? They didn't like me at all. You gotta slow down. What are you talking about? I've got to slow down? You wanna go in the parking lot? We'll talk, we'll talk about slowing down. You don't tell me what to do. You ain't my boss. Oh yeah, tell me to slow down. Hi, go away. I'm not gonna do that. I got work to do, man. So yeah, I blew the numbers out on the group because I would just work. I would just work. I'm a tiny guy, but I'm fairly strong. I always had good grip and stuff like that. Back when I was young, I was in reasonably good shape and I could just work. I could work four hours. I picked up two shifts eventually. I was getting overtime. It was fantastic. You work eight hours, you get four hours of overtime. Not bad. When you're a kid, you're making like nine bucks an hour, nine and a half bucks an hour. That's not bad. In the process of all that, basically a manager came in and his strict was to accuse people of stealing. And that's how he made his way up in the ranks somehow. And so he accused me of stealing and it didn't work. And then one day he pushed me too far and I said, no, look, it's right around Christmas time. I'll see you later. Cause I knew he was screwed without me because by that point I was a sorter on the line and I was their best sorter. And so I was like, yeah, I'll stick it up your end. How's that buddy? And I walked and they tried to get me back, like his boss's boss and all that. They were like, no, no, you gotta come back. And I was like, no, I'm not coming back. You fire him, I'll come back. And they wouldn't fire him. So I said, I'm not coming back. So yeah, in the course and right after that, what happened was I got sick. It was right around Christmas time. And I went to stay with my mother who was in Bedford, Mass. And my mother was my mother. So who knows, it's sort of hard to remember some of this stuff. This is sort of the before time. You'll get that in a second. And what happened was my uncle basically said, well, screw you, I'm gonna rent your room out. I'm like, dude, I've been gone for like four weeks. Like, you know, what the hell? So he brought all the stuff over and it turns out it wasn't all the stuff, but he brought a bunch of my stuff over to my mother. So I moved into my mother's. And then my mother being my mother being nuts started to flake out on me, like, you know, like clean the house and do my laundry. And I'm like, I'm not doing your laundry, do your own damn laundry. I'm doing my own laundry. You can do your own laundry. I'm not asking you to do my laundry. What's going on? Right, and then so I was cleaning the house. And then I figured out the trick to making it look like I had cleaned it when I didn't, you know, I'm all about the shortcut. I got things to do, Paul, I got things to do. So, so she eventually threw me out. And I was like, okay, well then I'm gone. I'll see you later. And then of course she regretted it immediately. I'm like, no. She lost her housekeeper. Yeah, pretty much. How would I throw out the housekeeper? I had free labor. What was I thinking? I didn't think of it that way. Thanks, thanks for that perspective. Pastors are for, afford other perspectives. So keep going, you're doing well. So, so yeah, I ended up, because I was online with people, I knew people from online. That's all my friends were online by that point. I didn't have any friends from school. Like I didn't go to college, obviously. This is back in the days of bulletin boards where someone had set up a little 286 somewhere with a modem and you could call in and you could swap files and you could chat. Yeah, I remember those days. The first large online free multi-line job bulletin board system, major BBS, as far as I can tell was in Burlington, Massachusetts. It was called Argus. Really? And that's what I was on Argus. And so a bunch of people know me from Argus actually. Still, still to this day, I know people from that bulletin board system. There's still friends of mine that I talked to. So yeah, yeah, yeah. And then it was its own culture, right? It was its own thing. But those are the people I was hanging out with were people who were in college and I'm sleeping on their floor, right? Well, it's so funny because I've got people in my local meetup that I listen to your story and you're telling a story that is not that different from theirs. And I won't out their names right now, but some of them are gonna listen to this and they know, they know, they know. And they're listening to you and they're saying, this guy lived my life. The parents split up, the parents had issues of their own. They were too smart for school. They got into PCs early. They did the Commodore thing. They did the BBS thing. They were online. They were playing games. They didn't necessarily go through formal education. They made their own way. So what was the first, UPS, that's kind of a job a kid does. What was the first adult job that you got that really was maybe something that you had to actually put on a, not a company shirt for, but a shirt with a collar for, or maybe you've never had one. Well, because I was homeless, it got really interesting. My mother actually found me a job with a government contractor because Bedford Mass is where Hanscom Air Force Base is. So my first job job was on Hanscom Air Force Base working for the military with some of the people who were on Argus from the base. Fascinating. Oh yeah, it's very fascinating. And so I was tied up in that. And then that didn't last long for various reasons. And then one of the people from Argus actually found me a job accidentally when he left his job. And then I was tech support, software engineer, and documentation. So my father used to do documentation. He ran the documentation department at Computer Vision. And he PhD in English Lit, right? And so, yeah, no problems with language. No problems with language. I had a college level vocabulary. I basically, when I went to the exclusive private schools, I went to two of them. One was called Westbridge and the other was Austin Prep. Austin Prep's a bit larger. Westbridge is a tiny school. Like I said, that was just junior high. Austin Prep was just freshman year. I basically tested in. They were like, well, you have terrible grades and you never do homework, but look at these test scores. So, right? So I had a college level vocabulary when I was real young. So that wasn't a, like we had the Encyclopedia Britannica. We had like four dictionaries, right? We had all this stuff in the house. So I just read it all. So when you were, so now you've got, now you're starting to get adult jobs and what are you doing for fun? I mean, you mentioned that you had gotten into meditation at some point. Was that because of your hippie parents? No, not really. So what really happened was just before I got my first job, I was completely homeless and I was living in my car in New England in the winter. Lovely. Which is not ideal. No. And normally what I tell people is, you know what? You should get out, you should explore, you should try everything. Don't try that, don't. Don't try, do not explore this. You do not know. You mean all those YouTubes that make living in your car such a cool possibility, not so much fun, huh? No, no. And I had splitting headaches. I had migraine headaches. I was getting about four hours of sleep. That's all I could get. And I, not contiguous. I could do two hours and then another two hours later. That was the best I could do. And I'm wandering around the streets of the city of Boston, suicidal and depressed and domicide, to use John Vervicki's term, right? Like personal domicide, right? I don't have a home, literally at all. I don't have a place to be. I don't have a family support network anymore. I had reached out to family and they didn't help for whatever reasons. Some of them, you know, oh, we didn't know, right? Yeah. One year I got uninvited to Christmas, which I didn't know about because I was living on the streets. And I only found out about it because I ran into my uncle in a place that neither of us should have been in. And so that was an interesting little thing. And, you know, it was because of basically I effectively have an evil stepmom and I'm using the word evil as in evil evil, like biblical evil. She's not a good person. Like nothing about her is good. She just has no goodness in her. And she, you know, she had a need to control and she's very good at that. She has a degree in psychology of some kind, I believe. So that'll be important later. And yeah, you know, basically I couldn't live with my father and I couldn't live with my mother. So I was out on the streets and, you know, I got my act together and sort of figured out how to get a job. And I had no free time because I had to take the train out of Boston because it was free outbound in the morning. And then I would walk to my job in Winchester and Winchester has two train stops. And it actually, it's the place with the two closest train stops in the world or something. I forget. Anyway, you know, and then I would walk and take the bus back into town to get back in. So, you know, my travel time was like three and a half hours or something every day to work. But I was a software engineer. You know, I was able to write this documentation and do all the tech support for the product. I was a one man company and he had other companies in the building. It was one building, right? But he had like three different companies. And I did a lot of work with the software. I learned a lot of stuff, you know, and because I was in Boston, I had also been hanging out at the GNU labs with Richard Stallman and those guys. So they all know me. I don't know if they remember me, but they all do know me. Yeah, so, you know, I was very embedded in sort of that world. And then they had a whole thing where what they were doing was sort of the hippie adjacent people. They had houses and they'd name them, right? Cause that was their thing, right? When you're young and you're hippie-ish, that's what you do. And then they had a thing called open parlor night. And it's like every Tuesday or something, you'd go to somebody's house and, you know, and then because I was in with them and they were in with the Free Software Foundation or what became the Free Software Foundation, there was an opening in one of the houses. And I got into that house and then it was like, oh, okay. So big, beautiful Victorian house right in Summerville Mass. Right? Highest, one of the highest populations in the world at the time. Literally more densely packed than Mexico City or number two. Like that, yeah, it's, Summerville Mass is a really interesting quirk of the universe. Highest, highest per capita artists and musicians in the world at the time. Yeah. I'm gonna have to look this up next time I get over there. This is interesting. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And Whitey Bulger's the next hill over just to tie it all together. Not that I knew that at the time, but yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So we had this house, the guy who owned it owned it with his sister, but he was a real estate guy. But this particular house he didn't care about and he was just trying to screw his sister. So we've got zero rent, right? The rent's really, really low, even for Summerville, which are already not high rent. And it was a wonderful location and I could walk down to Harvard Square and I did quite often walk down to Harvard Square. I wrote poetry when I was down there. I talked to people. I would hang out with the homeless crowd, which I was at an affinity for, right? And they weren't real homeless people by the way, but yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Rich kids larping. Oh, anyway. Yeah, you learn a lot down there. You also understand when you talk to people from Harvard that they're not good people on average and that Harvard makes them worse people on average, pretty reliably. How so? Tell me more about that. Well, they get very snooty. I don't know if you ever saw a Good Will Hunting. Good Will Hunting is one of my very favorite. Yeah, that is just accuracy, man. Like I think that's just like somebody that all that happened to somebody in exactly the way laid out in the movie. Like I could totally see that. I'm familiar with all these places. I know Southie, right? You know people like that. If you're in Boston, these people have super good memories. I have a good memory. I don't have an eidetic memory. Every once in a while, I can see pictures and read things off the pictures, but no, at a daily basis, no, right? So yeah, so the Harvard people are like that and they're very predictable. And I remember years ago, I was on, I think it was Yahoo chat, one of the Yahoo chat systems back when that was a thing. And somebody came in and he was ragging on my peeps. It's ragging on my peeps, man. And I got tired of it. And I said, listen, I understand that you're a Harvard boy, but you do not have more degrees than anybody who frequents this channel. So maybe you should be a little more respectful. And he went, how did you know I was from Harvard? And I'm like, really? All you Harvard guys talk the same, right? And so then I was like, yeah, you really don't understand, do you? You're not in the same place you think you're in here. You can't come in here and just say, oh, I have degrees and therefore, right? And he doubled down and I took him out. I took him out completely psychologically and he left the channel. And as far as I can tell, he never came back, right? Cause I was like, no, you're not coming in here. These people are being nice to you and you're just being a jerk from Harvard, like go away. So yeah, Harvard just because of the training and because of the prestige and some of the teachers in there, they're not the best people in the world. And so a lot of the most amoral people in the world, I would say that I have met have been Harvard grads. And it really breaks my heart. It's a beautiful campus and they have a wonderful library, right? And they just seem to churn out the same type of bad people for some reason. It's really disappointing. So where did meditation come into your life? How did you get into that kind of stuff? Well, when I was living with the weird hippies, my first job, I'm a software engineer. They're all software engineers. They're working at like FTP software and some of these early companies, right? And I'm just trying to be more efficient, right? I'm trying to get stuff done. I'm trying to figure out, well, why was I able to live to survive physically on almost no food, cause I was homeless and no sleep. Like, what is that? So I started on the sleep thing and I figured out a method to get people down to sleep about four hours a night. And it turns out that if you do that correctly, it takes some time. I'm actually writing a halfway through finishing the instructions for this. My third revision over the years, I keep rewriting this for people. It turns out if you do it right, you keep your brain in alpha state more and you can learn better and your memory's improved. So like less sleep is better for you and you're actually addicted to sleep most of the time. And if you can get it down to six or four hours a night, then you can be fine and in fact, a better person. So it actually increases everything about you. And so I was doing meditation. I was doing this sleep reduction stuff. I had one person tried it along with me who lived in the house. She was full-time student, full-time job, learned Chinese in a year. Wow. And she, yeah, years later, like 15 years later, I found her at the science fiction convention, Arresia, which is one thing that I was involved in with these hippie folks, who I miss dearly sometimes by the way, as much as I wanted to murder them all then and still wanna murder some of them now. Wonderful people. They had the science fiction convention and she happened to be there and I happened to be back after an absence of like five or so years. And she said, I tell people all the time when they ask me how I learned Chinese so fast while going to school full-time and also having a full-time job, that it was the Mark LeFevre, and she calls it the sleep deprivation program. And I'm always like, oh, no, not deprivation. Bad word, bad word. So yeah, it's interesting. So a number of people went along that journey with me, we'll say, but I was all about like efficiency and getting stuff done and learning quicker. And I think a couple of, maybe three years ago, I was up North visiting a friend of mine, Gina Bean, who runs the Mindful Boston, which everybody should check out because Gina's like one of the best people you're ever gonna meet in the whole world. She grabbed a book and it was a book written by one of the Google engineers. It was an older book. And she said, Mark, did you read this? And I'm like, oh no, I know who that guy is. I saw one of his YouTube talks. And she goes, all of the stuff you talked about when we were living together is in here. And I'm like, oh, good. Well, I'm not too surprised, but that's great. And then I'm like, you should have written a book, you moron. Okay, I go well. But I'm very private and I'm very independent. And I've been very successful being that way. Don't do that either, by the way. Yeah, bad. No, no, community good, lone wolf bad, lone wolf die. Lone wolf very bad. So yeah, that was how I got involved in all that stuff. I was just exploring hypnosis and meditation and the Kabbalah and tarot cards and all of that stuff. And it took me all this time and the help of my dear friend on the Discord, Andre, we were taking a break from trying to figure out how to get people to archetypes. And we were going through the tarot deck as our break. And then it was like, wait a minute, what is going on here? Tarot cards seem to be a way of making a generic narrative that coheres to your narrative and allows you predictive capacity. How does it do that? And thus was born the parabolic. So let's talk about the parabolic a little bit because this is, I mean, again, part of the reason I want to get a taste of your story and all you can really get and even a short time like this is a taste. You're an interesting pair, obviously, with Mary Cohen because Mary, she was one of the first people on my channel. And of course I pestered her with questions too. And she came on my channel because she found me because of the algorithm and Jordan Peterson. And I was a Christian and she had gotten out of Jehovah's Witnesses and she wanted to talk about cults. And of course she's a Roman Catholic now. And then she came up with this parabolic and then you jumped in. And I remember when she first started talking about the parabolic, it was like, what is she talking about? And when she was talking parabolic, I was thinking parabolas. I was thinking parabolas. I mean, I'm a Christian minister. I should probably think Jesus parables or something like that. But so, well, I'm still really nosy because I'm getting sort of, you saw that movie Memento, right? The guy who takes all these Polaroids and he can't manage time. And I'm kind of having that with your story. And I'm getting lots of snapshots here, but I'm trying to sort of line them up. And so I have a picture of your upbringing and your parents divorced and your homelessness and your UPS and your software engineer and documentation. Of course, I imagine these software companies are always hungry for people to do documentation because that's probably the thing that they're doing. Because that's probably the job that all of the software engineers with any status say, no, I don't wanna do any documentation. I just wanna, I actually, I have a brother-in-law who's a software engineer in the Boston area. And so I know that type too. So, and now I get a sense of, okay, you were doing some communal living. And my sense among the technological, the technology community is that, I mean, similar to how you described, okay, what are you trying to do with sleep? You're trying to do sleep efficiency. You're trying to say, hey, there's only 24 hours of the day. I'm blowing a third of my life unconscious. What kind of a crazy strategy is this? And they tell me I need to, what happens if I can cut that in half? And so, and I can very, so a lot of this, whereas for religious people hearing this story, they're gonna hear this sort of through a religious valence. And I think there's gonna be many in the tech sector coming at it much more in terms of a hacker ethos. They say, hey, we're human beings. We have code. We have systems. We should study these systems and figure out how we can be more efficient in order to do some of the things that we wanna be doing and to make the world better and all this stuff. So I say, I'm getting this picture also, obviously you're low in agreeableness. When we started the meetup here, one of the things that became obvious very soon on the Jordan Peterson meetup was that we had a whole herd of people who were low in agreeableness all in one room. And actually for, it was our good pleasure that most of these people also, as with yourself, is also socialized. So you can be low in agreeableness, but you're not actually throwing things around or knifing people or anything like that, which would tend to be a problem at a meetup. So we got all these low in agreeableness people who are also quite intelligent. And so what we usually have is really interesting conversations because people aren't just sort of assuming a line in order to get along with people. They're actually, hey, no, wait a minute. And they'll argue the other side, even if they don't believe the other side just because that interests them. So you're doing the software thing and you've got a real job and you're doing all that, but that doesn't, and then early on you mentioned that, your mother was going through cancer treatments and so that's when you started listening to the job. So even though you described your mother a number of times as crazy and she kicked you out of the house and your father, you have an evil stepmother, all this stuff going on in your life, you still at the same time, this is your mother. And when she gets cancer, you care for her. That's, you know, it doesn't surprise me, but I think it's an important thing to say because a lot of people who don't spend a lot of time around people who are low in agreeableness would misunderstand when they hear you call your mother crazy, they think of that as, oh, he's insulting his mother. And for you, it's like, no, I'm just describing her. Yeah, exactly. She's crazy, but I love her. She's still my mom. Yeah, she kicked me out, I understand that, but she's still my mom. So, you know, I'm trying to line up some of these pictures to sort of get us to closer to where we are right now, and then we can get over into the knowing and a bunch of the stuff that you've been working on because I wanna get into some of that stuff too. Yeah, so I mean, what happened was, I didn't stay a software engineer. I actually had an offer from the GNU Labs at one point, and in stupidity, I didn't take it because I didn't understand how jobs worked and that you could have too. Because back when I was young, I was like, no, no, no, you get a job and you stay there forever, sort of a thing, and I didn't really understand. I had a full-time job, you guys are two months late, like had you, you know, and I didn't really realize, they didn't care, they're a bunch of hippies, if I put in two hours a week, they'd have paid me for it and been happy. So I never understood that. And then what I did was I went into more of the system stuff and tech support and through that route because that's where the money was. It was harder to get a software engineering job and software engineering wasn't, it was a particularly turbulent market back then, right? You were either a high-end software engineer or you were gonna be in a low-end shop, and that really didn't appeal to me because the money differential was crazy. But they didn't have enough tech support people, so I went into tech support. Also, had to be on the phone. Mark does not like to talk on the phone, still does not like to talk on the phone. Still like calling somebody is like, I don't know, what do I say? Like, I don't have a script for that. Like, what the hell, right? Like I have some scripts now, so I do much better in the world, but like ultimately, no, I don't, I'm always like, oh, it's been too long. What do you say? You know, I got all that anxiety, right? So I'm like, no, no, what you need to do, you need to go into tech support where you're on the phone all the time. That's what you need to do. So I did and I made good money doing it. And I was a top tier tech support engineer. I was the only guy in the shop allowed to work over time without approval. Because they were like, look, you're getting all these calls. In fact, I blew the record out at NEC for calls taken in all the tech support departments. And our tech support department had the second hardest calls because we were doing CD-ROMs and SCSI and all this complicated technology. I did something like 220 calls in eight hours. Oh yeah, no, I kidded out of the park. Yeah, I beat the previous record by 12 calls or something stupid. And that guy worked nine hours. He worked through his lunch. I did not, sir. Just saying. So yeah, I bet I'm highly competent. When I get into something, I get into it. And then I learn it. And if I can't learn it, I get out. But if I can learn it, I do it. And I do it at top level every time. And so most of my jobs were around what we would now call DevOps, but working with software teams and getting the infrastructure up and running that they need to run their software. And I'm very good at that. It's systems work. So I understand how things fit together. But then I had a house for a long time. It got stolen from me. The courts, yeah, the courts let the banks take it. A foreign bank, no less. I don't know why. Five years, $50,000 later, and then I got to start over. And I had always had my eye on the South. I was like, no, I should be in the South. I shouldn't be in the North. And I never did it, right? I could have done it sooner maybe. And my mother had moved down to South Carolina, down to Columbia. And then so while I was at the tail end of the house lawsuit that unexpectedly I lost somehow, even though that's legally not possible, I was down here anyway, and I was working remote, which was nice at the time. And mom had just gotten over her first cancer thingy. And I was living basically in her frog front room over garage, it's a Southern thing. And I had a bathroom. I didn't need to leave really. It was great. Bed, TV, little computer. Don't do that either, horrible way to live. But I had a bunch of cash. I was gonna buy a house. So I ended up buying a house down the street, 12 acres of land. I have a pond, pretty freaking good. Yeah, I paid cash so no one can take it, right? Yeah, yeah, because I'm still paranoid about A, being homeless, B, now people not being homeless, but being homeless because people decide they want your stuff. Yeah. And then mom got cancer again. And I was starting to realize, wow, she's pretty crazy. And then she had all these quirky behaviors, but I was just like, whatever, people have quirky behaviors. But then as she was actually dying with the second round of cancer that was much more virulent, I began to see that she saw things that, maybe she saw a bunch of things that are there that most people can't see, fair enough. Cause like I'm all into that. Now I'm like, okay, sure. I was always like that. I was like, I'm not all science, man. I'm like, yeah, there's some stuff out there that we can't explain, like fair enough. But I mean, she was seeing some stuff that definitely, definitely wasn't there, right? Definitely wasn't there. And then what she would do is she would be able to justify her delusion somehow and make a coherent story out of it. And that was when I was like, oh no, no, no, mom's not smart, genius level, way past that. Like, how do you do? So I'm, and I'm still doing it. I'm still like, how did she pull off some of this stuff? Like, how is that possible? Like no one can be that smart. Like you just can't be, right? And she had gotten remarried and my stepfather, my stepfather had an unrecorded IQ. The guy knew everything. There were no questions he couldn't answer off the top of his head, which I don't know if he had an eidetic memory or what was going on. I don't know how many books he read, but I'm not well read actually. I refuse to read the classics. I don't read any philosophy. I won't engage in that stuff. This guy read everything. So I can always just ask him a question and he would know the answer. It was very convenient. And towards the end of his life, he went blind, which is just like the biggest tragedy ever. He wasn't fully blind. And then in the middle, my mother decided she was gonna do chemo again after saying she was never gonna do chemo again. Because chemo, I was taking to the chemo treatments. You're a mess on chemo. And then he had hatched a plan to take his own life in a way that she wouldn't find the body. And that was the day after my birthday. It's a bad week, Paul. And then I had to spend the week at her house because she had a very high up bed and she kept falling out of it, trying to get into it. And somebody had to be there and she wouldn't get the fall thingy and she wouldn't hire nurses because she was crazy. She wouldn't give up the bed. The bed's really high up the ground. The estate got stolen from me. Everything gets stolen from me, apparently. I wanted to burn the bed. I literally would have burned the bed. I would have put it somewhere and I would have lit it on fire. I was so angry about that bed being off the ground. I believe you. Yeah. Now I'm very upset that I did not get to burn the bed. Plus all the stuff I lost, all the memories. So your stepfather is gone and now your mother is gone and you're in South Carolina and you're between jobs right now again. And so, because when I asked you, hey, when do you want to do this conversation? Ah, my schedule's pretty free. And so you're spending your time on these Discord servers and having conversations like this and trying to figure out knowledge. And so maybe a good pivot point then to... It's gonna be... So in terms of the people who watch my channel, there are, I mean, my eclectic nature sort of breeds, my mother only watches, in fact, I talked to my mother often on Mondays and my mom said, any interesting conversations I want to watch? It's like all the other videos. She's like, I'm not gonna listen to my son talk about this stuff, you know? But if there's an interesting personality, I'll watch that conversation. So, because those are the only ones that are interested. Her son is mapped territory, the other people are not. So, where was I going with this? So, Verveki comes along and did you find Verveki via the algorithm or how did you get from Peterson to Verveki? That wasn't clear. The algorithm seemed to do it because I caught the FDMC right at the beginning somehow. And I mean, I had engaged with some of his stuff because like, oh, he's talking about zombies, that's cool. And by the way, there are actual zombies in Scotland. Just go to Scotland and you'll see people walking around. And I assure you, they are zombies. They are not interacting with the world in any way you would expect. Not an American anyway. I was like, wow, these people are really lost. Like, holy macaroni, they're gone. I know a lot of schizophrenics in my neighborhood that I see them shuffle around and it's like, zombies. Yeah, exactly. So, you got, go ahead. Yeah, I was interested in the Verveki stuff and I had seen a couple of his videos and when FDMC dropped, it just put me in there. And so, it's funny, I've been thinking about this a lot the past week. I don't think that without, John's gonna kill me. I don't think that without Peterson, you care about John's work. I think Peterson gives you a reason to care about meaning and think about whether or not your relationship to meaning, your participation in meaning. So, therefore, John's, I would call it a science of meaning. That's what I think his series is. It's not interesting. Like, it's not an interesting thing to engage with. And a bunch of the people on the FDMC Discord server are Peterson fans. Yeah, well, it was, well, you know, when I first, so you know who Strawn is. He's, I mean, he was, so I started making videos about Peterson and then Strawn, I start getting emails from this guy and they just keep coming. And if you know him, you know, they just keep coming. And so, and then he's like, you really have to, you really have to listen to this John Verveki guy, he's a colleague of Peterson. And then there's that old video of Peterson and Verveki talking to each other. And that was interesting. But then, of course, and then he had the Buddhism and cognitive science that, but the sound was horrible and that I couldn't, I couldn't really make heads or tails of it because the sound, technically the sound was horrible. And then he started doing awakening from the meaning crisis. And then, of course, I start playing around with his ideas and then he contacts me and we start having conversations and on and on we go. But, you know, when he, he basically framed Peterson's work as a meaning crisis. And when, you know, when he sort of, when he sort of used that frame, because I was trying to figure out, I came across Peterson and, you know, first it was the culture war stuff and Peterson's convention about pronouns and okay, but he wasn't an evangelical. And then he's doing a biblical series that's like, what's with that? And I listened to start listening to his biblical series, it's like, he's definitely not a, you know, religious, he's not a Roman Catholic conservative, he's not an evangelical conservative, what the heck is this guy? And so I'm trying to figure out, figure out what's going on with that. And then of course, one thing leads to another and, you know, meaning, maps of meaning, there's all this meaning stuff. And then Vervecky comes along and it's like, oh, well now I think you're exactly right. There, you don't, you kind of need both of them to figure out, especially for a lot of people because, you know, I was just talking to, I was just talking, I mean, we all did, I wanna, I had a conversation with someone quite recently who, you know, just completely described what happened. It was, you found Peterson and it was like, oh, and then you just do the, we still don't have the right name for it. You know, it just basically the Peterson dunk where I, you know, you just, you just, I would just then absorb hours of Peterson material. And in fact, I had one colleague of mine stop listening to Peterson because he said, I'm listening to more Jordan Peterson than I'm reading the Bible. And he's a pastor, he says, I probably shouldn't do that. So I'm gonna stop listening to Peterson. So he stopped listening to Peterson because he was getting in the way of his Bible reading. So, but then of course, at some point, you sort of map a lot of Peterson. And then of course, Vervecky comes and it's like, oh, but John's work and his language is, you know, whereas Peterson was just sort of, that's a slippery slope, baby. You get on there and whoosh down you go. Vervecky, it's a lot, oh, wait a minute here. I'm good, he's got all this new language going on. And, you know, then I started talking about John Vervecky on my channel and people starting to complain the Christians didn't like it because he sounded too Buddhist and the Petersonians didn't like it because he wasn't Jordan. And, you know, there's this whole thing, but no, you're exactly right. These two things very, very much fit together. And without Jordan, we wouldn't be having this little corner of the internet right now. So that's, again, and I still don't think, I know I don't know exactly how those pieces fit together, but what you just said right now, I think is true. That these things in fact do fit together and John came along and okay, now we're gonna have a science of meaning and we're gonna talk about this in a little bit more disciplined way. And we're gonna try and show our work. And, you know, and so actually I talked to some people who were friends and colleagues of Jordan and they're like, yeah, well, Vervecky is, he's a traditional academic. What Jordan is, is Jordan, you know, guy's gonna buy a church, you know, before he doesn't have to, which he doesn't have to now. But, you know, so anyway, I talked to you long, you keep going. Yeah, so I think, you know, I make the following case, right? Again, if you don't care about meaning or know that it's an issue until Jordan points to it. And then I think, I'm not sure that I could do this. This is a tall order, but I think that if pressed and given enough time, I could fit all of Jordan's stuff in Vervecky's meaning framework very easily. Like I think it drops right in. A lot of stuff drops in very quickly. There's a few things that I would, I'm not sure. Like I'm just not sure, right? Like I don't know, right? But I would make the case that that can be done. And then I think that when you have a science of meaning, now you can talk to people about it. And the thing for me was, oh, well, now there's a vocabulary for this. And then, wait a minute, all these people are running around in a meaning crisis? Like, how did that happen? I don't have a meaning crisis. What's wrong with these people? Wait a minute, I had a meaning crisis. I was homeless living in the car in the winter in New England, man. I fixed all this. I can help. I can do something to fix these people. Now that I can talk about it, now that I have language to talk about it. And then I went and I knew what Jordan did. I know exactly what Jordan did. He took people, and I'm gonna invoke Descartes here, and I'm always very careful when I do that because you should be. He took people in a particular location, we'll say in life, right? And like location's a fuzzy thing, right? It's a big sphere of something, right? And he built them a path and walked them along the path. And that path leads you from, we'll say, scientific thinking into religious thinking, right? And that's basically how he saved those people. Now, my theory is, or my hypothesis, I should say, I'm trying to be rigorous. My hypothesis is that we need more of those paths. So we need more paths, the same ending point maybe, but different starting points. And then how do we build those? And that is what launched the project that Manuel and Andre and now we've got guys like Nathan and Michelle and too many other people to name. Matthew's helping us out, Jonathan's helping us out, a bunch of people, all helping us out. Some of them are helping out just by asking what they deem as dumb questions, which aren't dumb questions. If you've got to ask me what the parabolic is, that's my failure to explain. And fair enough, this is new stuff and it's hard. And I hope that I can help people understand it because I think it is the most important thing, literally the most important thing for the meaning crisis in that context, is understanding that you're missing a type of interaction with the world that is important. And if it accidentally leads somewhere you don't like, you will say to the ineffable then, oh well. Well, no, that was really good rant. And I really like how you framed it, took people in a particular location in life and he built them a path and walked them along the path from scientific thinking into religious thinking. Tell me what, describe for me scientific thinking and describe for me religious thinking. Ah, so John's term is religio. And then of course, Andre likes to screw around with the EO idea. So we call it scientifio versus religio. Yeah, that's why, because we like to laugh and we love to laugh at ourselves. And sometimes we just start truncating words with EO all the time and just talk like that on the server because we can. Hey, it works for Harry Potter. Exactly, exactly. We're very Harry Potter. Yeah, so I think basically there's, within the model of the four types of knowing, there's a very clear thing here. And we're very informed by Struan, by the way, very. Like I talked to him early on, he was on the AppDMC server. He gave me his rendition. I've talked to Veloskin, he's another one that he understands Struan's work better than Struan does, or at least can communicate it better, I think, according to Struan, not according to me. And so we've had a lot of conversations. They don't particularly like our mangling of John's model. John doesn't like our mangling of John's model even a little bit, obviously. Mary found it first. We found it a different, going a different way. And the math works too, which is very interesting. This is Andre's very own about the math works. I'm like, oh yeah, the math does work, that's weird. And so we built up this whole thing with left brain and right brain. Struan uses particle and wave. I'm using a signal theory, right? That's how I started the conversation. That was my contribution was, no, no, we should start with signal theory. And then that means linear processing on the discrete side of the brain versus continuous processing on the other side, where you're parabolic, you're not linear. You're not limited to single point connections, right? And you're not limited to connecting things, to things only having one path. So one of the arguments I've made for our model of the four types of knowing is that it explains this phenomena that I used to encounter when I was hanging out with the hippies. So one of the games we used to play was, I would say logic and reason are, and I use rationality. This is not John's definition of rationality. Our maladaptive ways of understanding the world, because I can logically rationalize anything to you very easily. And so you give me an endpoint and I'll get you there and you won't be able to object. And this is a fun game for them, because first of all, they thought like, there's no way you can do this. And it was a trick. And maybe I'm like one of a handful of people that can even do the trick, right? And I would tell them, like, I wasn't hiding the ball. I would say, no, no, I'm going to do this. I'm not going to tell you exactly how I'm going to do it, but I'm going to lead you down a logical path. And I can justify anything. And then of course, invariably, somebody would choose the Holocaust. And I would be like, well, Hitler already did that. But if you want to go through it again, I'll take you there personally. And every time it worked, and every time the people involved admitted that it worked, they just didn't understand it. And I was like, well, that's because you're in a closed world. And if you can find the right starting point, it will lead to that ending point. And there may be more than one starting point that leads to that ending point, but you're stuck. And so we call this propositional and procedural stuckness. And because it's a discrete signal, because there are linear connections that are being made, you have to form a closed world. And a closed world is very safe and comforting psychologically. Everybody wants certainty. This gives you 100% certainty when you think on this side of the brain, but this is the scientific to mangle the word side of the brain, right? And that's what we think, is that people are propositionally and procedurally stuck because look, this has been a powerful tool. Everybody should engage in using this tool, but it's not the whole world. And this is where I have deep problems with John's work. I know you were on the AFDMC doing a Q&A and I asked you the question about what do you think about two worlds mythology? And I was expecting a very profound answer, Paul. And I am slightly disappointed because your answer was, look, I think there's a lot more wrapped up in that than anybody realizes. And then you moved on to the next question. And fair enough. It was an excellent answer to be honest, right? It was like, yeah, like, do you want a dissertation on that? Cause it's gonna be several pages. You just gonna, you just, I mean, I noticed very quickly when I was going through John's work that, okay, two worlds. How many two worlds do we have? I mean, they just keep, I mean, this is where, this is, you know, I've got some people are always on me about dualism or non-dualism. And it's like, first you get one and then you get two. And then you get three. And you just, I mean, how many things in life don't just flow this way, but you're, I really, I really do like your point about, about logic. I mean, Martin Luther basically said, said a very similar thing. He said, basically reason is a horse will work for anyone. And it's, you're exactly right. You can, you can, you create a closed world. You figure out that closed world. You know, today all, everyone loves talking about conspiracy theories. It's just another example of it. You know, once you, once you decide that this group of people is managing the world for some nefarious outcome, you can play the entire world through that script and it all makes sense. And, you know, I think you said that nicely earlier when you talked, you know, about your mother's, you know, if she's, you know, she's having hallucinations or something like that, you sit, and I talk to schizophrenics all the time and just sit and you listen and, you know, they're absolutely convinced about all of the things they're telling you. And they're like, okay, you know, I can't talk you out of that. And so I'm not going to bother trying. It doesn't work, the world doesn't work that way. So, yeah, I think that's true. You can imagine some of the side effects of this and some of which we're still realizing. Like one of the interesting side effects of this type of thinking is that you come up with the conclusion that the world is a zero sum game. And so something like distribution of wealth seems perfectly reasonable. If it's a zero sum game, the only way you got it was from stealing it. That's the only way you got it, right? But then you can also see the downside. Like the downside is, well, if it's a zero sum game, why am I going to participate with you? Why am I going to do anything with you? I should just have the stuff. I don't have a reason to interact with you anymore. I don't have a drive, I don't have an aim, right? There's no compelling thing. And also, how are you going to, I'm gonna, yeah, I'm gonna have to kick myself later. How are you gonna find meaning in a world like that? Right, because the world is knowable. And so why would you bother knowing it? It's a knowable world, it's closed. Not that you can know the whole thing, fair enough, but you could know any part of it that you wanted. And so where's the incentive to explore the world? And so I think that leads to nihilism. But it certainly explains socialism and this weird, like socialism good. What history are you reading? What is wrong with you? There's something wrong with your logic circuits. Socialism not good, and we know this. This is a done thing, this is a settled issue. And then that leads to nihilism because there's no reason to operate in the world. And people get closed off. And then I make a further argument that you can't navigate ethics. And that what happens because you can't navigate ethics is you keep putting the world in smaller and smaller identities to try and fit into an ethical framework. And ethics is bigger, not smaller. And so what happens is you eventually shrink all identities down to a single variable. That's identity politics, that's what it is. And it's all explained by this particular phenomena where you're propositionally and procedurally stuck. And you can't get out of the propositional and procedural way of thinking. And then we think of propositions as objects and procedures as navigation. Navigation and connection, right? So it's navigation, connection, but they're all linear. And that's what reduces the combinatorial explosion so that you can manage the world. And you can say, and John made a very good point in his talk with you and Mary where he said, some of properties of propositions already limit the things you can do with propositions. Okay, fair enough, like I'll grant him that. But they don't limit it enough, right? You need the procedural to limit the combinatorial explosion from just having a bunch of propositions. So I think that to use John's terminology, that's how you reduce combinatorial explosion through navigation and a closed set of connections. And I just mean closed in that it's determinable, right? It's not infinite. And then that makes that side of the brain, the left brain discrete processing side kind of makes sense. And then you need the other side of the brain, obviously we have two sides for a reason. We've got the suchness and the moreness. Yes, yes. I'm learning the fancy verveky words. Yeah, that's very good, very good. You pass, I give you an A for fancy verveky words. So that's the suchness, right? Things as they are. And then the moreness, the right brain, continuous processing, parabolic nonlinear connections. And then you can imagine that what that does is unlike the left brain, which causes or is prone to reciprocal narrowing to use another vervekyism, although it's one of his colleagues said it first, I think, right? The other side is the reciprocal opening, the moreness, right? And so it's really weird to me that John doesn't see the parallels here or to the extent he sees the parallels, he disagrees with our model. So there you have participatory, which is movement. And you can participate in a conversation, but that's a movement too. Like conversation is a dance to some extent, right? And then you have, and it's constrained, like you can only move so far, so fast, right? In so many directions, but there's a lot more and there's a fluidity to movement. That's where the continuous signal processing comes in. There's a lot more to it. So the participatory is in some ways parallel to the procedural. Procedural is linear. Participatory is continuous movement. You're touching and you're touching and you're moving in and out. And you can see very much why you would want these two, you would want both of these. You would very much want both of these living in a world like we live in. So keep going. Well, it's interesting that you went there because that's where Jess P went with his model and it's very upsetting in a good way, right? It's rubbing up against our, so what we're doing is we're saying participatory is movement and that's equivalent to propositions. Instead, I'm not sure that we're right. I'm not sure Jess isn't right. Like I have no idea, right? And then what we're doing is we're saying parabolic is the navigation component. So parabolic maps up with procedure. And the reason why we're saying that is because we're putting navigation and connection in place. And so when you're moving around, how do you know what moves to make, right? How do you reduce the combinatorial explosion of all the possible movements in this space? And so if you look at, I know I sent you the slide along. If you look at the slide, that's where movement and navigation comes from. So we map it differently. And I know Jess, and I, Jess's model is really good. I really like it. So I'm really upset that, I'm literally upset. Like they're rubbing against each other and I don't know whose is better, right? And maybe there's no conflict, but the parabolic is the thing that, these patterns, they're small patterns, right? So these patterns that you get to engage with are the things that allow you to reduce combinatorial explosion in participation. And I did that with Mary in our second talk, right? Where I just, what did I say, boo or something? And she went and she jumped and, right? And I did that on purpose because I can do anything in a conversation with you, Paul. I can do anything. I could just rip my shirt off right now. And how would you know that that was wrong among all the possibilities? Well, I would argue that's the parabolic navigation. We have these patterns that we follow. And you can go into, well, they're really cultural patterns because a lot of people do. And I'm like, yeah, I don't care where they come from. That really doesn't matter. The fact that they exist is interesting. Well, cultural, cultural just begs the question because, okay, why do we know that ripping your shirt off in the middle of this conversation would be, you know, and I'm high in openness. So it'd be, oh, that's interesting. You know, he just ripped his shirt off in the middle. I've never had somebody rip their shirt off in the middle of a conversation. So at least not a conversation like this. So, you know, maybe if we're in gym class and we're going shirts and skins, well then maybe, but, you know, but I liked, I mean, the, it's interesting that I, so I put up the, I put up the diagram that you sent me. And I really liked this diagram because it helps me sort of, okay, get a sense of, get a sense of what you guys are, what you guys are developing here. And, you know, the, this is of course, for vacu's for peas and we have to use peas because now we've started using peas. So we're, that's how we're reducing our combinatorial explosion of fancy for vacu words. And the parabolic is standing in for the perspectival. Well, we drop it below, right? Right. What John's doing is he seems to be adding a spectralization and maybe at the top of the stack somewhere outside of this particular model, right? And Manuel, who's just like, I can't do any of this without Manuel's help. Emmanuel is so brilliant and he's so good at being disagreeable when I need to be disagreed with. It's wonderful. We realized that without a perspective, without a frame, which I loved your video, frames on the elephant's nose, like if you're interested in this topic, you really put, in my mind, you push the parabolic forward, right? The frame has to come before the knowledge because knowledge can't exist outside of a frame. I don't, and I don't know why that, like, I think, I don't know why John is so resistant to this. I think it's just definition. He just defines a lot of stuff in perspectival that I think is A, not the same stuff and B doesn't belong there, right? And that's what Manuel and I always get upset about when he talks about this. We're like, no, that's not how you should lay it out. And maybe for Kogsai, he should lay it out exactly the way he's doing it. I don't know. Like I said, I'm not gonna lose any friends, any Kogsai friends over this, that's for sure. So it's a low barrier of entry. And then the perspectival capacity is really important because what we see is in meditation. You are training aspects of your perspectival capacity. And once you have that, you can take the knowledge that you already have and participate with it differently or participate with it at all. I think one of the problems, one way to frame the problems that you see in the world is that people are not participating with the knowledge that they have. When somebody sees a video that shows a bunch of things happening and somebody goes, no, no, that video has been debunked. And you're like, how do you debunk a video? Like, are you telling me I'm not seeing what I'm seeing? They're not participating with the information, right? They don't have a connection to that information. Whatever linear relationship they've made on the other side of their brain is taking precedence over the possible relationships. And then you can imagine something like a parable. I think the structure of a parable is something like you get into the narrative or the story, however you wanna frame it. I know we're not doing good at defining those particular words. And then you have choices in the middle, right? And those choices give you options that you wouldn't have if you were making a logical argument, for example. And then there's results. And then there's potential results that you see inside the story. And so it gives it a richness and a depth, right? We use those words. And that's what enables this training of your parabolic because you see these little patterns all over the place. And then it's interesting because John did a talk with Jacob Kishir. And he actually was nice enough to come on our Discord server and do a Q&A with us too. And he tells this story, right? He goes into the Orthodox, he's stuck in Greece during COVID. He goes into the Greek Orthodox Church and he sees these things. And these symbols are up there and they're gilded in gold or whatever the crazy Orthodox people do. I don't know. They're beautiful churches though, I love them, right? And he says explicitly, no transformation. He said, I understood what I was seeing and it was very beautiful and I got a sense for it. He said, but I go outside and then I'm transformed. And I said, yeah, because you saw the patterns in the church and you saw them glorified in the church. You saw them being sacred, right? Occupying a sacred space, I should say, in the church. And then you see those same patterns in the world. And that causes an insight, right? And now you're relating to the same patterns in the world differently. Nothing's changed. The only thing that's changed is your perspective has been, your perspectival capacity has increased. And so that's what I think is happening in meditation. Most meditation, especially with things like Metta, where you're doing the suchness and the moreness and things like that, that's what that is. You're training your perspectival capacity to open and close and open and close. And John talks about this in the meditation. So I'm surprised he doesn't seem to be making that connection the way we are. And then that's what we think the perspectival does and why it's important and why even John, I think has a hard time figuring out which comes first. Participation or perspective or procedural, he couches it different ways down different trees. And I'm like, no, the four types of knowing should be equal. What should change is the perspective should be down below because it's common to all of them. And he just doesn't believe that. He's trying to solve everything I think with rationality. Interesting. Well, it's very interesting to me too, because I hate to, when I first listened to you talk about the parabolic, it was like, okay, where does a parabola fit in? And then I listened a little bit more. Okay, no, we're talking about parables. And then of course I read, I think in my messiness of my office, of course I never put anything. I picked up this book on local knowledge and this sort of connected me to Neil Postman and amusing ourselves to death because he was, Neil Postman in amusing ourselves to death written in the 80s, he was decrying the combinatorial, the stupid combinatorial explosion of cable television. And he was lamenting the loss of the literate culture of earlier New England, which was interesting. But he went on to this, he went on this description about proverbs. So throw another P in the world. You know, what happens when you go into the church and you see the patterns and then you step out of the church and that's where you have the insight is there is a degree of authority in that. And for human beings, for human beings, for a lot of us, a lot of this authority is that which gets there first. Okay, it's the first insight we have because that then lays down the pattern in us. And every new pattern that comes has to in a sense, come up against and compete with this other pattern because we see a pattern, we go out into the world, we see the pattern laid out, we have this, we make this parabolic connection and we say, oh, so then now suddenly we have found, we have found something with authority. We have found a pattern and we have said, ah, this pattern has precedence over a bunch of these other patterns because this pattern worked. And so then we keep using that pattern until something doesn't work and how we know, you know, that the, and of course it's the, it's the continuous processing part of the brain that is always asking the question, does this work? Does this work? Does this work? I don't know if this works. And because it's not linear, and that's, you know, when it gets terribly linear, well, that's when, you know, you really get into trouble. So then you get, you know, your parables, you know, Jesus tells these parables. And so, okay, and what these parables are, these little patterns, these little stories that have little patterns, very similar to what proverbs are. Proverbs are even, you know, even simpler than parables. Parables, you often need, you know, you need a number of sentences in order to construct the whole little world. Parable is usually one sentence or even not even a whole sentence. You have this little phrase, you know, a stitch in time saves nine. You know, there's a tiny little pattern. And, you know, once Ben Franklin says it, now suddenly it has a degree of authority. And I like your, I like your, I like your system that you're laying out here. And, you know, of course, I got into this when I heard Mary say things like, you know, she's just watching children. And of course, psychologists have always known if you want to have an insight into how people think watch children, because they haven't, they haven't, it's a little bit simpler and you can watch the cake as it's being made. And, you know, boys are dogs and girls are cats. Huh, why? You know, is it size? Is it aggression? Is it, you know, what is, what is in, again, we get into the verveky stuff. What is dogness? What is catness? Daddy, of course, the more famous one now from Mary, daddy's the knife, mommy's the fork, baby's the spoon. And then, you know, okay, well, what, what in fact are these relationships? What in fact are these patterns? And, you know, and I think also your point where verveky and Peterson sort of coming together, a lot of people, and I think they'll, they'll have the same challenge with this video, which is why I wanted to talk about your life, because now suddenly all of these other theories, to whatever degree, anybody's actually making any real connection between the story of your life, which they can actually connect with. And that's why people tell their stories because now we have a little parable, which is the story of Mark's life and all the little interesting things. And we find all of those little things. Oh, he was homeless in a car. Oh, he worked in UPS and he doesn't like unions. Oh, you know, all of those things suddenly, you know, draw you into us. And so that we, we care to hear about, you know, your, your, your little feud with verveky about which peas are, are most, are most pertinent to the conversation. And, and now, okay, so how does then this connect up with Peterson? Well, the thing about Peterson was that these patterns are in fact very old and these patterns get encoded in us physiologically by virtue of history before us, gets encoded into us culturally by virtue of the stories we tell. And anyone who was born into this world and thinking they're just seeing the world through fresh eyes, which in a sense, this very linear mode tends to indulge us in, Peterson comes along and says, oh, no, my friend, you are the heir of, of far more before you opened your little eyes and had any little sense of awareness that you could actually participate in this. And, you know, all of these, all of, all of this modernistic, I'm going to argue this from first principles as a way of attaining certainty and, you know, getting, you know, moving all the things away and getting down to this, you know, this Cartesian nub upon which I will construct my universe. No, it's not going to go that way. And you can do this if you want, but you should have an understanding of exactly what you're doing, which is what people who are outside those systems look at them and say, oh, they're just fixated on this point or that point. And if you constructed their world around it. And of course, religious people do this, irreligious people do this. This is, this is simply how human beings try to figure out how to construct their world. And so then we're, we're continue, we continue on for this. We're continue on with this journey of, okay, well, how can I know the truth? How can I actually learn something? How can I actually improve? Which again, we'll have, then we're going to point to Savilla over there in terms of value, you know, how on earth am I going to discover value and actually seek value and make steps up a hierarchy? So I just wanted, I hope that, cause I watched a friend of my discord who actually teaches psychology here. And he listened, he listened to the conversation with John and Mary and I, and of course, Mary began, Mary wanted to start that talk. So she talks for a long time. And then the comment from my friend was, I didn't understand anything Mary said until John explained it. And it's like, okay. So we got a lot of that going on right here. Yeah. Very interesting. It is, it is. And you can, you know, you can imagine too that, that if you have a literal interpretation of the Bible, like a strictly literal interpretation of a text, then you can't participate with it. And you can't participate with the other people that are participating with it. You've locked yourself out of that participation, which is a very strange thing, right? And then the other thing is that when you're in the parabolic, you have choices. That's the whole thing you have agency. And what does it mean to participate in the world? What does that give you really? Well, I would argue it gives you values. Like you can't understand a value on the other side of the brain in the, in the scientific mode. Like there's no value. Which is Wilfred Seller's big point that once you close that one eye to see the world through one side of your brain, you can do a lot, but you're always sneaking peaks because I can do a lot. I want to do this, but I'm not going to admit it. You had the peak, you just had the peak. And, but, but you know, to, to come back to the literal thing with respect to religion, because part of what brought me to this was that I watched these two camps go on about literalism. And I said, now, first of all, the literalists are, they're working parabolically as well. Cause all they have done is have constructed a particular system. And I would really annoy certain Christians cause I said, oh, you're all excited about Genesis one. Well, let me quote you some things about, you know, what the apostle Paul says, unless you believe with your heart, your heart and profess with your lips. I said, do you believe with your heart? Well, that's a figure of speech. Oh, well, I thought you took the Bible literally that you believe with you. This, I thought this organ pumped blood. Oh no, but that's language. Ah, yes, that's language. And then people then flip the other side and say, oh, you don't believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ. No, that's not what I'm saying at all. I'm just saying that this, this whole game that at least on the church side of things that we've been playing for the last 200 years about literal, that's just another, that certain kinds of literalism are just another parable. And it's a frame through which they are trying to select and unselect things. And again, we're all dealing with the combinatorial explosion of every text that we have to deal with and the world, which again, Peterson, you know, Sam Harris in those debates basically said, you know, oh, but the combinatorial explosion of these, I can read this text of the Bible and make it mean anything. And Peterson turns around and says, yes, and you can do that with everything else in the world too. And again, that's where, you know, the Peterson canon and the Vervecke canon really do fit together here. Yeah, yeah, and it's interesting too. I mean, one thing we should probably note that I neglected to note earlier is that language is propositional and procedural. And so it's really easy. And I think even John falls prey to this more often than I would expect. It's real easy to confuse the thing for the description of the thing, right? Like that's real easy. But you know, a lot of what you described is the same as is ought, right? Like, yeah, the left brain can describe what is, and you need the right brain to describe what's ought. Jonathan Peugeot just did a brilliant video, brilliant video, right? And he just lays it all out. He says, you can have a science of how to kill the most people most efficiently. We've done that before. It works really well. You know what though, to Peterson's point, maybe everything we can do shouldn't be considered science. Like science shouldn't be the spot, the set of every possible thing you can do. That seems reasonable too. Like I think, you know, people didn't take Peterson seriously enough about that, or didn't hear that message loud enough. It's like his most important message in my opinion is, maybe there are things that we should call not science for the purpose of making sure that we don't wipe each other out. And that's where he came at it from it's interesting because I was thinking a lot of the same things Peter was thinking at the same age, right? Because we kind of grew up around the same time, right? With the same, like the world is gonna end. They're gonna set off the nukes, you know, any minute now. But the interesting thing about choice and about participation is when you have choice, which is the parabolic, and when you can participate, now instead of operating in a closed world where everything is certain, you're trading off some certainty, dangerous, absolutely, I understand. Like don't do this lightly agreed. Don't integrate your shadow by watching maps of meaning, you know, unless you're careful about it. What you get is possibility and potential and access to potential, right? And now you can see more in the text. Now you can understand more like who's dumber, the person who reads the Bible literally or the person who can extract more than just the literal interpretation of the Bible. Because under the scientific rubric, which, you know, I'm not a big fan of anymore, I used to be, the person who understands the metaphor, the parabolic, the symbolism, is more information and more information is better. Now I don't think more information is better, but even if you look at it scientifically, science should question itself at that point. And I think that's the problem is that when you talk about something like the two worlds mythology, which is also in this chart kind of, although I've had some objections about the bar down at the bottom, right? It goes from static to dynamic. That's an attempt to fix this problem around this two worlds mythology question, right? And maybe it should be a circle with a gradient, you know, from white in the center to black outside or something, right? Oh, tell me how you're connecting this with the two worlds mythology. Yep, absolutely. It is connected exactly as you see, but let me fix the two worlds mythology first and then I'll go over this. Okay. And John, I think John knows this, so it's really weird. The two worlds mythology is a scientific construction of the enlightenment. It wasn't a thing in ancient Greece. They didn't think that way. So where did it come from? It came from science. Because there's a lot of two worlds mythologies that we're dealing with here. Because these- Right, I'm gonna fix them all. I'm gonna fix them all. It's a spectrum, right? And so you go from static stuff. We talked about static with the discrete processing on one side to dynamic stuff. And you know, everybody gets tripped up on this. No, no, Mark, material things are the things I have the most control over. And I go, okay, if I have a cup, I can't make it into a dragon, right? If I imagine a cup, I can make it into a dragon. Which do I have more control over? The cup that's always gonna be a cup because it's material or the cup in my head that I can make into a dragon and then color the dragon and then turn it into rain and then make a rainbow. Obviously you have more control in your head, we'll say, than you have over the material world. And so that's where I get that from. And there's a blending and a mixing, right? And so once you understand that, you can imagine something like if there are forces, and this is very Jungian, right? If there are forces in your head that deny or are in opposition to the material things, but you behave as though they're true, you're just gonna have this cognitive dissonance. But cognitive dissonance can go on for a long time. There were Nazis long after the end of the war who defended Nazism, right? Like these things, there is still people who defend the Soviet way of doing things, right? There's still people that hold onto that stuff, even though there's, materially, it didn't work. Like it just doesn't work. Whatever else you wanna say about it, the system failed. And we know the system had to fail in some cases. And people still hold onto those ideas. They're stuck in the static. They're stuck in the material. And they don't have the flexibility of the ephemeral, and you can go too far the other way. So like my mother, she's just seeing what she's seeing, right? And then she's justifying it all in the material world. She used to ask a lot of times, did you see that? And the interesting thing is, about half the time I'd see something, and the other half the time, almost without fail, I wouldn't be looking. And so I would tell her, no, no, I was looking down, and she'd get very upset. And I was like, why are you mad that I was preoccupied or looking out the side window? And now I know, like now it's like click. Oh, she didn't know if what she was seeing was in the ephemeral realm, we'll say, as opposed to the static realm or material realm. That makes sense now. Now, some of her behavior makes a lot more sense to me. It's too bad it came too late to, you know, maybe knowing it wouldn't have helped me, right? I think I dealt with it the way I dealt with it. And then obviously she had a very good sense for the parabolic. Perhaps she saw things a little too parabolically at times. On the other hand, she could make some amazing predictions. And I was always like, I don't know how you knew that, but you were dead on. And that wasn't stuff you had control over. So I don't know what you were seeing. Yeah. Oh, this is interesting. So the two worlds gradient, where it's a continuum, right? And it's a continuous thing. That sort of kind of explains things like shadow projection in psychology, right? Like, oh, you have this ephemeral view of the world that you're holding onto, and you're casting that into the material world, maybe onto another person in fact, right? Which is what happens a lot with, Manuel and I in particular seem to be mirrors. So when people talk to us, they say, you said that you opposed X. I was like, nobody ever said any of that. In some cases, they're saying you said the following words and we didn't say words that were even like that. People get really crazy with their projections. But the projection is they're not in touch with the ephemeral world, so they don't know about it. So it's possessing them in some sense. It's really ruling what they do and how they behave. Right, right. Oh, and even, oh, this stuff gets so tricky because I mean, there's a way in which the material, there's a way in which the material is less control. I mean, matter resists us in some ways, yet also matter is enormously compliant in other ways. The, or everything that took to come into this music stand has been completely colonized by the ephemeral desire that my cell phone can sit right up here at my desk. I'm gonna even have a little hole here to run a little cord through. And so, and in other ways, ideas, you know, in a very platonic way, ideas are enormously static. I mean, C.S. Lewis made the point that every, you know, every love in this world will end in betrayal or death. But love is extremely static, the thing itself. But, you know, then you've got the point well taken about, well, there's, you know, there's the thing itself, which now we're getting into Kantian. I can't get at that thing itself because I'm trapped over here. So, no, this is, this is, this is, I think you guys are, I think you guys are progressing the conversation in this. And John, of course, knows that. John knows that this is, I mean, he's been in academia way too long to not know that this, in fact, is the way that we do this. He's not going to just turn over and capitulate until you guys can somehow convince him. But in many ways, part of the game is that we've all got all of these observers. And so in a very Thomas Kuhnian way, we're all watching and watching and waiting for a, you know, the little paradigm in this little game and this little corner of the internet to sort of flip around. And then of course, John will be on the outside and others will be on the inside and he'll have to make a new video thing and on and on. Of course, we've got status. And of course, now you got on Paul VanderKlaas channel. So you're moving up the status hierarchy and, you know, and on and on and on and on we go. But I think this is, I have a better understanding now of where you guys are coming at this and the system that you've laid out here, which is of course a very left brain system. Because this is, I mean, we need to have these little boxes and we need to have these little words and we need to have these little diagrams. And I mean, we're just constantly flipping between these two sides of the brain, but I care about this. All that caring is only coming from the continual processing. Because the caring is always, you know, I watched Eric Weinstein this morning on Twitter, you know, okay, time to start Unity, you know, 2024. It's like we're one day into it. And it was okay, we're leaning into the future because that's part of this continuous processing. So anyway, no, this is really helpful stuff. I appreciate this. Yeah, no, and I really appreciate the audience and the reach, because you have a lot of reach. And I thought, you know, I just, Jess did his little diagram and I was like, oh, I've had my diagram in my head for months. And I put it on paper and I finally put it on paper. And then, you know, Frostmuffin on our server was like, oh, I pretty did it up. And I'm like, oh, I could make it a little prettier, right? So I made it a little prettier, right? And I'm like, putting some text on the slide and we have bigger models. We have historical grounding and realm of transformative coupling and all these other things. Because again, you know, our goal is to repeat what Peterson did for more people who are stuck, right? And reach more audience in different ways. And we're still experimenting with our larger model sets, not just this model, but the other models that we have to try and figure out if we can do that and how to best do that. And part of that project is building community and like we're really learning that the two big things are sort of participation and integration, right? And integration is something like Peterson talks about, you know, do people have ideas or do ideas have people? And then that's in some of John's coursework. So he gives a meditation course, which is excellent. I really highly recommend it. But he also has another course, Cultivating Wisdom. And in there, that's the Greek tradition, right? That's Epicurus and the Stoics and then Neoplatonist. I haven't actually read the whole book yet. I'm still working on it guys. But in there, there's a practice called maximization where you take a maxim, like a short saying, right? And you rewrite it. It's like, oh, you're trying to own the idea. You're trying to participate in the thought, relate it to your own and then make it your own. Oh, that's different from just saying, oh, what is it and absorbing it. Now you're integrating it. So this integration process is very important to us. And we've been trying to do things like set intentions. That's aim. Peterson talks about that, right? Integration, that's sitting with something. After you've meditated, we sit quietly for a minute, eyes open, you know, reintegrating. There's a process that John talked about. I don't think it was a formal lesson, but it was really transformative to my life anyway. He talks about savoring, right? And I'm like, oh, savoring. And I took a trip to Croatia recently and we had a wonderful time savoring by the sea, smelling the saltwater. And every once in a while, the pine trees would waft over and we're sitting on the beach, right? And in the sun setting and I was just amazed. Like I thought, words, come on. This is parabolic. This is savoring, right? And savoring is all about, in my opinion, making those parabolic connections, right? Really feeling your oneness with nature, right? And the wonder of nature, the awe of nature at the same time because there's all these possibilities. And one of the projects we're embarking on is this thing called the Meaning Community. And we've got a domain. We don't quite have the website ready for, you know, ready for prime time yet, but we're trying to get people involved in that and push them off to the places they need to go because not everybody's gonna go here to the scientific method, right? Not everyone's gonna hear John's stuff. Some people are gonna wanna go with Rafe Kelly and go out in the woods and do parkour, right? Some people are gonna wanna go to Bridges of Meaning and talk to the crazy Christians about crazy Christian things, right? And we're trying to facilitate all that. Like I was really interested in your talk with Jonathan Peugeot, cause he's got symbolic world and you've got this. And I was a little disappointed, Paul, cause you spent the whole middle of the video talking about other things. And they were very important things, but I was like, oh, they're gonna talk for like an hour about how to build community. And then it didn't work out that way. What would, how to build community? Well, yeah, I mean, no, in general, I mean, I think, and everybody has this sense. I mean, there's lots of problems with it, but building community in general, I think is the thing. Like that's important. John talks about it, Communitas. He's very happy. I think that we built the Sangha, that we build Communitas on the Discord server, and we need to find more ways to do that. Part of my disappointment is nobody wants to step up and say, I'll be the face of this thing. I'll fill the Peterson sized hole in the internet, or however you wanna phrase it. Because everyone's afraid of two things, structure and charisma. A lot of people are anti-structuralists. And I can imagine you'd be an anti-structuralist if you were stuck on the left side of your brain in propositions and procedures, because structures have failed. So now you're like, oh, structure bad. Like, oh, fascism, structure bad. But, and charisma, like, well, yeah, the dangers of charisma are obvious. But is there a way around that? This is like the two worlds mythology thing. What if we live in a continuum between static and dynamic, and you just don't have a choice about that, and you have to make do as best you can? And what if there's a bunch of things like that, that stack up, where you just have to make do as best you can, and use the skills that you have? I think charisma is the same thing. Like, look, you wanna build communities? You want people to come to the communities? You have to have people there, and those people have to have certain skills and a certain level of charisma. And you have to give people structure, because structure allows you safety to participate. A lot of people are afraid to jump in and build things. Builders are an archetype. I think maybe Ayn Rand, I'm kind of an Ayn Rand fan, has the archetype of the builder in her stories. Like, I think that's what those are. Those are builder archetypes, and they build things. And building things allows people to participate in the most efficient way possible, right? Because maybe they can't run the accounting of a business, but once there's a vision for a business, and you know you need accounting, you can get accounting, and then you've got your creative artists over here, and they can do their creative artistry, right? And that's how you mix these different personality types a la Peterson, to make a structure that's bigger, a whole that's bigger than the sum of the parts. And that's sort of what we're trying to do with the meeting community stuff, is to build this meeting community up. John has this lovely vision of linking up all of these communities together, and having a hub for that, and we're trying to do that. I'm working with Brett, who is the creator of the Awaiting for the Meeting Crisis Discord server. We're in association with the Vervicki Foundation, John's little foundation there. And you know, we're trying to build, to get these things together, and to shepherd people through the process of finding where their next step is, and then having a place to go back to, if it turns out that that first thing they went to wasn't right for them, right? And helping them to slot into whatever community, and maybe building more communities like that, with more practices. We're very focused on practices on the Awakening from the Meeting Crisis Discord. We meditate every day, we've got a group Lectio Divina, which is something that John resurrected from Catholicism, and then we turned into a group practice on the server. So, you know, we're doing some of this co-creation, right? Because you can co-create once you can participate parabolically, you have options, right? You can do that co-creation in participation with others. And then we're trying to do more practices. We have some circling stuff going on. We've got a bunch of stuff, and we'd love for people to participate. I'd love to have too many people, because then I can just make more groups, right? And because you want to keep the groups relatively small. But that's sort of the phase project that we're on, and we're early days, I wish we were further along, but these things always, as you know, take way more time than you can imagine, right? Because things happen. They take a lot of time. It's a lot of, it's a lot of, it's a lot of work, and it's a lot of, the kind of work that doesn't necessarily look to people like it's important or fruitful, but it's, people are subtle and complex and timid and ambitious, and all of those things together. And so it takes a little bit of time to knit things together and knit people together. So you should definitely send me links that you want me to include in this video. And people can, you know, part of the difficulty that I've seen as a pastor is that the Discord, the Discord technology isn't, we're appropriating it, it's free, and that way it's wonderfully scalable, and we can do a lot with it, but there are limits to what we can seem to do with it. And we're always pushing those limits. And I've been pleasantly surprised regularly how much we've been able to do with it. I really have been surprised. And I was more pessimistic initially, but the kinds of things that I'm seeing are, you know, are really, you know, and it gave me a sense of optimism. So no, I think you laid it out really well. So, well, thank you, Mark. This has been fun. And again, now I have a much better sense of you than I had at first, and I wish you lived in Sacramento, but because you would, there are people I want you to meet. Maybe y'all wouldn't get along because you're also low in agreeableness, but. But I've been pleasantly surprised how well low and agreeable people can actually work together given the right structure, given the right project. So, and that's been a cool thing. So, and any other things you want to get in that you had to say, oh, I talked to Paul and we didn't go here. Oh, well, there's so many places we didn't go, Paul, but that's okay. I think this is good enough for now. And I really appreciate you making the time to talk to me in particular and to go over this stuff and making time to go over this stuff, because I know normally you just want to talk to people the first few times. So I appreciate that affordance. And it's, you're a wonderful person. And I was telling people the other day, I said, man, if there's anybody who doesn't like Paul, I'm immediately suspicious of them. Like, what's wrong with that person? They're out there. You can especially find them on Twitter, apparently. Are you sure they're not zombies? Are they real people? Oh, I think they're pretty real. They're real enough. They're real, that's right, they're real enough. So yeah, send me those links. I'll probably put this out on Monday, I'm thinking. And Monday morning. And I'm really kind of, it's always, you know, and this is part of the frustration of trying to scale something up, which is, you know, yeah, if I'm doing a talk with Jordan Peterson, whoosh! And I've been amazed at the interest in randos, as it were. And so to whatever degree I can help you guys in your project, you know, I'd love to see what I can do. Oh, great. Well, thank you so much, Paul. So we will, again, send me those links and I will post this Monday and we'll see where this goes. Thank you. Take care, Mark. See ya. Bye bye.