https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=yAHTeECcP9E

 Hi, this is Paul. On Friday I released part two of my commentary on the Vervecki-Peterson conversation. Now part of what I'm doing is using sub stack to using a combination of stub stack and Twitter to write video summaries. Now not everyone can has hours to sit and watch or there's always a an audio only podcast version of the videos as well. So often what I do and this is sort of part of the practice of thinking through these videos is I will release a video that morning and then I want to release a link to that video on Twitter and I want to give some sense of what's in the video. But just as you know a lot of people say well can't you just condense this? I just don't have time to do a clip channel right now. But can't you just condense this? And it's like no. Peterson had a nice line in there about in the in the conversation that he's given before the difference between just sort of a revelatory download let's say and editing. And these first draft videos are just mind dumps, brain dumps through YouTube and I'm recording them so that I have them. And as I said on the quest of every Friday, probably won't do one next week, but many Fridays I have a question-and-answer session on the Bridges of Meaning Discord. And often by the end of the video I've got some different ideas about the video than when I started. That's why I do what I do and it's why these things take so long. And I completely understand when people say I don't have time to watch or listen to that thing. Totally, totally get that. Totally get that. So because of that I have taken up this sub stack where I sort of create these tweets and the tweets force me to sort of get the ideas within 280 characters. So bang, bang, bang, bang. Twitter is nice because it does a nice job with links as does sub stack. I can just basically take all those, take that tweet thread, throw it onto sub stack and be done. There are sometimes typos which are significant as there was in this one which I'll point out when I get to the end of it. So if you sort of want to keep up with what I'm doing on my commentaries and monologues, just subscribe to my sub stack. I haven't monetized the sub stack at all. I don't know if I'll do that at some point, if it grows large enough perhaps, or if I need money for something perhaps. But at this point it's all free so you can get them all if you want to. And so I entitled this one the fall of modernity and the rise of spirit because as usually what happens is I'll make the commentary video the day before or a few days before and then I'll get up early in the morning and I'll do the Twitter work and write the sub stack and usually there's been development while I sleep and sort of things have sort of crystallized and so not only is the sub stack a summary of the video but the sub stack is usually an ongoing processing of some of the ideas that making the video has provoked in me. So the title of the sub stack is the fall of modernity and the rise of spirit dissecting the Jordan Peterson John Vervecky conversation. Today's video is the second release of the commentary on Jordan Peterson conversation with John Vervecky and you'll notice in the sub stack that it's almost always the Twitter handles if they have one of these individuals because this starts as a tweet and of course part two was entitled John Vervecky's distributed cognition into Jordan Peterson's spirit. When this video first dropped on Monday meaning the original the reaction of many of us was what was that? There was no consensus on how to account for this unusual conversation. The title calls it psychedelic I think of it's more shamanic and I talked about that what do I mean by shamanic because having a Christian minister talk about something being shamanic something again if you listen to some of the early episodes of John Vervecky's awakening from the meaning crisis shamanic is sort of a break up of sense-making so that you can see alternative perspectives of whatever it is you're looking at. A key theme that I've been developing for a while in my videos is that the disruptions of what rebel wisdom calls sense-making is the cause for a lot of the societal political and ecclesiastical chaos and disruption. Modernity was able to achieve broad consensus in many areas through mass media where the propagandistic elements were so pervasive it couldn't be seen. It would be best seen if it were part of a sufficiently coherent ethnic political or religious subculture. For example if you were a fundamentalist increasingly you look at broader American society and you say that's no longer me. That began to break down in the political sphere with the coming of Fox News and if you remember all the way back when I first started making videos about Jordan Peterson I was reading Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death and Neil Postman wrote that book with the rise of cable TV and since that time things have exploded exponentially. Then there were two bubbles who were just delivering propagandistic facts. The internet plus the rise of social media platforms made everyone look like a propagandist like a propagandist except me and my little tribe. Modernity invites the individual to imagine himself or herself above a world of objects or a world of facts that they directly observe and pass judgment on. In many ways Descartes got this thing going with his invitation to strip away everything from the subject even making thinking something differentiated from the self. John Vervecky is asserting that this Cartesian way of knowing is increasingly undermined by cognitive science and then I have a link to where he talks about that. In order to mentally grasp an object the subject doesn't simply stand apart but must conform itself to the object as the hand conforms to grasp the cup. In order to know the subject in order to know the subject one must to a degree participate in the object. There's something I should correct in the sub stack a moment. In order to know the subject one must to a degree participate in the object. Distributed cognition has a property collective intelligence that is not just the sum of individual intelligences. John Vervecky asserts here and then the link to it. In a monofocal propagandistic modernity sense-making this dynamic is masked. We participate in the vast sense-making stories naively taking them in deeply deriving our identities from them. As the mass media grip on the zeitgeist was increasingly disrupted first by cable TV and then by internet consensus within the body politic within the body politics continues to break down. Awareness especially during the Trump campaign rose should probably arose with fake news and the loss of facts. This process happened long ago in the Western Church with the Protestant Reformation fueled by the rise of the printing press. Western churches adopted mass media techniques to keep their collective cognition whole in addition to historic Christian communal sense-making. The current bipartisan political desire to reign in social media is an attempt by modernistic mass media to recapture their lost world but it will fail. Technology has killed modernity in a similar way that it killed the medieval Roman Church and it didn't kill the Roman Church. It didn't kill the Roman Church. The of course the Protestant Church arose and I talked about in my question and answer today about Protestantism being sort of the laboratory of change for the church as a whole but the medieval Roman Church gave way to the Counter-Reformation and the Council of Trent which brought about the modern Roman Catholic Church and you can read about that and in the the book out recently Reformations by I forget his name. What we find beneath the rubble of modernity is a far older way of talking which will not be unfamiliar to Christians who didn't completely translate away their Bibles, that of spirit. What Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky are doing in this conversation is unmask is the unmasking of spirit beneath the rubble of modernity. John Vervecky's non-theistic project of developing a religion that's not a religion within an ecology of practices was has discovered that logos emerges as people intentionally pursue some form of distributed cognition. Jordan Peterson keeps trying to map John's observations onto his psychological reading of Christianity. I believe part of the reason Jordan Peterson triggered a sacramental Christian religious revival is that he's been unmasking spirit in the modern frame. Jonathan Pigeot has been doing similar has been doing similarly but with the non-confrontative exposure of pattern as an accessible static metaphor for spirit. Ancients would would of course find all of this to be most obvious. Spirit has always been the word used to account for the movement of individuals and groups. It was just discarded in the naturalism lab leak that shamed people out of that way of talking. Instead of dreading dissecting instead of dreading dissecting this shamanistic conversation, now I originally it said not in the tweet and that was a misspelling or a typo now motivated to continue into it. I hope these explanations will make it more accessible. And then a couple of really good comments left first by Kim Watson. Paul I too am only 30 minutes into the Peterson verveci and have started your commentary first but stopped when I saw you felt confused and bothered. I wanted to see the original for myself before seeing your take which is what I usually do. As an aside I'm a Star Trek fan who loved Enterprise on its first run because I stayed away from negative commentary that could influence me. I have a history with this laugh out loud. Only 30 minutes in while Jordan's interruptions have been a bit bothersome. I have two observations. There's a given take between them that is far more casual that is far more that is a far more casual conversation among peers than either one's usual MO. They speak the same language easily and have clearly, I'm not so sure about that, because vervecian language is pretty strict and have clearly had some conversations over the years to know how the other one reacts, overreacts, interacts. There are sides jokes and personal knowledge coming out of this that make it more of an eavesdropping than an interview. I think that's true. We are all flies on the YouTube wall with this. I think that's true. As someone with ADHD over 50 years this begins to sound like what goes on in my monkey mind which is usually treated as negative. In this case though it's as if each person is a side of the brain. John takes the part of the left brain with reasoning, logic, details. Jordan takes the right side with intuition, imagination, creativity, order and chaos, the center and the edge. These interjections and interruptions are more normal to me as I think than as I speak or listen. I think that's true. As Jordan has said many times you have to speak in order to think. In the beginning he's blurting out his speaking part as he tries to think with John's left brain and they each actually know exactly what the other is talking about when we have no idea. I'm not sure that's often always true in this video. I'm really excited to see what all comes out of this as it spirals out into our little corner of the world. This conversation is fascinating. I agree. And James Lee. We all belong to cults. The cult you cannot see is the one you belong to. It's a great line. Paraphrasing overseas journalist Michael Yahn. Thank you Paul. I think, and he's quite right on this, I think you mean are motivated or now motivated to continue diving into this conversation. I appreciate now having your sub stack to digest your thoughts along with gathering up snippets of your video commentary. Although they are edifying immensely. I am about halfway through the John Verveke Jordan Peterson conversation and 30 minutes through your commentary. Normally I tried to listen to podcasts at 1.5x to get more information in but had to slow theirs down to one time. Many people have made this comment even to attempt to follow them. You frame the language that seems to be Jordan Peterson as manic or schizophrenic in the lay sense of the terms and I found it annoying that he keeps interrupting Verveke. As you say is Jordan Peterson all right? That question is still out there. Still if John Verveke still a member of the Blue Church in good standing. Verveke's I think always sort of been a heretic in the Blue Church. He you know Verveke in the Blue Church I have to think a lot more about that because John's always I think John has always been a fringe individual for the Blue Church tolerated. He's not an iconoclast in the Blue Church sort of like Peterson. Peterson is in some ways a rebel who I think Peterson is in some ways a rebel who wants to purify the Blue Church. And that way he's sort of a one of my first conversations with Ron Dart was about Erasmus and Luther and Dart wanted to see Peterson as Erasmus and I said no he's way more Luther. Jordan wants to purify the Blue Church. John is sort of like a member of a church who knows exactly where not to step to get in trouble with the Blue Church but is in other ways a quiet revolutionary of his own but in good standing with the Blue Church as James says. Although he wasted his time or was offended by Jordan Peterson how come he was not offended by Jordan Peterson how come he consented to having the video released or am I mistaken and John Verveke is embarrassed to be party in this insane conversation? I don't think so. I don't think so at all. I think one of the one of the amazing qualities I've noticed about John Verveke is how he can roll with a lot of divergent people including myself because for Verveke to talk to and establish Christian minister by myself both John Verveke and I take hits for talking to each other which is part of what makes it fun. Fascinating. I can need to find meaning following your following you on this path online and in person. Regards sir. I've got to get back to my day job. James is a part of our local meetup here. So again if you don't have time to watch all the videos you can just subscribe to the sub stack and at least you'll get a sense of where I'm going what I'm thinking in a far briefer way. Twitter there's a lot more noise to signal. I play around with Twitter a lot so but the sub stack will be quite a bit more disciplined and quite a bit more brief than other things so you'll find a link to the sub stack below and if you subscribe it'll come to your email box. Now we're ready to dive back in. I got some complaints and sound levels with these commentaries as always tricky. Things have gotten quite a bit better since I started using OBS and the comment on the last one was my voice was a little didn't say it but then I did a little investigating. My voice volume was a little lower than the commentary volume so I lowered the commentary volume a little bit. Hopefully it won't be too much. It is a little tricky. Now someone you say well you can edit these and normalize the sound. Yes but then I have to edit these and if you understand the nature of this project for me I don't really consider myself a YouTube creator. That's the YouTube term that they like to use. I am using this way of creating a learning community and educating myself and these commentary videos are completely unedited. I don't edit these videos at all and a lot of the process that I've developed it's sort of a streaming process even though I don't stream them so that I don't edit because if I had to edit video I wouldn't have a channel because I don't want to edit. I don't want to edit so let's go. What you're looking for. Well I think you probably lost me to some degree with that last move so maybe I can get you to lay it out a bit more. So what people start to do is in relationship to the way the locus is unfolding they start to see a pattern of how things can unfold and make sense and then they start to see that maybe that's the pattern that is ultimately discloses reality to them. That's how now there was a lot of discussion in the comments on my last video about logos in this way and my comments at the end of it was they both want to be talking about one thing and I think from a Christian perspective there isn't just one thing that if you let's say you have how can I say this so for a Christian spirits there are lots of spirits around and you can understand this in sort of a revelatory traditional religious way that posits spirits that are not created by human beings and there are spirits that are created by us and many spirits are collaborative between non-human spirits and human spirits. Okay so let's use my go-to illustration of school spirit. Let's imagine that a high school was built on that let's say that the developers of the town chose a site for the planned school on an outcropping to afford it wonderful views. The climate of where that school is located will impact school spirit. The architecture which is a function of the geology and the geography of the school will impact school spirit and so now you have spiritual influences that are a function of the geography and the geology and so you'll have spiritual influences that are already embedded before human beings were ever around in this world. Now again in a Christian worldview there are spiritual powers and forces that are pre-human and this is where the question of spirit and non-human spirits and even what we would call aliens comes into fore because we are awash in spirits. We are sensitive to spirit and we participate in spirits and we contribute to spirits and so in this conversation where they keep focusing in on logos and that's a valid thing to do I would continue to say that let's say if you have a group that is circling or a group that is meditating together and these are practices that that John has been studying and working in Jordan Peterson has been paying more attention to historical spirits that to use the singular is okay but to it is also insufficient. Now this is very tricky because you know the videos that I'm not making where I'm thinking about things like universal history and where I'm thinking about the past see the past is a very tricky thing because not only but let's say something physical in the past like Jesus revelation or a car accident that I had in the year 2000 January of 2000 when I was leaving the Myers parking lot in Grand Rapids, Michigan moving into 28th Street on the suicide lane right at the intersection of Kalamazoo Avenue and 28th Street and I moved in and I didn't see a car that was coming down because it was masked by another car and it hit my little blue car and then my wife's uncle who worked at a body shop gave us a good deal in repairing the car that was an incident that happened at a place in time. That incident its physicality doesn't change but via history that incident has many many layers of reality built into that incident the make of the car the history of the creation of that car you have combinatorial explosion in that incident and multiple spirits are in that incident yet see this gets into the question of what religion was and especially let's say the book of Job because Job's friends say because of the calamities that you have suffered you have offended God pagans might say you have offended the gods in their attempt to deal with the agent arena relationship and the meta divine realm they they might have said it was fated I've just about completed the last kingdom and utrid and that whole story on netflix season four and utrid keeps saying things like everything is fate and again fate is an attempt to agentify the arenic impersonal nature of this meta divine realm and and there have been endless religious conversations with respect to that so they're talking about logos and logos and the platonic sense and the neoplatonic sense and the stoic sense is this organizing principle but again when you get to this level agency and arenic agency get very interesting and so they keep talking about the singular and in this sense they keep looking for what Jordan Peterson might call God and John Verveckia non-theist well in some ways even though for Jordan Peterson God is something that I might put in quotes very early in the biblical lectures somebody asked Jordan I should look up that his answer to that and listen to that again someone asked Jordan if all of human minds were to go away would God go away would God go away and that was a very profound and subtle question because Jordan Peterson in a modernist frame where he's speaking psychologically God is a function of the intersubjective between us in many ways and so I dealt with a question about that in today's question and answer God then is a function of what we need to make sense of the world and I think Jordan Peterson is right that it that God is just too helpful of that God in quotes is too helpful of a function to actually do away with and so there's no killing that God because we simply need that God for us to make sense of the world but to what degree ontologically is that God an agent who has purpose very interesting kind oh that was with ginger bill when ginger bill said you know about the the real difference between us and animals my conversation last Friday with ginger bill is our capacity for purpose and of course if you're as John Verveke have questions about telos and say well this is something that people do and it's not in the universe well that's that's sort of the assertion of contemporary non-reductive naturalism and I think you know JP Marceau has really worked hard on John Verveke's conceptions of that that's the you know that's the debate and to what degree then are Christians fooling themselves again a lot of these questions came up in in my question and answers today and I thought today's was a particularly good question and answer they're they're quite uneven but I thought they were I thought they were pretty good so so again all of this to the fact that they're talking about the singular logos and not various spirits because I would say when a group of people come together all of the combinatorial explosive data comes together in that group and in a sense they create a new spirit that might be a very that might be a very short living spirit today in sort of the new agey lingo they might talk about the energy of the group and and so I guess in some ways we are substituting for spirit again because of the naturalistic lab link lab leak and social pressure we don't want to say that word even though the word hasn't been completely exercised from our vocabulary and and so when we listen to a group talk about the energy in the room or the energy of the group that is in a sense a spirit that all of these spiritual beings in the room that all of these spiritual beings in the room have come together to create or participate in because there's probably some energy from the architecture energy from the history of the room energy that's all there I would say spirit that's all there that is going to impact the spirit that the group creates by their gathering now is there a can you follow that all the way back to the logos that created the world yes that logo that logos is never exercised completely the only place where that logos is completely exercised we have a name for and that name is hell which is by definition the complete extraction of the logos in sort of a c.s lewis great divorce way of saying I won't bother you anymore but what in fact is left of you if it goes that far so I know that's a lot to say and if I keep going like this we're 25 minutes into two and a half hours so yeah maybe the um maybe someone will win the bet over someone else well they start to think well that's okay so is that it can this is why you're so interested in consciousness I mean I think maybe one of the things you and I share is that we find it difficult to make a distinction between the consciousness of reality and reality itself so I think yeah I mean I that's why I've coined this term transjective to try and talk about the relationship these kinds of relationships of participation that they're being co-created by transjective okay so so expound upon that see and this is why I think again Peterson's been okay someone took issue with me saying he's fighting for his life okay he's been busy okay if you don't like fighting for his life he's been busy well the I mean the the notion is ultimately um ultimately derived from Tillich's idea the symbol is that which grounds and makes possible the relationship between the subjective and the objective and and I think this point here and part of the bigger project of trying to account for the Christian Jordan Peterson revival and the shape that that revival has is why neo-sacramentalism and I think for Vickie puts his finger on it here that looking for these sacramental portals between us and our maker and us and the world of I'll use Christian terms the Holy Spirit is is something that has you know is deeply undermined by to a certain degree by Protestantism and you can read Peter Crieff's book on a dialogue between CS Lewis and Billy Graham and who was the third person that he put in Billy Graham CS Lewis and probably I've got it in Kindle can't think of it right now but but it was about sacrament about you know again what I've been you know when I talked to Brett Sockel about transubstantiation that's why this I think Peterson triggered so deeply strange but Peterson triggered this revival of neo-sacramentalism which which in some ways was sort of just it's it's been already swelling up I see that because churches that we planted in the 90s that were seeker oriented have all gone neo-sacramental and and when I told the the church in Australia when I told the pastor your wave is coming my friend because I know you're living in you know you're living in the land of Hillsong but your day is coming and he's like I don't see it I said yeah but culture moves from California to Australia it would be the kind of idea that you have in ancient epistemology whereas instead of thinking of knowledge as representing something over there you know Aristotle's idea is the mind and the object that is known come into conformity I mean now now this is what I wrote about in the substack and I realized when I was writing it that I was smuggling in a little bit of the future into that because I had exactly this scene in mind in the substack and again because yesterday every now and then when I make these videos I fail to pay attention to whether or not the record button is on and this has to do with the various setup the setup I have here in terms of especially the space bar and stopping these videos sometimes I stop the recording and I don't realize I'm stopping the recording and then I sit here and talk for an hour or 45 minutes and have nothing to show for it except of course the process and so you've got the the secondary benefit of that because I had seen this and talked about this already but but this point this point I think is really critical and I think John Vervecky is right that what we are realizing is that the modernist epistemology we're done with it it's it's not it's it's going away and this is a big part of modernity going away using is the knowledge as representing something over there you know Aristotle's idea is the mind and the object that is known come into conformity I'm using shape as a metaphor for form where form means something more like you know a plonk form the structural functional organization organization that makes it be what it is this is the key Greek idea that which makes it be what it is is also what makes it be knowable as it is right there that is so key now again many people who will watch this conversation have not listened to awakening from the meaning crisis and John goes through that stuff and I've listened to those videos not all of them but many of them two or three times but this already was before Covid when he was making them that point right there is key and I think it's correct and this is part of the reason there's such an ancient element to this and part of the reason that Jonathan Peugeot is finding so much purchase with the culture because I think he's right and there's a deep strain of Aristotle in Peugeot's work. Greek structural functional organization that makes it be what it is this is the key Greek idea that which makes it be what it is is also what makes it be knowable as it is and so I'm not representing the cup my mind conforms to it it has this see and that's the difference because in with a monarchical vision and in the modern frame we think oh there's a cup I know it and now because of cognitive science we realize that in some ways we have to bring that cup into our space and if you watch yourself closely and I became aware of this stuff watching the Peterson videos if you watch yourself closely you know where is the book in my study I can point to the area that it's at well that's weird because my books are not terribly organized in case you didn't notice but I yet have a sense of where it is I have a member in in my church who is a brilliant man and he's getting up there in age now but he's been a absolutely central figure in a particular state department he famously had in his office huge stacks of papers that covered the floor and you know it's almost a party trick someone would go to his office and the guys and the guy's just a savant he really is people would go to his office and ask for a paper and he would look at the stacks and he would he would be able to zero in where in the stack and pull it out people how can he do that well he couldn't tell you where the paper was in a sense it was physically in he and his office was in his mind and and that's true of here again and again every now and then my wife will move something in the kitchen and I used to it's so bad because I'm so what I'm so much my father in this because my mother would laugh because my father would try to put something away in the place that it used to be 10 years before and my mother would get frustrated and say why couldn't you learn that I moved this and I had to do the same things every now and then especially when I'm thinking about something else I automatically go to pull out a dish from a cupboard where the dishes used to be that got imprinted in me and so in some sense my kitchen physically is in my mind and it's not stored in the way we imagine things are stored and and I think what John is the point he is making here is is dead on right the same form as it and so it's not right to say that it's sort of well that's what you do when you reach to pick up the cup according to Piaget well yes very much and so in some sense you're mimicking the cup by understanding it you're shaping yourself to it right which is different so and this is the difference between a Cartesian and a theological approach to knowledge right because the Cartesian approach is I don't have to undergo transformation in in fundamentally in who I am in order to know I just have to properly organize my proposition okay and here's we get where we get to Protestantism because Protestantism you know so if you're a medieval Catholic how are you saved by going to mass by confessing to the priest by baptism by last rites by the sacrament Protestantism changed this how are you saved by knowing the propositions now there's a pitfall here and this is where I expose my Protestant self once again because that propositionalism doesn't go away it's always there and what we're really dealing with is emphasis because even in Protestantism in some extreme forms of Protestantism they do away with the sacraments and and this is where again Peter Crieff's book about Lewis oh gosh who was the third almost oh was it Tolkien Tolkien Lewis and Billy Graham talking about the sacraments this is this issue okay and so now this critique of propositionalism which is right there in how many deconstruction stories which is there in Peterson which is there in Verbeke this is a reassessment of modernity and now what we usually do when we reassess or when we destroy the icons of something is we overreach so it's always what revolutions do they always overreach and then after the enthusiasm of the overreaching it's well maybe I went too far it's usually we do but but notice here this is where the lines are and now in this video for the first time Verbeke is going to talk to Peterson about my wife just messaged me hang on this is a very difficult video to sort of summarize by its frenetic quality and and you can even see and and you can even see you know YouTube has all of these little you know this is a new feature that YouTube put in look how many of them there are in this conversation compare that to some of his previous conversations now John communicating his four Ps of knowledge is I think one of the successes of this video because his four Ps it's really it's not one two three four it's three and one not three in one but three and one that is key to understanding this and if you've watched my previous videos you know that I often bring up John's four Ps and of course some in the awakening from the meaning crisis discord server have argued it should be parabolic and so there's there's a lot of debate about those four Ps but we're just going to go with John's four Ps because John's got the bigger platform and more of you can sort of be conversant with it positions but if you go before to know I just have to properly organize my propositions but if you go before Descartes right even reading was pursued not informatively but transformatively the idea was unless I go through fundamental transformations there are deep truths that will not be disclosed to me and see this is where you know Calvin is such an interesting figure Calvinist would bring up John Calvin because this is part of what Calvin says about the the work of the Holy Spirit in the Christian's life you have to know Christ in order to understand him now a lot of people don't realize that Calvin loved the church fathers and read them deeply now part of what happened after Calvin is that Calvinists in the following generation because remember Calvinists you know a lot of these reformational pastors were Renaissance people what do I mean by that they loved the classics and so this was part of the this was part of the Italian resident Renaissance and Renaissance humanism where they you know they can read this again in reformations they took on Greek names and they took on Latin they took on ancient names because they were such fanboys of the classical world and and so some of Calvin's ideas about what it means to know God for Vicky is talking here this isn't alien it just tended to be the people a century a century later nobody in the in the 16th century called themselves a Calvinist in the 17th century they would no one in the 16th century would call themselves a Lutheran in the 17th century they would because Calvin and Luther would have been horrified that people using their names just like in some ways Paul was horrified that the church at Corinth said I follow Apollo I follow Cephas I follow Paul Paul says no we all follow Christ so so these ideas if you look at that they're still there in the Reformation but as the Reformation progressed they tended to drop out as modernity really gets going especially in what is the enlightenment which is post-reformational that's a conformity theory of knowing as opposed to a representational theory of knowing and what happens what I'm saying is people they feel themselves being conformed to reality through the logos and Romans 12 pops to mind do not be conformed to the patterns of this world but be transformed by the renewal of your mind the apostle Paul says in Romans 12 what does he mean by that now there's there's the spirit enables a new way of seeing the world you'll look through the world differently and I love this pause here that Peterson gives and it's it's rather dramatic because of all of the interruptions and now Peterson pauses to really think this through so that's a feeling of personal transformation it's a it's a you and is that the feeling of of is that that same feeling of tracking is yeah is that the same as stumbling uphill with your cross towards the city of God see they're trying to find each other here and of course Peterson is is basically using his psychological take of Christianity as a platform to interpret it and of course for Vickie with his non-theism and that was the that was the conversation expected them to have is Verveckis critique of hero mythology of telotic narratives and well maybe they'll they'll get to that at some point at some point because John is well versed in Peterson's thinking and has his critique but but at this meeting I think they're just getting to know each other again well well that's why I asked the question well let me try let me try either okay so I mean this is some metaphor that pops into my mind all the time yeah you know we're we're shouldering this burden what is the burden well for you you said it's transformative consciousness or I think that's what you said and we stumble uphill with it towards what I you know everybody pays attention to when they name dropped me earlier in the video this is the moment I pay attention to and let me show you why so um got a couple of minutes left so this might be quite a big question but just come back from the US where we interviewed Paul Van der Kley a Christian pastor who's been doing quite a lot of videos about your your thought he I had only begun to do videos he one of his questions was he says he he sees a real sort of stoicism in your thought so pick up your cross and drag it up the hill his question is what's at the top of the hill he doesn't hear that well that's because he hasn't listened to the times when I've been talking about it I guess because I've said it repeatedly you stumble uphill with your burden towards the city of God that's the that's the story what does that mean the city of God to you I would say that that's that's a place where everyone bears maximal responsibility and speaks the truth it's stoicism that's what it is and what's the responsibility you're responsible for the suffering in the world you're responsible for the malevolence in the world and you're responsible for the veracity of your utterances right and in the city of God you're maximally responsible for the suffering you're maximally responsible for the malevolence and you speak the truth that's what it is see and you know doing a lot of deconstructing of wokeism wokeism is you're maximally responsible for the suffering of the world and there's no grace there's no forgiveness the the the breakthrough especially as a protestant as a Calvinist of Christianity is the grace because in this world in this world of locked in guilt condemnation damnation consequences this this trail of tears of 10 000 years for humanity we opened the question and answer today with the question about the orange shirts and the toppling of a statue of a sitting queen at the parliament in manitoba and the government in canada allowing this to happen it's like did you forget what a government is or how it works apparently so yes you have and and and how all of these things happen now now to understand that human beings wrong and hurt and kill and and they do so consistently and they often do so in the name of righteousness remember Jesus was killed in the name of righteousness the apostle Paul persecuted the church in the name of righteousness this is what we do the miracle isn't responsibility you don't need a miracle to see that the miracle is forgiveness that's what you need revelation for revelation for and so i'm not interested in dragging something heavy up the hill just to hear i'm responsible i'm going to go up that hill to see the redemption of my soul and a new heavens and a new earth that's why i'm heading up that hill and i'll drag a heavy cross but it's grace that's the miracle not responsibility or guilt that's everywhere well let me try uh let me try that's a that's a that's a great question um thank you well i spend a lot of time thinking it up he's been thinking about this a lot that's right well for me so one of the things and this is this is again for me from the socratic tradition this kind of knowing that we're talking about this this kind of transformational knowing there's no clean separation from you knowing the thing and you knowing yourself that you think there's a clear separation from the inside experience or is that the same thing i think the inside experience is exactly that kind of thing in in small doses and then when you start to link them together you can get flow experiences and what happens in flow yeah and if you link them to get together too much it's non-stop flow experience and then the question is can you tolerate it well that's that's another i mean that's a good question there's another question maybe we can get to that i'm not sure i can tolerate it well i mean i i just sometimes in listening to this video have to slow it down and and if you haven't watched the bridges of meaning news episode four where the masked newscaster slows down elements of this conversation you should see it it's hilarious i'll if i don't if i don't put the link in the notes chad drop it in the comment section there's there's the possibility and this comes from my my you know my my experience my decades experience as a daoist tai chi player i mean chick sent mahi largely talks about what you might call hot flow and you know now now him calling himself a player is very intentional if you watch awakening from the meaning crisis he explains why he's not a you know and and there's a there's a good reason for that and it's it's really good language and i could say i'm a i'm a christianity player by the definition of what players for him and again this is part of the difficulty of understanding verveky because he's worked on this stuff for so long and he's got you know peterson pries himself on accurate speech verveky does too that's a function of academia to get the language right no the player i mean chick sent mahi largely talks about what you might call hot flow and you know the flow that you experience the the flow and you experience when you're there's a lot of metabolic expenditure but you can get into the flow state when you're doing tai chi chuan and you're not doing a tremendous kind of at least physiological i imagine there's stuff going on cognitively but there you don't have that same sense of i'm going to burn out you have this no well i need some of that because i have that sense of i must be in a hot state of flow then all the time but but but the but the i mean that's that's that's i mean there's a lot of comments like this about that i mean he's got to be suffering i mean we he said many times he's suffering but and i i i have i watch him like this and i want to tell him about grace if what awaits you at the top of the hill after carrying that cross is the maximal sense of your own responsibility it will crush you this is what peugeot told him misery deliverance gratitude jesus was on the cross where to take up our crosses too absolutely but he does the lifting and the church is a shelter and and and i understand how people look at that and say it's a dodge if christianity were simply a dodge you wouldn't have people leaving the church saying it's too much work but it's a different kind of work because it's a work of grace it's a work of gratitude misery deliverance gratitude misery deliverance gratitude make that into a meme misery deliverance gratitude misery deliverance gratitude gratitude make that into a meme misery deliverance gratitude misery deliverance gratitude the the the thing about the good state of flow is that it it opens up the possibility for you to um you can you you have more time to explore that participatory sense so like you know chick sent mahi says you're in the flow state you have the sense of atonement right that powerful that's one of the defining features and atonement yeah exactly exactly and and this is where so you have a sense of meaning or this is where i did a little conversation a little live stream yesterday and i brought up the abolition of man because that book is rather central because when louis talks about colorage and the waterfall is pretty or the waterfall is sublime does a flow state is a flow state in some ways sacramental as a portal into a world of spirit so atonement you know in my in my catechesis as a young boy in the christian reform church atonement is at one mint we are reconciled with christ by virtue of his sacrifice on the cross and you know as part of our tradition we are often warned about works righteousness and and again this is very much a reformational take on paul and there's a lot of nuance that you can say and you can look at nt wright's work and a lot of the the recent pauline work on this but what what the what the calvinist what the calvinist posture emphasizes is giftness that the to the degree that we are afforded the spirit is a gift from god and and again god number one and god number two the the arena and agent working together exactly right and you have and so what do you think that means because that pulls original sin into it what or the other way around or original sin made use of the idea of the spirit of the idea of at one mint that is originally yes as the as the original sin or original guilt because that always comes because original sin when people use original sin i find they tend to use it in a rather sloppy way original sin as a sense of we we are already born with a debt or as a sense of because adam because adam sinned we all sin i mean actually in my systematics class with neil plantenga we took a couple of we took a couple of days on this where he got into burkauer who's another dutch theologian because some of the distinctions involved here are are really important and and so often when i hear original sin just sort of lightly used out there it's i don't know what sense they're meaning it in when they're using it as the antidote as the as the yeah as the as the stuff of the grail is atonement but that's the city on the hill too it is i mean anyway or it's the wandering up to the city on the hill that's the other possibility or another possibility oh you've got some i've got john's pilgrim progress going through me i've got augustin city of god i'm trying to parse them um yeah that's a tough road to hoe there john um what i was what i what i was saying is i think um that um when you're doing this kind like when you're when you when you can get into a more of a a cool flow um rather than a teach me teach me well uh i'd love to that'd be great um what i've noticed and i and i see this also happening in you know this when i want to think of what we're talking about when we're talking about like these these circling practices and these dialoga practices is you're getting shared flow you're getting flow in distributed definitely yeah and i'm hoping that's what i'm inducing in my listeners on youtube and i think it happened with john with uh with uh my carver friend jonathan pageau jonathan yeah well you know part of what i noted in again we could look at the how how my interaction with this work has sort of followed the waves because what happened when i started speaking about peterson what i just got a tremendous number of requests for time for conversation and as i began to reflect and gain perspective on those i discovered that especially the biblical series was relieving people i was talking to of nihilistic depression and which is very connected to verveckis meaning crisis and i thought what a thing that somehow because peterson very much would be in a state of flow in those biblical series just watching him and participating in that state of flow would be enough to to to give people a sense of relief from their nihilistic depression because of the meaning crisis and i completely and part of the reason i i threw myself into this and worked my channel in such a way that i could be found by people in this state was i knew just repeatedly watching the biblical series was not going to be enough they were going to need groups of people to talk with now i i mentioned before i spent four hours on thursday with two of the estuary host support groups basically leadership training for estuary leaders and i think probably in the next few next month or so or next couple of months will be unveiling what maybe we'll call the estuary protocol so that these jordan peterson meetups that we originally started three years ago i'm going to transition mine into an estuary group and whereas i had a protocol that i used for the jordan peterson meetups now i'm going to be doing much more as an estuary where we're going to we're going to have this kind of conversation together and and as i said to the question and answer today and as i said to the estuary support groups i think these groups will likely be downstream from churches which is part of the definition of estuary but they have to be distant from churches and what i what i intentionally don't do is is overt proselytization if people want to swim upstream that's fine but and swimming upstream is sort of like carrying that cross up a hill and and that's what you know being a catechumen what am i using that ancient church language if that's what training and discipleship now i'm using evangelical language but if you know many will want to swim upstream and of course as a christian minister that's what i welcome you know in some ways your decisive discipleship group is your fish ladder so but you know people can swim back out to the ocean that's that's fine too so yes and that was a very peculiar podcast and i thought it did that and this one will too well that's the thing that's the okay point for peterson intentionality in this crazy video right there there's a point for that that he is intentionally pursuing a shamanic psychedelic in his words encounter so we'll see the thing is and look and got a million and a half views like what the hell's going on because i think jonathan is i don't know that this one will not in the same time span peugeot's did just because so many people listened to 20 minutes of it and said i can't listen to this this is unlistening and that wasn't the case with peugeot's video jonathan i don't know people i mean i say that's in love and i have a lot of affection for jonathan i think jonathan is more radical a more radical christian than he realizes i don't know if it's then he realizes i think it's then a lot of other people realize and i talked quite a bit about jonathan in my question and answer today um i think yes i think that i think that might be true of you too and there's always the possibility that it's true of me did he just call john vervecky a christian you don't have to be a christian you don't have to be a confessed christian to be used by god's spirit just saying well i that's a that's funny you're in you and your logos john i've had i've had that's funny because i've had some christians say that to me recently and i don't and i and i want to receive it properly because receiving statements like that like your receptivity matters as much as anything else um yeah it's not exactly a trivial compliment john no it's not and i okay okay what what's with the it's not you know he keeps mentioning the name and part of in in in english prose when you do that you're you're using it for emphasis and again what he knows of john is john comes to the university of toronto as in some ways a professor practitioner who uses tai chi plays tai chi you know throughout the pandemic had things in meditation and so it could be that in jordan's mind john is sort of over on that new age frontier while being a a an academic and a little bit of poking there oh daoist trend on the board i think that's what he's doing ordered between not and oh daoist trend on the border between chaos and order well yes right and that's yes but it's what i'm interested in is the possibility that well perhaps maybe maybe we could this ties it together maybe when people are seeing i hope people who know me and see many of my videos know that i'm deeply respectful to religion so i do not mean any disrespect in what i'm saying i'm not trying to be pretentious but people who claim to sometimes he goes overboard but i understand because a lot of religious people are really thin-skinned and get defensive quickly um but he he at i'll i'll tell you this just by my personal experience he's deeply respectful he is not an he is not your enemy okay and i know a lot of people because there's a course in buddhism and cognitive science and daoism and he does his things with his hands he is not your enemy okay see the spirit of christ in me i i hope what they are referring to because that's what i aspire to is somebody who is trying to realize in both senses of the word that goes back to what we're talking about transjectivity it's both something that i'm this is nishatani's use of realize it's both some realize it in both senses of the word something that's coming into my awareness with intelligibility and something that's being actualized in reality i hope that i'm realizing the logos with other people um that's well i think your effect on your students is evidence of that john but what what do you think your name by the way just out of curiosity my last name no your first name he just keeps poking him here john a gift from god um i don't know is this jordan the evangelist jordan has a church of one and maybe he'll maybe he can bring vervecki into his church don't have to go there well i i i i i have we could go there you know i my middle name is barrent and it's norwegian and i've always been somewhat embarrassed about it i i'm going to say that publicly i probably never admitted that to anyone but because it was parodied as burnt because that's b-e-r-n-t that's how it's spelled and so um it was an object of mockery but so i didn't look into it much but it's barrent and my great-grandfather after whom i am named built a ship and sailed it to north america and he was a remarkable inventor given what this dude has done i guess this doesn't surprise me he invented a potato uh harvester and built it in his own is his own shop and he raised my father in any case i had a indian carver build my third floor which you'll have to see sometime because it's quite spectacular and i would like to he built a totem of me and i'm standing in the arms of a bear and i didn't know that that was the meaning of my name oh really yes really that that really happened so and people have been you know describing my name to me on on youtube comments and so that's where i got that information so you know who knows what's in a name jordan barrent peterson john is my favorite gospel if that means anything yeah that makes sense in the beginning was the word yeah the logos that suits you uh and um i guess what do you make of this comment that the spirit of christ is manifesting itself in you i mean that's something you come up and just say to someone on the street you know it's like if you take that seriously it's how do you take it serious yeah well then how do you maintain yourself well the thing is it's not i mean it's people that i i talked to on video but it's also my girlfriend you know who she's sort of officially an atheist but but she's and she knows that i don't profess to be a christian because i have a very ambivalent history with christian Christianity uh but she she said to me you know i actually think you're like the rest of what the western world you mean well yeah and i noticed that was coming out in your discussion with jonathan and there was you know i had tremendous empathy you know what my the most powerful takeaway for me was from my biblical series which was what the meaning of the word israel wrestling with god we who wrestle with god yeah who struggle with god yeah it's like well maybe that's the real i i i listened to this jordan and i say there is grace that if you uh wrestle with god and prevail you know there's grace christian spirit is and that's what that phrase implies and that's the real jewish spirit yeah wrestling john it's the why does what you know why does why is there that strange scene of the wrestling with the angel like why would you possibly fight with god and then you think well god isn't that what i'm doing all the time and he's not doing all the time he partially wins though that's what's even more mysterious and hurts you doing so yeah i mean that's that's that's the story but isn't that the story he takes away so again i've told the story before in the videos jacob hears that his brother esau another famous story who jacob tricked and got the birth right from is coming at him with 400 men and so jacob cowardly arranges his family in order of preference why don't you do this with your son you know the sons that are way up at the hedge that yeah those are the first ones esau's are gonna esau's gonna kill and then jacob is all the way at the rear thinking maybe after he kills my sons and takes their wives and children as their slaves and all of my flocks and all of my animals all the way back to my favorite sons and then me who's he has a little hierarchy of value going on jacob has there in fear that esau is going to take him it's at that point that he wrestles with god it's at that point and he struggles and and and you know in in a sense is prevailing over the angel and calvin in his commentary you know says with one hand god fights us and with with his other hand he gives us the strength to fight back with him john calvin's comments on that in his commentary on the book of genesis are absolutely brilliant but then you know release me for the sun's coming up what kind of angel is only out at night and and no i won't release you till you bless me oh wait for the blessing you're gonna so he touches his hip and he's lame what is the one and this whole story starts at bethel where jacob you know god appears to jacob in a dream there's jacob's ladder the stairway the angels going up and down and repeats basically the blessing that he had given to abraham and jacob ends hearing the blessing ends it by saying takes a blessing and turns it into a deal and says well i'll give you 10 if you follow through on that but you don't understand what a gift is it's like i'm not taking your gift i want to earn it oh okay and then jacob struggles with you know struggles with laban struggles with esau and and the one thing god takes away in that fight is jacob's ability to run and it is god saying to jacob now will you trust me i mean it isn't belief it's the wrestling with belief and and and and it's wrestling in the way that you're wrestling well i mean i do sparring and i often use sparring as a metaphor for the oh so that's the other metaphor for dialogue yeah exactly it's not just the tracking it's the sparring yeah and and we have to remember yeah you know that kind of sums up men's relationships well well play with each other tracking and sparring playdo means big shoulders he was a wrestler that's what that's his nickname his nickname is playdo because he's a wrestler and we have to remember that the greeks are in the gymnasium even more than they are in the academy right i was watching this suits episode last night and yeah the the men are always sparring with each other verbally you know and they're tracking something they're tracking victor again it's it's not disconnected but it's we we want something more linear okay it's it's it's shamanic in this series they're they're filea and they wrestle they wrestle when they fight they they have to go into a clinch in a fight to settle their disputes like a physical fight but there's the you can shift off of that this happened bernardo and i when we were doing this we both said this you can shift off of it and this happens when you're actually martial arts sparring because you get into the shared flow state you can shift off of victory to the aesthetics of the dance there's a beauty in that that is an independent that's independent of victory that you can come to appreciate for its own sake playdo talks about this he talks about the beauty the eros that draws you into the that's why he a dance yeah a dance but it but it's a dance that draws you beyond yourself edu's education right to draw forth from you and so is that the is that the battle with the adversary is that related to the this is another very serious question obviously it's a question related to the book of job i don't know because i i see parallels you know in niches quote you know i hate socrates he's so close to me i'm always fighting him right you can see you can see both niches and kirkagard wrestling with socrates kirkagard said i follow jesus but socrates is my teacher and he wrestles with socrates all the way through everybody is wrestling with soccer i follow jesus but socrates is my teacher so is that the statement of the west um i think that i mean that was your objection at the beginning of this talk right at least to some degree because you said how influenced you were with greece you insisted on how influenced you were by greece i think the west is the attempt to if i had to try and summarize the west what an audacious thing to try and do see ruck ruck said that because i asked him why dianesis transformed into christ because we were answering simple questions too and he said well greece met judaism yeah but judaism okay i'm gonna pause it here i'm out of time for now um this is probably enough for this next commentary we're right at the transition into john's belief in christianity trying to integrate agape and logos wow so again i the the more i get into this the the more i slow it down the better peterson looks in it the more intentional this looks and so we'll see so i guess this is part three thanks for watching leave a comment the comments on this series have been fascinating