https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=p8Oz2ifIMz8

 Hi, this is Paul, and I said I'd continue with the biblical series. I better make good with that. I probably will mess up, but we'll keep going with it. Part of the difficulty of doing these commentaries is that the videos of Jordan stay the same, but I don't. And I've been doing, I've continued my own journey talking to different ones of you, listening to Reveke. I've been taking a deep dive into René Girard and thinking about him. I had a conversation with someone about Owen Barfield again today that got me thinking about that. I'm talking to Mark Vernon tomorrow about Owen Barfield, and I'm talking, I might be talking to Jeff Quackenbush again, which will be fun. I like talking to Jeff. I know some of you don't like me talking to Jeff, but that's okay. And so, and I come back around to Peterson's biblical series, and this is, I think, a really important series of all the videos. This is the one that people mentioned the first time. The idea of God, which is probably something that I haven't made enough comment on in terms of, well, that's just obvious, and it wasn't obvious to me, but Peterson has continued to talk about the idea of God. Now, part of what I've been working through and thinking about, obviously, is John Verveke's relevance realization and trying to figure out how the John Verveke representation in my head and the Jordan Peterson representation in my head and the material that they put out, how they can both coexist in one head and how they fit together. And there's that conversation from 2015 of those two talking, which was really quite a good one. And so, apparently, another more formal debate that John Verveke and Jordan Peterson had done earlier that was not recorded, you know, you got to record stuff, folks. You got to record stuff. You never get a second chance to record stuff. So, you know, if you think it might have significance and others might see it, there's obviously lots of things that are not appropriate for recording, but, you know, record some of that stuff. So, I'm thinking about relevance realization and Darwin and relevance realization, and how this stacks up with the idea of God and the frames that I've been thinking about lately in the video I did on Hubert Dreyfus and frames and all of this stuff. And so, when I swing all the way back to Jordan's biblical series, it's with all of these things that I listen to it now, and so my commentary is different. You know, it's the old Greek idea. You never step into the same river twice, and you don't even step into the same river once. It's just the way it goes with human beings. And now I've got a dry throat and my water isn't here. Now, I'm going to pick up pretty much where I left off before, where he starts talking about Jung. I've actually been doing a lot of thinking about this before we get into it, especially with how Peterson's talk about the idea of God intersects with Vervecky's relevance realization. And I made the comment to John when I had my last conversation with him about a black box, and maybe that wasn't really fair. Because I think we can penetrate to a degree what it means for human beings to practice their relevance realization in a context that is so full of other human beings. Now, one of the things that Jordan makes reference to is Jordan did a video of basically a five section video for Easter 2018 that is no longer up. I don't know why it's no longer up. It's too bad because it was a good video. And he talked about sacrifice, and that's something that I'm very much going to come around to when I do more work on René Girard. Because René Girard and Peterson kind of come together in some interesting ways. And the more Girard I listen to, and the better I understand Girard, and the better I understand Peterson, they really are intersecting in some interesting ways. And now I know a lot of people during the, I think the Peterson heyday was sort of between 2016 and mid 2018 when his wife got sick and he ended the book tour. And so we'll see if there's a second chapter when Jordan releases his next book and comes out of the hospital, so on and so forth. But a lot of people were saying, oh, you should intersect with the work of René Girard. The difficulty is that status binds and blinds. If you're having the kind of demand that Jordan Peterson was having, it's really hard to start learning another significant body of work like that of René Girard. And so, and not only to learn it, but to be able to integrate it because integration of this kind of stuff takes a fair amount of time. But Peterson, why don't I play a little bit of it and then I'll talk about. See, I also spent a lot of time reading Carl Jung. It was through Jung and also Jean Piaget, who's a developmental psychologist, that I started to understand that our articulated systems of thought are embedded in something like a dream and that that dream is informed in a complex way by the way we act. Okay, so articulated systems of thought are embedded in something like a dream. That's how we structure them. Now, I had a really good conversation earlier this week with a young man from the UK that I should have pulled up. I wrote it down when he said it because it was really good quote. He basically talked about how art is our way of knowing that bridges between the world and value. And he said that, I was like, type of that thing. I'm typing that up. I've sent him the video and we'll see if he wants to share. And again, when I do conversations with people, I've had a lot of conversations with people lately that haven't wanted to share, which is totally appropriate. And sometimes it isn't appropriate to share, but other times it is. Human beings are amazing. John Vervecky has had a very similar experience that I've had that so many of you who write and reach out and have conversations have so many interesting things to say and so many good observations. And I'm just so thoroughly enriched by all of this. In fact, I'm so enriched by it often I can't even keep up with so many of the good things that you send me. But Jordan Peterson says in that Easter video that part of the reason sacrifice works is that the future is so full of human beings that relating to it as a human being is, he says something like this, that it's a fairly savvy way to go about it. But now, what Peterson's referencing Jung and Piaget here, the world is so full of other human beings that a huge part of what we need in terms of our relevance realization is knowing how to deal with other human beings. And because the machine code of human beings is story and narrative, it only makes sense that we are processing all of these interactions, all of these relationships. We're processing them in sort of a dream state. And we know that with dreams that we have dreams if you had a significant thing during the day you might dream about it at night. If you're studying a book you'll dream about it at night. And so we know that for as little as we know about our dreams we know that it has something to do with memory and processing and maybe it's taking things from unmapped territory to map territory and all of this. But as I mentioned in the conversation I had today with the woman, we do this with each other. If you look at Jordan Peterson talking to Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson is very much trying to help Sam realize and integrate the filter through which we process this external world around us. And in a sense the way that filter creates the world around us through filtering it through consciousness. It's vitally important to remember that that filter is mostly made up of stuff from other human beings from the religious context that we grew up in and the cultural context. I love the way Brett Weinstein talked about the, you know, we not only have the genetic code but we have a culture code. And human beings are as dead in some ways without a culture code as your PC would be without an operating system. And what that culture code is made up of is all of the experiences, significance, meanings, values, all of this stuff sort of gets, has to get encoded and crunched. Well how, what's the best way to crunch it? Well the best way to crunch it is in a sense into remembered action. Okay this is where Peterson is going with this, into remembered action because there's so much information in a tiny little thing that we do that we, if we had to list it all and line it all up you get that combinatorial explosive nature that John Vervecki talks about. And so in action, worlds of information are compressed into that action. And you know this if you're, if you know a person very well or are living with a person or are, because if you notice in your family that just a look from a spouse or a father or a mother or a child or a church member or a friend, just a look means a world of things and whole worlds flooding just with that look. Now we have to manage and we really do very well, amazingly well, we manage all of this information but all of this information has to be compressed somehow into something that is not physical, into the mind. The mind has to take it all in there. Well how do we do it? Well we do it in images and stories. Right now, I haven't had a chance to see the movie The Joker but Jonathan Peugeot just did a video on it and it's killing me. I'm begging my wife, honey we gotta go see this movie because Jonathan Peugeot did a video and I wanna, I wanna talk about it, I wanna listen, I don't, I'm protecting myself from the spoilers. But in a movie there's worlds of information compressed into something and good art, real art is that way and deep inside of us we know it but even if it doesn't make this little plane of consciousness that we live in. And what Peterson has said basically before minute 16 here in the video is that the way he thinks about the Bible is that that is just so much stuff from thousands and thousands and thousands of years compressed into that and I'll add on to a little bit of what he says here in terms of his thought that this is battle tested and refined and we don't even know where this comes from but we know it's potent because out there in the world people act like it's important and meaningful. You can go into how many homes in the world and you can find Bibles there and you might say oh that was just because of power or propaganda but well you know there's a lot of copies of Chairman Mao's Red Book but I don't think it's gonna have the durability that the Bible has had and people aren't going to do commentaries like these on Chairman Mao's Red Book and so there's something whether or not you I'm going to play the the atheist card here whether or not you believe there's anything supernatural about the book just what has happened with that book over the scope of human history is truly amazing and Peterson knows this and so he's saying in a sense here there's way too much data in the world for us to deal with okay that gets into the frame problem there's way too much data in the world for us to deal with and so we compress it and we compress it in action and we compress it in narrative and we compress it in art and we compress it in dreams and and when we compress it in that way somehow we're able to manage it and to interact with it and to sift it and to sort it and to somehow manage value which is a you know where does value live he gets he gets talking about that with with Sam Harris but and again that word value even has so many different dimensions when you say the value of Elvis's guitar well you're you're even just scratching the surface on value so so all of this stuff is going on and so now then he mentions Jung and Jung of course I don't know a lot about Jung but I've you know tried to educate myself a little bit about Jung but one of the things that that struck me immediately from his from his biography was this and I've spoken about it often was the the moment when he's he's working as a doctor in insane asylum and the other doctors say well don't talk to the patients they're crazy you can't do anything for them we just basically house them here that's what we do and Jung's like well I'm a doctor what am I supposed to do so he starts talking to the patients he begins to okay we see pattern recognition he begins to notice the patterns that are developing not only in terms of stories from multiple patients but the patterns within the religious context of the people because he grew up as a as a reformed pastor's son and he so he he noticed the the patterns here and he's he's noticing this he's saying this isn't random this isn't chaotic there's there's things at work and things at play here and it's really important because if our if all is not well in our dreamscape we are not able to act out well in the world and and so that's where Jung and then Piaget later they come into this conversation and so Peterson I think rightly sees that well you know the Bible is really important in this conversation because the the Bible has made up the the it's in a sense been the operating system for different cultures all over the world and now it isn't like an operating system where Windows 10 just runs Windows 10 or Mac OS Catalina just came out just runs Mac OS Catalina there's all these different permutations because there are cultural aspects that come into an individual family dynamics and personality it's just enormously enormously complex but but the Bible has has been in this mix for so long that in a way and and even Richard Dawkins had has noticed the seat Richard Dawkins was was lamenting that English school children weren't learning the Bible anymore because even Richard Dawkins who thinks that you know there's all kinds of problems with the Bible you can't you can't participate in this long line of Western culture without it and now the Bible is penetrating India and Africa and China and and so to to ignore this thing you ignore it as your peril so now let's listen to Jordan talk a little bit more so you know we act out things we don't understand all the time and if that wasn't the case then we wouldn't need a psychology or a sociology and anthropology or any of that because we would be completely transparent to ourselves and we're clearly not so we're much more complicated than we understand which means that the way that we behave contains way more information than we know and part of the dream that surrounds our articulated knowledge has been extracted as a consequence of us watching each other behave and telling stories about it for thousands and thousands and thousands of years extracting out patterns of behavior that characterize humanity and trying to represent them partly through imitation but also through drama and mythology and literature and art and all of that to represent what we're like so that we can understand what we're like and now now again to represent what we're like now if you go to if you go to Mary Cohen's channel Mary's been you know she hasn't made a lot of videos but they're good videos and and Mary's a a really smart woman and she's got a lot of ideas and she's fun to listen to so listen to Mary and and she talks about propositional truth where you know it's it's there's always two things with this and you get to Jonathan Pichot's left hand and right hand stuff but but we have to represent things so we can kind of distance it from ourselves it's a little bit of self-transcendence as it sends and we distance it from ourselves so that we can look at it so that we can manipulate it so that we can play with it in terms of our mind and in terms out into the world we can try things and and that's and we have to separate it from ourselves so that well in a sense it can die and not us that's what Peterson always talks about ideas but but we have to this is this is how we begin to work on these things so we create these representations in terms of sometimes we use our body to represent things and sometimes we use paint and canvas or sometimes we use words or are we doing all of these things to kind of set it apart from ourselves so that we can play with it and figure out then how to reintegrate it into ourselves and in a sense that way we're always programming using programming to tinker with the programming so maybe a little bit of a forgiveness from Brett Weinstein with what I just said there but we're always doing this but we're not we're not terribly conscious doing it even that we're doing it in fact I've never had exactly the thought that I had right now until now after 56 years of being a human being you'd think I would know what it's like to being a human being but we don't know ourselves very much that process of understanding is what I see unfolding at least in part in the biblical stories and it's it's halting and partial and awkward and contradictory and and all of that which is one of the things that makes the book so complex but I see in it the struggle of humanity to arise to rise above its animal forebearers say and to become conscious of what it means to be human and that's a very difficult thing because we don't know who we are what we are where we came from or any of those things and you know the light life is an unbroken chain going back three and a half billion years it's an absolutely unbelievable thing every single one of your ancestors reproduced successfully for three and a half billion years it's absolutely unbelievable we rose out of the dirt and the muck and here we are conscious but not knowing and we're trying to figure out who we are and a story that we've been telling or a set of stories that we've been telling for 3 000 years seems to me to have something to offer and so when when I look at the stories in the bible I do I would say in some sense with the beginner's mind it's it's a mystery this book how the hell it was made why it was made why we preserved it how it happened to motivate an entire culture for 2 000 years and to transform the world like what's going on how did that happen it's by no means obvious and one of the things that bothers me about casual critics of religion is that they don't take the phenomena seriously and it's a serious phenomena I mean not least because people have the capacity for religious experience and no one knows why that is and I mean you can induce it reliably in all sorts of different ways you can do it with brain stimulation you can certainly do it with drugs there's especially the psychedelic variety they produce intimations of the divine extraordinarily regularly people have been using drugs like that for god only knows how long 50 000 years maybe more than that to produce some sort of intimate union with the divine it's like we don't understand any of that when we now now early on in my videos you can find a you can find a video where I had a conversation about psychedelics with Dr. James Frazzi who is a member of our local meetup here and and then I read Michael Pollan's book on psychedelics because when I started my videos on Jordan Peterson I had taken mushroom I still haven't taken mushrooms but I've you know I don't drink alcohol or smoke why would I start doing psychedelic drugs and how do they operate we don't quite know how they operate but when you get to this question of the my my my connection between the frame problem and god the fact is that James says you know part of what these drugs do in terms of the brain is what they do is they sort of take the controls off well what are these controls for these controls are for for filtering okay so filtering all this information so there's way too much information out there that I can deal with and so we have these filters and part of these filters are are biological so my dog has filters on him that that prioritizes certain aspects of the world you know with his nose and his hearing his eyesight isn't very good but his nose is great and his hearing is great and and so he's prioritized to go out and and and do the kinds of dog things he needs to do in order to survive and then have the kind of dog relationships within a pack that he needs in order to survive and so all of that stuff is built into him and we have stuff built into us too and and it seems like what these psychedelics do is take off the frame and when we take off the frame everything rushes in and it's very interesting how this then so instinctively and natively gets associated with the divine well that well there's a word divine well why do we choose that word and and why why do psychedelics then suddenly transform just this this moment where the frame is off transform people in lasting ways and peterson himself when he talks to what's his head over at liberty university and there's the one more question type little video he did after the big video where the guy rests the stage but you know why does this have lasting effects because and to me that the the it's an interesting idea that there's a potential association between these religious experiences when in a sense not only do we reliably induce them with drugs and and doing things to your brain religious communities have been reliably inducing them with with music and meditation and sermons and song and conversations and reading and and yeah that's what religion has been playing with all along and the fact that it gets associated with god or the divine or or that which we we have difficulty imagining or describing or representing well it makes sense that there's a connection between god and the frame problem and you know the last few videos that i did we discovered the psychedelics in the late 60s it shocked everybody so badly that they were instantly made illegal and abandoned in terms of research for like 50 years and it's no wonder because who the hell expected that nobody now that's a few people have read by copalans book now young was a student of niches you see and he was also i would say had a very astute critic of niches he was educated by freud and freud freud i suppose in some sense started to collate collate the information that we had pertaining to the notion that people lived inside a dream you know it was freud who really popularized the idea of the unconscious mind and we take this for granted to such a degree today that we don't understand how revolutionary the idea was like with what's happened with freud is that we've taken all the marrow out of his bones so to speak and left the husk behind and you know now when we think about freud we just think about the husk because that's everything that's been discarded but so much of what he discovered is part of our popular conception now including the idea that your perceptions and your actions and your thoughts are all what would you say informed and shaped by unconscious motivations that are not part of your voluntary control and that's a very very strange thing it's one of the most unsettling things about the psychoanalytic theories because psychoanalytic theories because the psychoanalytic oh not just about the psychoanalytic theories but as a pastor when you sit down with someone who's just done something horrible that this is peterson at the edge of his bed just done something horrible that he never wanted to do and never in the life thought he could do and then he did it why did you do it well you know flip wilson the devil made me do it there's a lot more to that joke than just a joke because we have things inside of us that that that make us do things and and we don't know what to do about them and that's that's disturbing for us you know we we would think we could just do what we say we're going to do or think we should do or tell everyone that everyone else should be doing tim keller has this lovely little um it's an old pastor sermon illustration you get these sermon illustrations where where people say well i can't believe in a god who would judge me against his law and so well imagine that i'm going to update it with a cell phone imagine that your smartphone is is certain imagine just suddenly clicks on everything you say every time you declare what someone else should do and that every time you declare that well such and such a person should stop smoking such such a person should drive less such such a person should eat a certain way such and such a person this person should behave that way and don't say those kinds of things to other people what if your smartphone clicked on and recorded you know siri or hey google or whatever recorded every time you gave an announcement about the morality of someone else and then at judgment day god just pulls it down from the cloud and says then say well i'm not going to be judged by you say okay well why don't we have you judge yourself why don't you live by the standard that you imposed on everyone else in the world that's essentially what jesus says when he says you shall not judge because by the measure that you judge others it will be applied to you that's what jesus says and well who can meet that standard because we're so quick to put burdens on other people about their behavior that we don't want those burdens on us that's how we are the theories are something like you're a loose collection of living sub-personalities each with its own set of motivations and perceptions and emotions and rationales all of that and you have limited control over that so you're like a plurality of of internal personalities that's loosely linked into a unity you know that because you can't control yourself very well which is one of jung's objections to niche's idea that we could create our own values so jung didn't believe that especially not after interacting with freud because he saw that human beings were especially not after interacting with freud he looked at freud and says you can't control yourself what about everybody else you hypocrite affected by things that were deeply deeply affected by things that were beyond their and if you want some fun reading read jung's chapter on freud in jung's autobiography it's it's quite interesting conscious control and no one really knows how to conceptualize those things you know the cognitive psychologists think about them in some sense as computational machines the ancient people i think thought of them as gods although it's more complex than that like rage would be a god mars god of rage that's the thing that possesses you when you're angry you know it has a viewpoint and it you know he puts this out here but that's really important what he says right there that that well what are these gods well well because people don't know and we don't use the word gods anymore but we use spirit and if if you want to find an interesting thing in my adult sunday school class i did a couple of weeks on spirit because i talked to adam about this as well because schools have spirit what do we mean when we say school school spirit where does that spirit reside well the intersubjective yeah but it also gets into the building and it gets into the stuff on the walls and it even inhabits it after the students were gone i did a conversation i had a it wasn't it wasn't an online conversation i had a conversation with a with a with an uber driver who told me that this person loves to go to europe there's a certain cathedral in italy that that when this person goes there the spirit just comes out of the walls well what is that spirit oh materialist what is what is happening with this how what are these spirits that inhabit us oh we're so we're so skeptical about about demon possession well spirits inhabit us and and we're not in control of them and if you want to see that go to any playground and watch children and and for the most part adults are barely socialized children in many ways it it says what it wants to say and that might have very little to do with what you want to say when you're being sensible and it doesn't just inhabit you it inhabits everyone and it lives forever and it even inhabits animals and so it's this transcendent psychological entity that inhabits the the body politic like like a thought inhabits the brain that's one way of thinking about it now and and how do you deal with such things now we get all embarrassed as secular people if we talk to them or even talk about them we get embarrassed but it doesn't seem to me that talking to them or about them isn't an entirely bad idea well can they hear can they think well how do you know we don't even know what it is but yet it's out there and it controls us in some ways or we we wrestle with it the apostle paul says we wrestle not against flesh and blood well what do you mean by that well these these spirits or gods aren't flesh and blood but they sure are real enough to to make a mess out of our lives and make a mess out of the world it's a very strange way of thinking but it certainly it certainly has its merits and so and those things well in some sense those are deities although it's not that simple and so yung yung was got very interested in dreams and started to understand the relationship between dreams and myths because he would see in his clients dreams echoes of stories that he knew because he was deeply read in mythology and then he started to believe that the dream was the birthplace of the myth and that there was a continual interaction between the two processes the dream and the story and storytelling and well you know you tend to tell your dreams as stories when you remember them and some people remember dreams all the time like two or three a night i've had clients like that and they often have archetypal dreams that have very clear mythological structures i think that's more the case with people who are creative by the way especially if they're a bit unstable at the time because the dream tends to occupy the space of uncertainty and to concentrate on fleshing out the unknown reality before you get a real grip on it so it's like the dream is the birthplace of thinking that's a good way of thinking about it and so because it's the birthplace of thinking it's not that clear it's doing its best to formulate something that was yung's notion as opposed to freud who believed that there were sensors internal sensors that were hiding the dreams true message that's not what yung believed he believed the dream was doing its best to express a reality that was still outside of fully articulated conscious comprehension it was because you think look a thought appears in your head right that's obvious bang it's it's nothing you ever ask about but what the hell does that mean a thought appears in your head what kind of ridiculous explanation is that you know it's it just doesn't help with anything where does it come from well nowhere it just appears in my head okay well that's not a very sophisticated explanation as it turns out you know and so you might think that those thoughts thoughts that you think well where do they come from well they're often someone else's thoughts right someone long dead that might be part of it just like the words you use to think are utterances of people who've been long dead and so you're informed by the spirit of your ancestors that's one way of looking at it and your motivation speak to you and your emotions speak to you and your body speaks to you and it all does all that at least in part through the dream and the dream is the birthplace of the fully articulated idea they don't just come from nowhere fully fledged right they have a developmental origin and and god only knows how how how lengthy that origin is even to say something like i am conscious you know that's taken chimpanzees don't say that you know it's been seven million years since we broke from chimpanzees something like that from the common ancestor you know they have no articulated knowledge at all they have very little self-representation in some sense and very little self-consciousness and that's not the case with us at all and we had to painstakingly figure all of this out during that you know seven million year voyage there's a book i've mentioned a few times the secret of our success and and that book starts with the with the with the question well are are we so different from chimps because we're that much smarter and it goes through various ideas even even the question of of intelligence is something which is part of the reason i like john's formulation of of relevance realization because i think it i think it expands and broadens out intelligence to to to be the far more complex reality that it is but it goes into this question of well who's are we really that much smarter than than chimps or some of these things and and again what seems to be from the point of view of that book the secret of our success is our capacity to think communally to to have a shared communal cognition and and if we're going to have this shared communal cognition one might ask well well how does this how does this happen and i think peterson is right here where it it happens with us watching each other and and then we have language and so we listen to each other and so when you know when brett weinstein in his talk with alistair mcgrath says you know what's the difference between man and chimps language language is just the beginning of it because it's it's not just it's not just language and i'm not saying that he he reduced it to a poor guy to give an answer on stage in front of cameras and all that stuff that's not easy but but it's language is just the beginning of it and so this so this idea that well well what if it's in kind of the dreams around us and so once you start thinking this way it's not you're not far off of of of jung's of jung's collective unconscious although i don't know if that's the best way to represent it verbally for us but it's it is unconscious and it is collective but it's it's it's it's dreamlike and it has content and its contract content is coded in in images and narratives and sound bites and and music one of the things that i i've told the story before as a pastor you get invited into into spaces that aren't terribly public and there was a situation where a man was dying and and sometimes people just kind of die quietly and sometimes people don't and and this was a this was a case where the man was not dying quietly and he had an estranged wife and kids with his estranged wife but he hadn't you know actually divorced her and so okay there's a legal mess so now she's the one who's making medical decisions for her estranged husband and some of the kids were from her and some of the kids weren't from her and and i'm in the i'm in the waiting room with various elements of various family members and we've all been in the other room where he's not dying a very peaceful death and and the the estranged wife embraces her brother both of them were adopted and again as a pastor you kind of see a lot more from families in terms of the generations and and they embraced and they began to sing together a song it wasn't a religious song at all in fact in some ways it was kind of a campy song nostalgic but it meant a lot to the both of them because they grew up together and and they knew this song together and so the the song creates something between them in that space and again well how do you how do you code the estranged husband dying an unpeaceful death and the fragmented children he had left through various women and all of those relationships and then this this last estranged wife and and the the utter complexity of the at one point happy and later broken home that they had created and and the children that were left in that and and how does that get encoded how do you survive that because we're not just you know i know i remember the um the chimp lady i don't remember jane goodall and and it was so moving to people when people saw chimps grieve but we're operating on all these other layers and so we have to process that we have to encode it well how do we do it well it's it's i think peterson's got a handle on it with this you know with the dreams and the images and and we're living in the midst of that and that's why we we conjure all of this stuff and we're mysteries to ourselves because it's we're so enormously complicated and life for us has so many more levels than life has for my dog and we've got to manage it on all of them all of those levels and so all of the complexity and then in all of that complexity all of the messes we make we have to deal with it and therapists sit in rooms with strangers and talk for hours and hours at you know at a hundred or two hundred dollars an hour pulling all of this stuff apart and you can do it forever it's just that complex and that's a relatively new thing for very wealthy people to be able to afford and most of the world just has alcohol or music or church or anything else to get by because these things in our minds just won't be denied and this is part of the reason that i you know i'm with peterson and that to say that this is just a world of objects and we're just walking around seeing stuff and interacting stuff that's not what people are like and when i hear people deal with that and talk about that i think have you never met a human being don't you know what we're like that that one word that your mother said to you 40 years ago still lingers in your mind and it's affected your relationship with your wife or your daughter or or or your co-workers and maybe it's been something you've been drinking yourself to death over that's what we're like so yeah the idea of god isn't going away it's way too useful we need a platform we need characters in that platform that's the stuff of religion this is what we've been working on forever it's our operating system for our cultures doesn't just go away the new ideas are just add to it they don't dispel it and i think some of that's represented and and and and captured in some sense in these ancient stories which i believe were part of especially the oldest stories in genesis which is the stories we're going to start with that they were that that that these are these are battle-hardened stories these are stories that have been compressed down and down and down and peterson will talk about it into just a few verses so all of this stuff into just a few verses and of course the text itself on the page and how that is mined has on the matter of paper and parchment and and and and stone and all the ancient ways that that it was remembered some of the archaic nature of the human being is encapsulated in those stories and it's very very instructive as far as i can tell i can give you just a quick example you know there's an idea of sacrifice in in in in the old testament and it's pretty barbaric you know i mean the story oh when i get into jarad we're going to talk a lot about sacrifice sorry abraham and isaac is a good example of that because abraham was called on to actually sacrifice his own son which doesn't really seem like something that a reasonable god would ask you to do right and god in the old testament is and and again when he says that a reasonable god so much stuff built into that word god that that that we can barely use it and and so again the prohibition of using the name of god the the more i learn and the more i go the more i think yeah there's way more built into that than we ever give credit for we're we're not very wise creatures frequently cruel and arbitrary and demanding and paradoxical and which which is one of the things that really gives the book life because it wasn't edited by a committee you know a committee that was concerned with with uh not offending anyone that's for sure so so young believed that the dream was the birthplace of thought and i've been extending that idea because one of the things i wondered about deeply was you know you had a thought or god and then one of the that the so young believed that the dream was the birthplace of thought thought for you imagine he'd say god too and i've been extending that idea because one of the things i wondered about deeply was you know you have a dream and then someone interprets it you can argue about whether or not an interpretation is valid just like you can argue about whether your interpretation of a novel or movie is valid right or biblical text it's a very difficult thing to determine with any degree of accuracy which counts in part for the postmodern critique but my observation is being that people will present a dream and sometimes we can extract out real useful information from it that the person didn't appear to know no and and they get a flash of insight and to me and and again they didn't appear to know what do we mean by that word it wasn't it wasn't there on their in their in their consciousness room on the shelf that they could pull off and say it's this insight that comes and and again this is part of this propositional nature where we we propose it out there from ourselves so we can look at it and and so the dream in a sense transmits out there and so now we can look at it and we can work on it that's a marker that we stumbled on something that unites part of that person that wasn't united before it pulls things together which is often what a good story will do or sometimes a good theory you know things snap together for you there's a little light goes on and that's one of the markers that's a little kramer-esque moment so sorry to the podcasters i'm gonna replay it because it just looks a little bit like cosmo kramer there with the uh that i've used with the hand gesture which is often what a good story will do or sometimes a good theory you know things snap together for you there's a little right there light goes on and that's one of the markers that i've used for accuracy in in dreams and i know in my own family when when i was first married you know i'd have fights with my wife arguments about this and that and uh i'm fairly hot-headed and so really all puffed up and you know agitated about about whatever we were arguing about and she'd go to sleep which was really annoying you know so annoying because i couldn't sleep right i like chewing off my fingernails and she now there's this movie out rise that's it's the it's at some point going to be out on apple and it's about peterson and part of what's fun about that movie is is there's a lot of video just from his family life and if you're if you're interested in peterson it's it's sort of interesting to watch just because because again we watch each other carefully and not just our conscious selves watch but the whole you know all of our mind watches and we filter it and we get ideas about people and so it's you know for peterson fans out there it's it's interesting to see he'd be like sleeping peacefully beside me it's like maddening so but often she'd have a dream you know and then the next morning she'd discuss it with me and then we could unravel what was at the bottom of our argument and that was unbelievably useful even though it was extraordinarily aggravating so so you know i was convinced by young it looked to me like his ideas about the relationship between dreams and mythology and drama and literature made sense to me and and the uh and and the relationship between that and art i know this native carver he's a quack quack guy he's carved a bunch of wooden sculptures and apparently that movie jonathan peugeot made this comment that that movie that they made was was because of the relationship between he and that carver and then all of the craziness broke out with c16 while they were working on it and so it's like now you got now you got some footage there baby totem poles and masks that i have in my house and he's a very interesting person not literate not particularly literate and really still steeped in this ancient 13 000 year old tradition he's an original language speaker and the fact that he isn't literate has sort of left him with the mind of someone who's pre-literate and pre-literate people aren't stupid they're just not literate so their brains are organized differently in many ways and i've asked him about his his his intuition for his carvings and he's told me that he dreams like you've seen the hidea masks you know what they look like well his people are are closely related to the hidea so it's the same kind of style he said he dreams in those animals and and can remember his dreams and he also talks to his grandparents who taught him how to carve in his dreams quite often if he runs into a problem with carving his grandparents will come and he'll talk to them but he sees that and again from a psychological perspective which is of course what peterson hasn't started giving all the all the qualifications in this video yet because he hasn't actually doesn't actually get into the biblical text from a psychological perspective this of course makes makes perfect sense if you imagine that what your brain has to do is represent all of what you're interacting with somehow in some kind of narrative language that that dreams fit in very nicely into into that idea of what we need to do that the creatures that he's going to carve living in an animated sense in his in his imagination i mean it's not that difficult first of all i have no reason to disbelieve him he's a very very straightforward person and he doesn't have the motivation or the guile i would say in some sense to invent a story like that there's just no reason he would possibly do it i don't think he's told that many people about it he thinks it's kind of crazy you know i said when he was a kid he thought he was insane because he'd had those dreams all the time now that sounds like a throwaway line but it really isn't because again it gets back to my point where we we judge its status we judge our status we judge our sanity it's it's you know so peterson peterson when he's having his conversations with sam harris on those videos is is and when i was listening to him i always again this is our this is our cultural default i always think in individualistic terms but our our our filters are communal which is why church is so important because we we filter them throughout our community and if a human being is isolated from other human beings they go insane why because our filters are actually communal and well what are the filters and how how is this information encoded well it's encoded in the looks and the sounds and again watch watch yourself in a relationship with someone that you know well look at a married couple that have been married for 40 or 50 years you know even a silent moment at a particular time speaks volumes think about your relationship with your parents and and you know them so well possibly at least if you know you grew up with them and it's all encoded and so we are we're highly communal in all this ways and and i think this is a blind side of our culture that we don't respect the fact of how communal we are and how much stuff this matters and how this gets encoded about these creatures and so forth and so it wasn't something he was trumpeting but i found it fascinating because i can see in him part of the manifestation of this unbroken tradition we have no idea how traditions like that are really passed along for thousands and thousands of years right just like we don't know how how things are encoded between us in any moment part of its oral and memory part of its acted out and dramatized and then part of it's going to be imaginative and people who aren't literate they store information quite differently than we do we don't remember anything it's all written down in books right but if you're from an oral culture especially if you're trained in that way you have all of that information at hand both so you can speak it you can tell the stories and you really know them and you know modern people don't really know what that's like anymore doubt if there's more than maybe two of you in the audience that could spout from memory like a 30 line poem you know when poetry was written so that people could do that and and this has changed dramatically quickly i i remember as a child sitting around and my father would he'd have these poems in his head from when he learned them in school well what kind of a school did my father grow up on my grandfather had churches out in the prairie and so my father would go to these tiny little schools and the education which again styles of education change all of this stuff the education then was a lot of wrote and so as a child he was he was he learned how he learned certain poems and around the dinner table when i was a child every now and then my father was fairly playful mentally he would just come out with a certain poem or a certain song and as a kid i always thought that's the randomest song i've ever heard of but it was tales from another place but most of human history that was the way when we lived in the dominican republic my wife was helping out a school and and and the schools that were had dominican teachers well those teachers in many ways the education that they received was the first draft of the education that they were going to give and so a lot of this education was wrote when i'd go into the churches we'd come in as north americans and we would we would have this priority well here's a verse from the bible put it in your own words and there's reasons for that but the older tradition was here's a verse for the bible spit it back out at me just like you had it and so in the sunday school classes in the haitian churches there'd be these there'd be these long sections of the pastor would say a verse and everyone would repeat back and the pastor would say another and everyone would be back well what are they doing as a community they are memorizing the sacred words and they are keeping them alive because who knows what will happen to books in an unstable chaotic community and there might even only be one book and so in a sense in that very impoverished haitian community they are practicing the kinds of the kind they are they are rehearsing the kinds of practices that kept religious communities alive for generation after generation through unspeakable chaos and violence and and they didn't know why they were doing it they just did it because they had done it before and that's what people are like we do things that we don't know why we're doing and it's a good thing we do because well you know we can apply darwinian type thinking to this because communities that didn't do it are no longer with us and they were colonized by communities that did do it and the practices evolved and were sustained and took over that's why we have that form is so that people could remember it and have it with them we don't do any of that anymore anyways back to you we don't do any of that anymore because we've had this nice window and again these windows are tiny 50 100 200 years of relative stability you know put our lives through a blender we'll probably start doing it again you was a great believer in the dream and i noted that dreams will tell you things that you don't know and then i thought well how the hell can that be how that in the world can something you think up tell you something you don't know how does that make any sense now just as a preacher listening to peterson talk he's a lot like a preacher because you notice how he makes a point does this little interesting circuit comes back to the same point that's this is all preacher craft and and i don't know if he knows what he's doing and i'd love to know who preached at him when he was a little boy out in that united church of canada church first of all why don't you understand it why does it have to come forth in the form of the dream it's like you're not there's something going on inside you that you don't control right the dream happens to you just like life happens to you i mean there is the odd lucid dreamer who can you know apply a certain amount of conscious control but most of the time it's you're laying there asleep and this crazy complicated world manifests itself inside you and you don't know how you could you can't do it when you're awake and you don't know what it means it's like what the hell's going on and that's one of the things that's so damn frightening about the psychoanalysts because you get this both from freud and young you really start to understand that there are things inside you that are happening that control you instead of the other way around you know he's a bit of reciprocal control but there's manifestations of spirits so to speak inside you that determine the manner in which you walk through life and you don't control it and and what's amazing to me and the points he's making here are just exactly right what's amazing to me is that people don't recognize this and again i watch people as a pastor i watch people live and it's like yeah that's how we are no not me it's like really let me get a video camera let me give some illustrations of how you're just like that and what does is it random you know there are people who have claimed that dreams are mere merely the consequence of random neuronal firing which is a theory i think is absolutely absurd because there's nothing random about dreams you know they're very very structured and and very very complex and they're not like snow on a television screen or static on a radio like those things are complicated and and then also i've seen so often that people have very coherent dreams that have a perfect narrative structure now they're fully developed in some sense and so that just doesn't i that theory just doesn't go anywhere with me i just can't see that as useful at all and so so i'm more likely to take the phenomena seriously say well there's something to dreams well you dream of the future and then you try to make it into a reality that seems to be an important thing or maybe you dream up a nightmare and try to make that into a reality because people do that too if they're hell bent on revenge for example and full of hatred and resentment or you have something happen in your life and you say i think i dreamed this what's with that now again we'll put it on science well you can't tell me what i dreamed and maybe i'm just eluding myself or maybe it's a false thought but even the dynamic of that thought what's with that i mean that manifests itself in terrible fantasies you know those are dreams then people go act them out these things are powerful you know when whole nations can get caught up in collective dreams that's what happened to the nazis that's what happened to nazi germany in the 1930s well he's using dreams metaphorically there but the fact that that we use that word metaphorically in that way is very interesting and very telling because most of the dreams we have are not this if if are not what you would what you would answer when i ask you what do you really want you don't our dreams are usually far more my dreams at least usually far more chaotic every now and then there'll be a really nice dream but the other normal dreams are just sort of this and that and this and that and usually some frustration and some challenge and and all of that so you know the fact that we use dreams in a in a particular way as he just used it here that's a very interesting thing it's absolutely remarkable amazing horrific destructive spectacle and the same thing happened in the soviet union the same thing happened in china it's like we have to take these things seriously you know try to understand what's going on so you believe that the dream could contain and back to you more information than was yet articulated you think artists do the same thing you know like people go to museums and they look at paintings renaissance paintings or modern paintings they don't exactly know why they're there you know i was in this room in new york and again this has everything to do with value but what why how do we communal i mean that's really in a sense what status is we we communally assess value and we act that out and we communicate that to us and we signal it and and we're that that that's terribly powerful and terribly real for us i might i might up the speed on this video i don't know because i've listened to these videos so many times at least this earlier one i've listened to a lot i don't remember which museum but it was a room full of renaissance art you know great painters the greatest painters and thought maybe that room was worth a billion dollars or something outrageous because there was like 20 paintings in there you know so priceless and the first thing is well why are those paintings worth so much and why is there a museum in the biggest city in the world devoted to them and why do people from all over the world come and look at them what the hell are those people doing one of them was of the assumption of mary you know beautifully painted absolutely glowing work of art and just like 20 people standing in front of it looking at it and think what are those people up to you know they don't know why did they make a pilgrimage to new york to come and look at that painting it's not like they know why is it worth so much i mean i know there's a status element to it too but that begs the question why do those items become such high status items what right because status is is just simply another another currency of value what is it about them that's so absolutely remarkable well we're strange creatures so i was trying to figure out in part well where did the information that's in the dream come from it has to come from somewhere and you can think about it as a revelation you know because it's like it springs out of the void and it's new knowledge if it's a revelation you didn't produce it now his use of the word revelation there maybe i'll slow it down again his use of the word revelation there is is really interesting because well what do we mean by a revelation well it has to do with value and status and and it has to do with value and status the regard with which we hold this element of information as compared to other elements of information that we that we live with and and you know it's funny i listen to the celebrity atheists go on and on about the bible and supernatural and la la la and revelation and it's like yeah but you have various different elements have different revelatory status for you you might not believe that the bible is revelation but you might believe that you know see part of the problem with these other with people who don't have a religion and don't have a communally sanctioned book in which there's a communal tradition around with around an idea such as revelation is that you don't really have one what you really have is a bunch of ideas that you sort of hold up but you haven't really encoded them and so they stay rather murky and and believe me the bible even with itself as a text is plenty murky for people because if you if you watch people and listen to people read the bible and try to interpret the bible you'll very quickly see that there's there's a world of murkiness going on even amidst it's almost worse amidst professional interpreters of the book because we know so much more it's a sort of tightens the rules but this this revelatory this revelatory status that we use to regard certain parts of information that's an entire dynamic that deserves attention in and of itself but but peterson's use of it's a revelation is i think fit in that we're talking about the idea of god so we're going to have an idea of revelation that something happens and and suddenly lights come on look at the language we use and i can see clearly and things are illuminated and i am enlightened look at look at all of the ways that we use to talk about that so you know it's not a bad word but it's at these points that religious traditions that that peterson starts hitting some trip wires for people within a religious tradition and and that's perfectly justified and good because what religious communities do set up our trip wires in order so that the members of the religious community can function as a community because what is a community is a community is a a group of individuals that now have communal ways of acting and thinking so that many can act as one okay that's in fact how people come together and become as one and if you don't have that capacity and you don't have the framework for communities to come together as one you can't accomplish the kinds of things in the world through time and history that these these one these principalities can in fact accomplish because many many tens hundreds dozens thousands of people become as one that changes the world and and in a sense what happens with the with the loss and the rejection of these mechanics that are used in order to create human community well what happens is that you lose power what do you mean who's you you singular plural another problem in english that we have the you don't have it in greek or you know the or or spanish but the the the second person is singular singular and plural is the same so if if you're within an institution within a community that has tripwires and all of these things again as as individualist libertarian americans we we sort of um i always spanish words always come to my mind when i start thinking in some of these terms we always we always cast away these ideas but they're incredibly powerful and we do so at our peril it just it just appears but that's see one of the things i want to do with this series is like i'm scientifically minded and i'm quite a rational person and i like to have an explanation for things that's rational and empirical before i look for any other kind of explanation and i don't want to say that everything that's associated with divinity can be reduced in some manner to biology or to an evolutionary history or anything like that but this is this is part of his open agnostic posture for this insofar as it's possible to do that reduction i'm going to do that and i'm going to leave the and and again if you get into some of the videos i made a couple of months ago about the spirit of geometry and the spirit of of of finesse what what seems clear in this combinatorially explosive world is that you can continue to penetrate with the spirit of geometry with reason and try things out and and and i think i think i think christians sometimes develop a fear that oh you're going to get to the curtain and pull it back and find the humbug wizard of oz i i think we need not have that fear the other phenomena floating in the air because they can't be pinned down and in that category i would put the category of mystical or religious experience which we don't understand at all so artists observe one another they observe people and they represent what they see and they transmit the message of what they see to us and they teach us to see and we don't necessarily know what it is that we're learning from them oh and and again i'm thinking about the movie the joker that's coming out and and and i've talked to a number of filmmakers in in my process here and and i think peterson's right in terms of this process and how this works we're learning something or at least we're acting like we're learning something we go to movies we watch stories we we we we immerse ourselves in fiction constantly that's an artistic production and for many people the world of the arts is a living world and that's particularly true if you're a creative person and it's the creative artistic people that do move the knowledge of humanity forward and they do that with their artistic productions first they're on the edge and the dancers do that and the poets do that and the visual artists do that and the musicians do that and we're not sure what they're doing like we're not sure what musicians are doing what the hell are they doing why do you like music you know it gives you a deep intimation of the significance of things and no one questions it you go to a concert you're thrilled it's a quasi religious experience particularly if the people really get themselves together and get the crowd moving you know there's something incredibly intense about it but makes no sense whatsoever it's it's not an easy thing to understand music is deeply patterned and and patterned in layers and i think that has something to do with it because reality is patterned and deeply patterned in layers and so i think music is representing reality in some fundamental way and that we get into the sway of that and sort of participate in being and that's part of what makes it such an uplifting experience but we don't really know that's what we're doing we just go do it and and and and it's nourishing for people right i mean young people in particular and and nourishing interesting choice of words and the right word but but what do we mean nourishing unto what nourishing unto and and this is where you get into peterson's sort of sort of using meaning as an internal compass and and this intuitive sense of value that we have which which isn't is is by no means infallible it's constantly gets gets tricked and bullshitted but but it's just lots of them live for music it's where they derive all their meaning their cultural identity everything that's nourishing comes from their affiliation with their music and is part of their cultural identity so that's an amazing thing the question still remains where does the information and dreams come from and i think what where it comes from is that we watch the patterns that everyone acts out we've watched that forever and we've got some representation again we is interesting when he uses it there of those pout we've watched that forever and we've got some representations of those patterns that's part of our cultural history that's what's embedded in stories in fictional accounts of the story between good and evil the bad guy and the good guy and the romance you know these are these are canonical patterns of being for people and and they deeply affect us because they represent what it is that we will act out in the world and and we have a sense when we watch them that they're useful to us and again that's that's a that's a deep part of it that we're we're fascinated by it even you would think well why would watching this movie about superheroes or space people or or or some intimate uh some you know the the the complexities of a relationship of this couple that it's a fictitious couple that i'll never know well why is that interesting to me that somewhere in our brains are saying well you're going to need to watch this you're going to learn something from this and this is this might be important so pay attention and then we flesh that out with the individual information we have about ourselves and other people and so it's like there's a there's a there's waves of of behavioral patterns that manifest themselves in the crowd across time the great dramas are played on the crowd across time and the artists watch that and and it's it's helpful to remember that the people who are playing it out have also watched things and so when you think about let's say compression data compression that happens in this doesn't happen so much anymore because we have these big hard drives and a lot of a lot of ram and but 10 15 20 years ago you know you you would compress a wav file which was really too big for your hard drive into an mp3 and that was lossy but and so then what we did is you know now we have lossless compression but so so it's the constantly watching the okay we watch this love story with these people now we watch it with these people we watch it with these people who watch these superheroes who watch these superheroes who watch these supers what we're doing is where again we're synthesizing out the the the lessons and again we don't know we're doing it it's just all happening our minds are synthesizing it's getting compressed and refined and focused and and and actually when you get to again cross over into some of the for viet verveky stuff what comes out of there finally is wisdom because we've compressed so many things and because everyone else is watching too and so you have this communal cognition that is compressing and compressing in wisdom so then you have all these wisdom strands that are out there and we're looking at all the wisdom strands and then here's here's a wisdom strand drink yourself tonight drink yourself to sleep at night every night okay you play that over a thousand people and oh you got all these alcoholics it's not a very good one oh take this drug lots of people that's not a very good one and so wisdom is is part of this compilation and this refining and this compression that happens over and over and over again and it gets tried and tested and through all the stories and so you know what's happening now with the the incredible multiplicity of artificial stories that we're living with with netflix and and and stories on our phones and on and on and on well i don't know is is is this is art is corrupt data getting played out that would be propaganda i suppose or or is it honest data is this helping us i don't know how are we supposed to know and the thing is again back to the bible in all of this what the bible is in many ways is that again says peterson that process just built into that now christians say well this is from god well what does that mean well that means that this is this is canon this is prioritized now modern people look at that and say yeah but some of the letters and some of the text it's like i don't know you're not getting it you're not getting it they get intimations of what that is and they write it down and they tell us and then we're a little clearer about what we're up to you know like a great dramatist like shakespeare let's say we know that what he wrote is fiction and then we say well fiction isn't true but then you think well wait a minute maybe it's true like numbers are true you know numbers are an abstraction from the underlying reality but no one in their right mind would really think numbers aren't true you could even make a case that the numbers are more real than the things that they represent right because the abstraction is so insanely powerful once you have mathematics you're just deadly you can move the world with mathematics now he says more insanely powerful he could have said more insanely real so it's not obvious that the abstraction is less real than the more concrete reality and you take a work of fiction like hamlet and you think well is that it's not true because it's fiction but then you think wait a minute what kind of explanation is that maybe it's more true than non-fiction because it takes what the story that needs to be told about you and the story that needs to be told about you and you and you and you and it abstracts that out and says look here's something that's a key part of the human experience as such right so it's an abstraction from this underlying noisy substrate and people are affected by it because they see now noise is a really interesting use really interesting word he uses there too because again if we continue with this metaphor of of data compression noise and data compression well what is noise noise is sort of like weeds well what are weeds in a garden is are is the weed any less a plant than the other plant is the lead the weed any less a valuable plant the word noise is a word that communicates a function of value the word weed is a word that communicates a function of value it's noise to us we talk a signal to noise ratio noise is that which we don't want okay and and so and back him up a little bit even a substrate and then people are a key part of the human experience as such right so it's an abstraction from this underlying noisy substrate and people are affected by it because they see that the thing that's represented is part of the pattern of their being that's the right way to think about it and then with these old stories these ancient stories it seems to me like that process has been occurring for thousands of years it's like we watched ourselves and we extracted out some stories we imitated each other and we represented that in drama and then we distilled the drama and we got a representation of the distillation and then we did it again and at the end of that process that's the compression it's compressed and compressed and compressed it took god only knows how long i think some of these stories they've traced fairy tales back 10 000 years some fairy tales in relatively unchanged form and it certainly seems to me that the archaeological evidence for example suggests that the really old stories that that that the bible begins with are at least that old and likely embedded in a prehistory that's far older than that you might think well how can you be so sure and the answer to that in part is that cultures that don't change like the ancient cultures right they didn't change as fast as they stayed the same i love i love that line that's like the ancient cultures right they didn't change as fast as they stayed the same that's the answer and it's the haitians with their with their practice they they don't change partly because of the chaos they're not free to change and they have to keep doing this or the culture just evaporates and so what you get is well you've get you get the most durable cultures does that mean they're the best cultures where you're gonna have to have some ideas about you're gonna have to have some guiding stars out there something outside and the question of course of secularism is is there an outside so they call they keep their information moving generation to generation that's how they stay the same and so we know again in the archaeological record there are records of rituals that have remained relatively unbroken for up to 20 000 years it was discovered in caves in japan that were set up for a particular kind of bear worship that was also characteristic of western europe so these things can last for very long periods of time we're watching each other act in the world and then the question is well how long have we been watching each other and the answer that in some sense is well as long as there's been creatures with nervous systems and that's a long time you know that's some hundreds of millions of years perhaps longer than that we've been watching each other trying to figure out what we're up to across that entire span of time some of that knowledge is built right into our bodies which is why we can dance with each other for example right because understanding isn't just something that you that you have as an abstraction it's something that you act out you know that's what children are doing when they're learning to rough and tumble plays they're learning to integrate their body with the body of someone else in a harmonious way learning to cooperate and compete and that's all instantiated right into their body it's not abstract knowledge they don't know that they're doing that they're just doing it and so we can even use our body as a representational platform and again it gets funny into this what do we mean by no they don't know that they're doing it's they're just doing this well part of them knows that they're doing this it's this little conscious part that we connect with them again this is identity that that part doesn't know but they know you know they're doing it so they must know something so we've been studying each other for a long time abstracting out what is it that we're up to and that's that's what is it we're up to what should we be up to that's even a more fundament should question if you're going to live in the world and you're going to do it properly what does properly mean and how is it that you might go about that and to what end now we've got telos coming in here well it's the right question right it's what everyone wants to know how do you live in the world not what is the world made of it's not the same question how do you live in the world it's the eternal question of human beings and i guess we're the only species that has ever really asked that question because all the other animals they just go and do whatever they do not us it's a question for us we've had to we have to become aware of it we have to be able to speak it god only knows why but that seems to be the situation so we act that acting is shaped by the world that acting is shaped by society into something that we don't understand but that we can model that we can model we model it in our stories we model it with our bodies and that's where the dream gets its information the dream is part of the process that's watching everything and then trying to formulate it and trying to say well trying to get the signal out from the noise and to portray it in dramatic form because a dream is a little drama now get the signal out from the noise well how do we know what signal and what's noise because it's all just data now we're getting to vervecky's relevance realization because it's relevance this thing that doesn't john says doesn't have an essence that's that's that's the little tuning that we're always doing this is relevant this is not this is relevant this is not and then we discover oh we got it wrong look time to recode now you watch others doing all this relevance realization and they get it wrong time to recode and and we're always adjusting always recalibrating always signal and noise signal and noise signal and noise because there's way too much data and then you get the chance to talk about what that dream is and then you have it that's the process you have something like articulated knowledge at that point and so the bible i would say is is it's sort of it exists in that space that's half into the dream and half into articulated knowledge it's something like that and going into it to find out what the stories are about can what can what it can aid our self understanding and then the other issue is is that if nichu was correct and if dostoevsky or well that before he goes on excuse me i just have to the space button crazy world you know this is going to again trip a lot of so again he's talking from below here all right this is this is this is his project it's it's in a sense a sort of natural theology up from below let's give a psychological explanation to account for not just the creation of this book but the culture that is around the book because the book isn't just you know dozens of them up on the shelf here the book isn't just the physical thing that's not really the book the book is everything around it and the publishing houses and you know people smeed sneaking it into russia or china and reading it every day and having this relationship with it that's the book that whole thing and now let's say a skeptic would might look at this and say oh this is all this encoding for wisdom and so on and so forth which is giving the bible credibility which is being communicated to people who for whom the bible had no credibility and said look at jordan peterson and he has credibility and he talks about the bible and he argues persuasively that the bible should have credibility so they then give it credibility well if you wanted to encode that in religious language what would it look like well it would look like the the religious encoded language that we have we don't have any other way to encode it besides that if we say something like well the bible is a good book and you should read it well you might say well yeah but the uh there's lots of good books that are on my shelf here's this book about from timothy keller and here's this book from jordan peterson and here's this book from from timon hoffman about canadian story of the crc and here's this book by gk biel of the temple and the church's mission and oh boy i got lots of books well it's not just a good book it's the best book there's a priority and well what kind of language you would you use well that's that's where all the religion get its languages from now of course celebrity atheists come along and say ah but it's not it's not it's not that special it's not inspired by god well how do you know you don't you just you're skeptical about it but then again i watch non-religious people talk about how they imagine religious people deal with the text well i've been watching religious people deal with the text my whole life and they deal with it in very particular ways they read certain segments of it a lot and 90 percent of it they don't read at all and this again i i really like what brett weinstein said in the alistair mcgrath conversation where and i've made this point a while ago with my videos you can the beauty of having it all on youtube is if you could ever actually find it you could actually find it but you know that's so so most of the bible sort of lies dormant for many people just like our genetic code and then people just keep coming back to certain certain codes and maybe those those codes produce proteins and those proteins are the are the are the confessions and the doctrines and and those proteins then become active in the body of the church and and that's how but in different cultures different proteins become active and but then those churches meet each other and figure out well well these passages say this and those passages say this and they're both from the bible that we both agree are up at the top of the hierarchy so how do we manage that and it gets into the area of confessions and this is actually how people work okay and and so this this process that that jordan is talking about that the bible itself is not simply the result of this process now again i'm dutch calvinist and you can read someone like herben bobbing and and learn about what we call organic inspiration of the text that god moved authors and so that particular that particular understanding of the origin and nature of scripture is not alien to our doctrinal theological tradition but that process has not ended and and if you look at my sunday school classes one of the things that i often do is i bring in different translations of the bible and we'll dig back into the king james version from the 16th century and then we'll look at the new international version first developed in like 1975 and updated and and in 2011 and and and then i'll look at the these different traditions and we'll look at the text because that continues to happen it's a living document amidst the living community and the community is strengthened because it has such a document because if you don't have this document communities have a very difficult time coming together forming voltron as it were but not just of like five lion robots but but thousands and millions of people and this of course in in a political sense is what the u.s constitution is supposed to do and so if we look in western society and we say oh they're using a book and a text around which to organize and to and to maintain themselves well someone would say well isn't that what religious people do this politics is just following religion and and the fact that that we're using a book and a text in that way and trying to organize people together in that way where did we get that idea well we saw it worked with the bible so let's write a constitution and see how that goes and the older the constitution gets the more we're you know don't want to tinker with it because when you write a new constitution oh it's all chaos and usually only do that after some great tragedy or some great victory so i'm running out of time yeah we'll we'll see how this goes i'll listen to a little bit more and then we'll see young was correct and dostoevsky as well without the cornerstone that that understanding provides we're lost and that's not good because then we're susceptible to psychic pathology that's psychological pathology you know the people who are adamant anti-religious thinkers seem to believe that if we abandoned our immersment in the underlying dream that we'd all instantly become rationalists like dacarter bacon or you know intelligent clear thinking rational scientific people and what they never seem to realize is that dacar and bacon had that underpinning which afforded them rationality and again as i i played that little clip from renais gerard what what's happened in our society is that we've we've simply forgotten the underpinning and the further you get away from the underpinning the more and more chaos gets built in well now my video seems to have stopped up there so um maybe i'll call this around