https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pcGNwdO0uWE

 Julian, I don't know that Julian needs a lot of introduction. Julian, you were one of the first conversations I had on this channel. Oh, was I? I guess, yeah. Early on, yeah. Pretty early on. You found me pretty quickly. So obsessed ever since. Yeah. Well, why are you obsessed? What about this conversation has so grabbed you? I find that in a weird way, like the stuff you talk about on your channel is stuff I'm deeply interested in. And then a big thing for me has been networking with different people. So I've met all kinds of different people through this channel and that started sub conversations and I've been opened up to new perspectives and new things to read and new people to follow. And so this whole thing is just a mind expanding experience. And it's just great that you're sort of this central node and then you have this collective consciousness of different people you're sort of using to expand your own mind. And eventually, so we're all worried about our central node having too many conversations. I don't see how he has enough. We were worried that his brain is going to explode. No, my brain's not in any danger of exploding. But people who are trying to sign up for slots have found that they can't get any for the rest of July. I've got vacation coming up and I've also I'm trying to get ahead of the tide if I can. And I'm trying to figure out how to do this. So my limitations don't limit the channel. So I know you're talking with some other people about doing a conversation without me and I'd say record it if the stuff is appropriate and I'll very much consider posting it on the channel, especially if it's a bunch of people who are regulars on the channel. Because I'd be curious to see what you guys talk about without me in the room. That'd be kind of fun. Yeah, yeah. And it always seems to circle around the same similar themes. Yes. Be interesting to have someone outline what those themes are. I was thinking, you know, the meaning crisis is a big one. The reconciliation of heaven and earth and the various ways that plays out. Epistemology, how we know perception, like how we see the world is another big one. Consciousness, modernity and its effects. These are the types of things I'm having conversations about. Yeah, yeah. So you sent me a list of, you mentioned James K. Smith, someone that I haven't talked much about on the channel. He's a philosopher at Calvin College. He's a big name in my church and an aspect of my church community. Which of his books did you read? I read this one. So this is Who's Afraid of Postmodernism? Taking Derrida, Leotard and Foucault to church. And boy, I enjoyed that book. I think you would love it too. So what he does is he sort of takes these three thinkers, Derrida, Foucault and Leotard and sort of shows how they address problems in modernity and sort of give the church a new way forward. And I think it would be really interesting to go through those three and sort of get your thoughts in. Because I think it just plays into this whole conversation. I've read some of his Seeking the King, I mean that cultural literacy series that he's done. I haven't read this one. And I know almost nothing about those philosophers so it would probably be a good book for me to read. I think it's strange. I've said this before. Peterson has sort of put himself in opposition to postmodernism. But when I read this book, it's like the way Smith sort of paints them, it's like they're addressing the same problems. What they're doing is sort of bringing a recovery of the body, a recovery of community. And these are essential. So it would be interesting to go through like these three. Maybe I could do it now. So what he does is sort of takes one of these philosophers and takes one of their main ideas like a famous line from them. For example, for Lyotard, I think he has postmodernism is incredulity towards meta narratives. And then he sort of shows how that can apply and what that actually means. So yeah, do you want me to sort of get into that? Okay, so maybe I could start by reading the passage 65. Yeah. So yeah. Where do I have it here? I don't even know. I thought I had it marked. Oh, so he started by sort of defining what he means by meta narrative. And in conversations, people often think that meta narrative is just a big story, like something that explains the whole the totality of how things are. But what Smith says is that a meta narrative isn't just a big story. It's a big story that claims to be universally true and can be shown to be so by universal rationality. So it's sort of this is true, and it's rational, and you need to believe it. So he says, meta narratives are distinctly modern phenomenon, they are stories that not only tell us a grand story, but also claim to be able to legitimate or provide the stories claimed by an appeal to universal reason. Right. And then, so what happens in postmodernity is we get suspicious about these grand stories that claim to be rational and prove provable and everyone regardless of their culture should be able to sort of arrive at the same conclusion and accept this grand story. And you see this in apologetics, where it's like, okay, Christianity is the most rational way of viewing the world. And it's a very odd claim to make if the central point of Christianity is this incarnated God who was crucified and raised from the dead, the whole thing is sort of, you know, if you read First Corinthians three or something, it's like, this, that he sort of points out that the whole thing is, it's not rational, it's something else, it's almost irrational in a sense foolishness to the Greeks. Yes, exactly. And, and so what he wants to recover is sort of the idea that Christianity can't be sort of known from the outside in an objective manner, but sort of you have to enter into it, see the story, be shaped by it. And sort of through faith, you live into the story. So it's a reclaiming of story and a reclaiming of the role of faith in knowing. So it's, and this is important to me because it's, it's like, you, the claim that you can know Christianity to be objectively true is not something Christianity has ever claimed. Why would it be? It's foolishness to the Greeks. You have to enter into it. You have to have faith. You have to, so that sort of the shift that postmodernism brings about and it's just so helpful in my mind. It's a very Calvinist move. Yeah, yeah. He does bring in the presuppositionalist. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's interesting. So I've never, I've never read that book. There's, I wonder if I could get him on the channel. That would be, that would be great. That would be interesting. I talked to you about it once and you said he might not be interested because he's having his own status of rocket or something. Yeah, yeah. And I don't know. He's, he's, he's known to be, especially on Twitter, a rather surly guy. Surly. He doesn't suffer fools well. He gets, he gets annoyed and, and, and can get, and can get rather, can get rather snitty. I don't know him personally, but I, you know, I do, I do have, I do have a, I do have some status in the Christian Reformed Church and I could use some of that status in some ways if I need to. So, that would be great. I want to read the book first because, you know, so, you know, John Verbeke fairly early on invited me to have a conversation and I, I put him off because I know that you're often better, you'll wind up having a much better conversation with the person if, if I know something about, you know. Yeah, I was thinking about this. My brother was telling, this is going to offend some people, but I don't care. Brother was telling me about the, the, the Joe Rogan show and how Eric Weinstein, I think was on it and they were talking about Dave Rubin and he, my brother, I always have this joke about how Dave Rubin is sort of the moron in the bunch because he hardly ever knows what he's talking about. And he said they were sort of dancing around the issue and saying things like, sometimes Dave Rubin has a conversation about things that he, you know, he hasn't really looked into. And so I was just thinking the convert, that's what's good about this moment is we're having conversations with people who are both interested in, have looked into the same issues. And those are always the conversations that are more fun to have and more engaging for both sides. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I agree. And I, I'm often humbled and humiliated by the things I say and by how much I don't know, you know, although I take some comfort in, you know, Peterson, I was relistening to the first biblical series lecture and he noted quite rightly that no one, no one is educated enough to talk about the psychological significance of the Bible. No one is educated enough. And I mean, when we're talking about something that we're sort of calling the meaning crisis, none of us are educated enough to actually know a lot of what we're talking about, but we have to talk. Yeah. And even if we get things wrong, we have to put it out there because we have to think together. And if we can have a and, and having a good conversation means having enough humility, but humility is really strength of a different kind. It's the kind of strength that allows you to be wrong. The kind of strength that says, I'm going to say this and I may be wrong and I may be proven wrong. And I may in fact be humiliated, but I'm okay with that because I'm not at the center of me. Yeah. And be forward looking instead of backward looking, right? It's, I could look back at all the stupid opinions I've had and I, and five years, I look back and look at all the stupid things I've said now. But if you keep the perspective of, you know, you're moving forward and what you're saying now is better than what you said five years ago and et cetera. That, that's another positive way of seeing things, I guess. Which is Peterson's rule. Compare yourself to who you used to be instead of two others right now. Well, not quite, but yeah, yeah, yeah, that's right. That's right. That's not quite it. Yeah. I actually, I didn't quite get it, but yeah. Oh yeah. One of his rules for life. Compare yourself to who you used to be instead of two others right now. Right. In other words, you show progress. So, so another one of the things, what time do you have to go? Cause I know you've got, are you on your lunch hour? 12. I need to go to 12. 12. Okay. Switches 20, 35 minutes from now. Again. Oh yeah. That's in 30 minutes or so. Okay. Okay. All right. Yeah. Let's, let's go on to the, to the next one. So there's three and I got one of them. Okay. So this is, the first one it goes over is there's, this is Darodin. He says there is nothing outside of the text. And this is also an interesting one. Where is it here? So what he means by there's nothing outside of the text is essentially that there is no seeing that isn't interpretation that you never sort of see the things, see the world or see the text in a pure, unmediated sense. You're always interpreting, always seeing it through your lens as always. It's always interpretation. And so he would say also there's, there's no see, there's no text without context because you're always bringing your own context. And so here's sort of a quote. He worries that it is. So he's talking about sort of the interpretation where you try to get as close as you can to what the original author meant and then assume you have the correct interpretation. So he says, he worries that it assumes a kind of Rousseau naivety because Rousseau is sort of the guy who promotes the noble savage, because this is the guy who has unmediated, unmediated access to reality, right? Assumes a kind of Rousseau naivety precisely because it assumes there can be a reading or even experience that does not involve interpretation. So this is again his, you can hear the Calvinism in this next sentence. In other words, it assumes that we who are either normal, healed or redeemed, not beset by a condition. And so how he applies this to the church is that there's the necessity for the interpretive community to sort of have this community who interprets together and shapes each other and shapes each other to see the world as Christency. So what the community does is it shapes you in the narrative and it makes you see in the narrative. So you're sort of embracing the fact that you can't see without interpretation and making an implicit effort to form yourself within that, within the interpretive framework or within the interpretive community. So this is a recovery of the church as a body and a recover of formation as making you see the world at the way the Christian way of seeing is. So yeah, it's also a really interesting one. Well and I think you know as a number of us have said a lot of times there's a lot, we tend to deal with these facile low resolution labels where Jordan Peterson would be anti-postmodern but there's plenty postmodern about Jordan Peterson. And so he embraces a fair degree of postmodernity even while he's critiquing it. And you know and I think because a lot of these things from a lot of these points, these were the kinds of things that were commonly talked about and taught in Calvin College in the 80s when I was there. I mean it's been something built into our tradition for a long time. So again I didn't know who Derrida was but when I listened to that I think well yeah. I mean this is something you talk about all the time on your channel is you know we're not transparent to ourselves. We don't necessarily, salience, you know you walking in the room and seeing this cobra and your yeah this is all the same kinds of stuff. Yeah but Rider and the Elephant is the next one. Oh okay let's hear it. This is Bocot, where is it 87. So his claim is that power is knowledge. This is one that triggers people a lot of times. A lot of times because not knowledge is power, power is knowledge. Power is knowledge. He's just putting it in a provocative way I think but his basic claim is that knowledge and power are in inextricably linked. That whenever there's a power system it's going to sort of form people into their way of seeing the world. So here's a quote. I think we should admit rather that power produces knowledge. That power and knowledge directly apply one another. That there is no power relation without the correlative constitution of a field of knowledge nor any knowledge that does not presuppose and constitute at the same time power relations. And so he sort of gets at this through this is Foucault. Foucault gets at this through a long study of the prison system and he looks at the medieval prison system where people can see the prison system as sort of the system of power being embodied in an obvious way. And what they would do is they would sort of beat the confession out of someone. So this is an obvious way of how power sort of forces people to accept knowledge claims. So I torture you on the rack and force you to say I am guilty and what I did was wrong. So you're being forced into the system. But what Foucault claims is that in the modern system it's almost worse because it's much more subtle and indirect because we get shaped in these subtle ways to reflect the way society wants us to be. For Smith one of his most common examples would be like the shopping mall where you sort of get shaped into being mass consumers and whatever. And so this is where given the fact that mainstream society is sort of shaping you in a certain way, this is where Smith sort of takes this claim then applies it to the church and the necessity of forming people into the Christian narrative and sort of creating this counterculture of people who are being formed in a different way so that they're able to see the principalities and powers afoot and sort of name them for what they are. So he's sort of calling for a countercultural power knowledge relation within the church. And yeah, there's the summary of the book I guess. Well now I don't have to read it. Well and here too I think this to me isn't something that I don't necessarily see as terribly controversial. I think it's true that there definitely is that. Now I think part of what Peterson really objects to is when this is, I think all these three points are true and I think the heart of Peterson's objection is that all of these things create a, basically create an oxygen-free zone where people know, where we can't imagine people can act and we can't imagine people have will and volition and agency. Yep, I see what you're saying. And so what happens and I think Peterson's main point in critiquing this is that when all of this is pushed too far, you wind up with a world that doesn't exist. To get back to Peterson's main point, I mean again in that first biblical, in that first edition of the biblical series which has now is over 4,000 views or 4 million views, you know he makes the point that we act as if each of us are agents and even in the Bishop Barron conversation that he had, you know we don't, if we imagined that people were merely the description of these three points of post-modernity and nothing else, that there was no freedom, then well that then constructs a world that we don't recognize and creatures that we don't recognize as people. And so I guess this, I totally agree but I guess I just see that this is a necessary recognition that we have bodies, that we have elephants, that we're being shaped, that we're part of communities and that not everything is up to us. We don't have this sort of monarchical vision rationality. We can't step outside of ourselves completely so you always need to have both of these things I guess. No, I very much agree. You need to have both of them and if you don't take this stuff seriously enough, then you wind up with Brett Weinstein saying we'll just reprogram ourselves. That's horribly naive. That is so naive because and I think have you never watched yourself? Have you never, and I think this is in a sense where to the point of James Smith, of Jamie Smith, where a lifestyle of living within a Christian community teaches you how non-transparent you are because you begin to know your sin and you have a community around you that in a sense continues to have a degree of discipline, church discipline, accountability upon you and you recognize how I am not a master in my own house. You need that to just see yourself. But on the other hand, it simply can't be lived because anyone who is out there on a soapbox in the street, whether they're proclaiming the new gospel of progressive liberationism or conservatism denies this because people then can't change camps. They're complete prisoners of their gender, their identities, their moments. They're complete prisoners and then they're no longer people. So that's exactly right. It has to be both. Yeah, I totally agree. But yeah, let me just say and I'll have another yeah, but so there was, you remember a week or a couple of weeks ago, James White got into trouble for having this tweet about, did you remember that? Yeah, something's ringing a bell. He got into trouble. He had a tweet. I don't remember what he had a tweet about, but I remember he got in trouble. He said, he was, I can't remember the tweet, but his point was basically, oh, he said, so what's a more plausible explanation for the fact that black people have three times higher rate of abortions? Is it because a because they're being willfully disobedient and transgressing the moral law, or is it because of 150 years of slavery? And so that tweet triggers me because I see this kind of thing all the time where the gospel, what he went on to say, like what these people need is not like new social broke, didn't exactly say this, but he said, what we need is to give the gospel to these people. And this will solve all of their problems. Essentially, I'm really caricaturing him, but this is the general spirit. And it's this type of seeing the gospel as disembodied and seeing people as disembodied souls who only need to be injected with this gospel serum. And this will make everything better. And, you know, I think that's that's wrong on two accounts. First of all, we aren't just souls or whatever you mean by souls, but we are embodied beings. And second, the gospel isn't just accept Jesus as your personal Lord and savior and everything will become better. Part of what the gospel is, is that Jesus through his life, death and resurrection, confronts the powers who are holding us captive. And so we need to recognize that it's not just, you know, my own personal decision to be sinful. I am captive to these principalities and powers that are affecting me and depressing me. And part of what the gospel does is free us not just from ourselves, but from the captivity to the principalities and powers. And, you know, just from my own experience as a Canadian, the Native American people here, like they're not being held captive just by their own false decisions, wrong decisions. They're being held captive by years of, you know, generations of dysfunction. They're being held captive by alcohol. They're being held captive by crime. They're being held captive by poverty. There's all kinds of different issues. And let's start treating people as if they have bodies. Yeah, yeah, that's right. That's right. And I love, I think you put that very, very well, and I completely agree with you. And that is the gospel. Now, what's difficult for us is often, you know, there's another element of the individual and the statistic. Statistics, I think, very much help us see principalities and powers because you can tend to, they're a filter. Obviously, every statistic is a filter through the lens through which you are trying to see the group. And that selectivity, it's almost like a monarchical vision that you select one aspect, and then you create a profile, you create a data set. And you can, and through this lens, you can see principalities and powers at work by the nature of what a principality and power is. And then when we talk about, okay, how does Christ free us? What's interesting is that so much of this, you can see it if you look out over very long periods of time. If you look at the data set from let's say, 8030 to 80100, and you ask yourself, well, I was making the point in my adult Sunday school class, that when the gospel of John was written, John the Baptist was a bigger name than Jesus of Nazareth. And when we hear that today, that just sounds absurd. Yeah, yeah. But it was true. And that's part of the reason we see John show up as he does in the gospels, because this is a leveraging that's taking place. The gospel writers have to contend with the fame and power of the community of John the Baptist. And they have to deal with this narrative. And each one of them does. Now, if you look instead at 8030 to the year 2000, you look at that time frame, John the Baptist is nothing. Jesus is huge. It's been colonized. Yeah. Yeah. And you can look at how and again, back to this question, who is more powerful? Who's a better colonizer? Jesus of Nazareth or Genghis Khan? Yeah, yeah. And so, you know, all of these issues sort of come into play. And this, I think we part of us finds this disturbing, because as individuals, we are very important people for ourselves, because it is us. And but in the long scheme of things, we're pretty small. And most of us are quite anonymous. I've been reading, you know, I've mentioned that some of my videos that I've been reading this book, Fatal Discord, which you very much should read. It's, it's a, in my opinion, it's a journalist's account of the Protestant Reformation. And what is helpful in that account is that I don't know if I've ever read a book before that so captures the, the power of that movement. You know, I've read plenty on Luther's theology, Luther biographies, John Calvin, I've read all of that stuff. But none of those books capture the explosion that the Protestant Reformation was. I just finished watching the HBO miniseries Chernobyl. Oh, yeah. And that was a terrific miniseries. And it, you know, Chernobyl was both a literal explosion, and a cultural explosion that probably led to the fall of the Soviet bloc. Because it's so effectively exposed the corrosive power of the lie. And when you take that in conjunction with, with Solzhenitsyn, it just, you know, just devastates the Soviet system, where they can't speak the truth, and everyone knows it. So what happens in Germany with Martin Luther was a similar explosion. But what gets spewed out was not radioactivity, but a whole bunch of other elements that have come to simply describe the contemporary world, the end of the totalitarian Roman Catholic Church, the beginning of freedom of conscience, the beginning of using the Bible as a portal, to think about Eric Weinstein's word, as a portal back to Christ and the apostles, instead of the church as a conveyor, a change in consciousness that sees faith as a psychological, emotional experience inside of me, instead of a pageant that is embodied and acted out by a horrendously corrupt church. And in not just in this book, because this book doesn't get into those things. Part of why I'm seeing those things is because I'm reading this book, well, I'm doing all that other thinking, you know, Owen Barfield and Vervecky and Peterson, and it's all starting to connections are coming together in my mind. And, you know, but Luther, you know, when we look at, say, this, this little experience that we've seen that might be even at an end now, which is kind of the Jordan Peterson explosion, that was nothing compared to Luther. After Jesus Christ, Luther is the second most published about person in all of human history. Wow, we are. That's not surprising. It's just, just enormous. And then to watch this for one Vervecky interview with a guy, and Vervecky starts talking about the Protestant Reformation, and the student says, well, what was the Protestant Reformation? And I'm thinking, this guy is talking about philosophy and all of the Vervecky. And he has, he has zero, he has zero idea about the Protestant Reformation. This is something analogous to the Russians not knowing under what condition their nuclear reactors will explode because they buried the lie. Okay. Yeah, that, that was almost everything we experienced today comes from the Protestant Reformation. Definitely. With, I was thinking about you sort of pointing out that the Bible, the Bible now gets seen as a way to get back to Christ in sort of tradition as going back to Christ instead of the church going forward. And it strikes me that the Protestants today, in many cases, aren't actually Protestants in that sense, because think of someone like think of the, the reformed church, for example, you can't really, what you're sort of, what you sort of have is this new apparatus, this new tradition, through which you're now reading the Bible. And I guess there's always sort of this, this back checking, where you sort of go back to the original or go back to Jesus or use historical scholarship. But it's, it's really terrifying to think about what it would mean to sort of put it all the, put it all the, put all the filters aside and then just try to see with, with which I don't think is entirely possible. But there's sort of two ways I think of, of approaching Christianity, where you sort of find the, so, so here's, here's the biblical text. So do you sort of strip back all the layers, all the traditions and sort of try to see it face to face with Jesus, so to speak, or do you find the best interpretive framework for the text and then say, okay, this is, this is how we're supposed to read the text. I need these traditions to interpret this community. So there's this dichotomy, this is sort of the difference between the Protestant and maybe the Catholic view, where the church is essential and where it's the naked individual before Christ. And I always find myself sort of being torn between the two. Well, that's, that's exactly the moment. And so what Luther does in that moment is in a sense, establish modernity. Yeah, because for Luther, the Bible is the key, the Bible affords a monarchical vision. Now, what happens in Protestantism is that that's, it's by no means a monarchy because right away, while Luther is still holed up in Wartburg Castle, things get off the rails at Wittenberg to the degree that Luther then leaves the castle, goes back to Wittenberg under a great deal of risk, and basically gets up in the pulpit, calms the city down. You know, they had sort of, in Luther's opinion, gotten ahead of themselves by already taking out the mass and Luther reinstalls the mass and says, okay, we're going to take this slow and we're not going to violate people's consciences. Right there, he, in a sense, destroys the Roman Catholic Church because he places the individual conscience above the authority of the church. And you have the, right there, you have the beginning of modernity, you have the beginning of religious freedom. Yeah. But what you also then have is this incredible fracture where Luther's going to disagree with Karlstad and of course the Swiss Reformation is going to, in a sense, get out ahead of the German Reformation and, you know, Calvin's going to arise and, you know, England is going to break away and, you know, so that the thing breaks apart. Yeah, yeah. And, yeah. But we might now be at, you know, so I was having this conversation about, so the, you know, the same-sex marriage, this debate is hot within the Christian Reformed Church. And when the Christian Reformed Church was fighting about women in ecclesiastical office, the church came to a political compromise that said, well, there are two ways to read the scripture. When the CRC did that, in a sense, they broke the monarchical vision of the Bible. And now, as the conversation develops with respect to same-sex marriage, what's going to happen likely, what's happening likely now is that both sides are saying, this is a debate we cannot resolve with the Bible. Isn't it strange to be in a situation where you are a pastor in the CRC and I'm an individual in my own denomination and I, and I think you too recognize that there are multiple ways of reading the text. And yet you want, we want our church to claim a monarchical vision. It's, so I was reading Stanley Hauerwas and he says, so he's also all about sort of reclaiming the community. And he says, this was in his memoir, Hannah's Child, he says at some point, you know, I'm not interested in what Stanley Hauerwas thinks. I'm interested in what the church, what Stanley Hauerwas believes. I'm interested in what the church believes. And that's sort of the move we continuously make where, you know, I can't really make the biblical argument here. I can't really resolve my inner, you know, my consciousness. I can't get my conscience in Congress to agree on this issue. So what I do is I kick it to the church and then say, okay, I want you guys to take a position and I'll just submit to that and I'm fine with that. And you, it gets really complicated when you think, okay, so the Greek Orthodox church has claimed to have this apostolic succession. We've handed the tradition down century after century and both of us are hairs of the Protestant Reformation. So we come from this tradition, which by contrast is like, we have these infant traditions, which are really pathetic when you compare them to the Orthodox or the Catholic tradition. So what we're saying is, you know, we're going to bond our consciousness Congress to this little pathetic 500 year tradition and we're going to leave this 2000 year tradition sitting on the shelf. But at the same time, the decision to stick with the church you grew up with is almost more of a Catholic decision than a Protestant decision. You're saying, okay, I'm not going to be this choosing individual. I'm going to try to find the perfect denomination that fits for me because that just makes me another hair to the Protestant Reformation. So these things get complicated. Yes, yes. And what we're seeing is in a sense an end to Protestantism, but an inability to go back to, you know, because when I look at the Orthodox church and when I listen to Jonathan and a bunch of Orthodox priests who are Protestant converts, they're different from, you know, those from the old country. I mean, yeah, I mean, if you sort of take the perspective James A.K. Smith has in this book about, you know, the community that the Formational Community, the centrality of narrative, and you sort of have this perspective of the community is essential for formation and for instilling this narrative in you. And you sort of come to a community with this perspective. You are not thinking the same way a lot of people, most people in the congregation think to them, okay, this is the monarchical vision truth. And it's very, very difficult to navigate these things because what do you even want to be in a community where everyone sort of thinks the same way you do? What would the church look like 100 years from now if everyone, yeah, you know, is order and chaos thing? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. No, and I wrestle with that. And I've always wrestled with that as a pastor because one of the things I've always tried to do as a pastor is as a pastor in a small church, I get plenty of say in this community. I'm in the pulpit. They get to hear me preach. And so one of the things I've tried to always do is limit my say in the rest of even this small community. So I don't pick songs. I don't a lot of a lot of people would like to colonize me so I can, you know, and therefore sort of take control of the tiny little issues in the tiny little church. There's no community small enough that once you have two people, you've always got someone wanting to colonize the other. I mean, that's a marriage, isn't it? That's exactly right. But even in a church of 50 people, there's plenty of that that goes on. And so you're exactly right. And I love how you laid it out. And I have friends who very much take the Stanley Howe-Ross mold of, okay, I am going to submit to my community. And if you look at the biography of Stanley Howe-Ross, I was reading his Henneth Shiloh, he's talking about, you know, I submit to the church and blah blah blah. But then he goes to this church and they have a liturgy he doesn't like and he's like, okay, I can't stay at this church anymore. Pastor, you're a sponsor. Goodness. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. I was talking to a friend of mine who's had K to three teacher and you know, I asked her like, I don't think she gave me a response, but like, how do you navigate the difficulty of so you're part of this community and you're teaching the kids and you might have opinions that a lot of the parents don't agree with. And you're suddenly in charge of these three year olds at their most like at these four year olds at their most formative times in their lives. Like, do you sort of shape them in the way you think that the way you think the future generation should be? Or do you sort of try to instill them in the status quo? Or what is the point of education is the point of education to make everyone fit into their society? Or is it to have people who sort of think outside of the box? And when you're talking about three year olds, what's the role there? Goodness. If you want to find petty tyrants in our world, go to an elementary school. Boy, it's full of petty tyrannies. And that's how teachers are. And they have to be they've got 30 little children in there. They are petty tyrants. And yeah, mold these children according to their my wife is a Waldorf teacher. She has eight years to mold these children. She loves those children and her but it's a tyranny. Why do you think the like the Ontario government, for example, is pushing to get things like gender studies or whatever pushed back further and further because this is the most formative period of these kids lives. So if you can plan, they're playing with they're playing with they're playing with fire. Because, you know, it's I you know, I heard I heard Eric Weinstein with Joe Rogan talk about, well, we just have to undo this gender binary. And I'm thinking, Can you be serious? You're a biologist. No, he's not a biologist. His brother's a biologist. But can you be serious? Do you actually know how ideas work in communities? And granted, there are always going to be some even Joe Rogan was incredulous and pushed back a little bit on it. But it's like you don't understand how you know, you don't understand how children are formed. And he does and that makes him more I mean, or the Ontario teachers do understand that and they're just using their knowledge and their power in kind of I mean, they're just abusing their knowledge and their power in that way. Because, I mean, you're you're the pastor of their small church and you sort of grapple with, well, how do I form my community? It's you can't just Yeah, you can't just boy. Well, and I so so often I'll have people come up to me say, Pastor, you should preach a sermon about this. It's like, I've been preaching here for 22 years, and you've never figured out anything about how I preach sermons and how it goes. Have you noticed I they follow the Bible? I mean, that's my goal. Yeah, I'm not about to pretend that, you know, I there's no Paul Van der Kley in any of this interpretation. But I, you know, I let I try at least in some ways to be guided by the text and not just stand up and say, you know, I think I think you all need to give more money. Lots of that that goes on in churches. In fact, I know a church right over there that I get reports all the time for people in the neighborhood. You know what that pastor said? Every man has to give 75 and every woman has to give 50. It's like, yeah, the day I do that, I hope you shoot. The other conversation you were having, it was the question was, can you force generosity? So yeah, yeah, yeah, that was a great kind of all this. There's been some amazing conversations lately. And there's some more to come that are already in the can, like this one's going to be in the can. But but there are some amazing conversations coming out. And again, I every time I sort of get a little, how many of these conversations can I do? I have a conversation. And it's like, wow. Yeah, yeah, I talked to Mary yesterday. And I talked to gem yesterday. And I talked to I talked to Jeff yesterday. All three conversations were just amazing. And at the end of it, it's like, I can't stop this. This is Yeah, this is too good. I can't stop this. But I, I have to figure out how this fits in with everything else. So well, I love what you're doing. I think it's it's beautiful how you're getting these particular people with a particular perspective. And I was telling you before we started recording, this is like, in my mind, the embodiment of the incarnation where you it's just the significance of particular people. I love it. So yeah, you got to go back to work. I need to go to lunch. So oh, yeah, lunch. All right. This was fun. Julian, it is always a treat talking to you. And I remember the first time I talked to you. I was so excited. I thought, this is amazing. It's an amazing guy. This is incredible. And so I've so appreciated your your presence in the comments and your presence on this channel. And I really appreciate it. Well, thanks. Thank you so much. Europe. Yeah, I find you and your channel pretty amazing, too. So I haven't I haven't been watching it for two years for like since you basically started for nothing. So yeah. All right, Julian. Well, you enjoy your lunch. Oh, I will. Yeah. Okay. Bye bye. Bye.