https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=kHeGHBve90Q

 Nice to see you. Yeah, it's nice to see you. Sorry for your technical problems. Yeah, I'm just a little complicated in my end. So I had to get a nice private space and that's not always easy. So Are you at work? Yeah, actually in an office here, where I work. Actually a welder. So if you ever needed a dumpster, I can weld you one. I have my brother-in-law is from Brandon, Manitoba. Oh, wow. So I have via him, I know people in Manitoba. So, okay. Okay. Wow. Small world or something. It is indeed a small world. Yeah, we don't have a lot. Let me just check. My next appointment, I think is at 11. So we don't have a ton of time. So let's make use of the time we've got. Maybe I could start by telling you a little bit something about myself. And like the one guy who once told you, he knows a lot about you and you really don't have an idea where I crawled out of. So I'm actually part of the How do I end about this tradition? You're familiar with that. Hence the span. Yeah. So you have quite a diverse audience. I certainly do. It's amazing. What's characteristic about our tradition, we're a community area. So we live in a community. I would say we also have sort of more oriented towards works. So what's really important about the Anabaptist tradition is following Jesus and living out the faith. And I think that's a key component. And maybe that's where the Anabaptists and the Calvinists might have a bit of a some tension or something. Maybe we could talk about that. I think traditionally it tends to be about kind of how you, where you locate works in terms of the process of salvation. So it's really more a theological position. We wouldn't want to say that Calvinists don't want to obey Jesus. You'll see, look at this in the Peter Sonians and there is these people who say, it's only grace, but they sure don't act like that. Right. That's exactly right. So do they really believe that? No, that's very true. So how did you find Peterson? How did I find Peterson? Well, my goodness, I think I listened to him a year or two ago. I think I listened to his trans millennial thing while I was cutting grass. And I was quite scared of him at first. But he's really grown on me very much through you in the past few months. And I'm really, like I was telling a friend of mine, I'm really not a high level Peterson fan at this point, because I haven't listened to all of his biblical lectures and I haven't learned well rules for life. But I have been following him quite intently. So I knew it. I have a fair grasp of what he's about. Okay. Okay. So your background really helps me better understand. I know you sent me, you've got a bunch of stuff in the emails that you sent me. And so that really kind of helps me figure out where you're coming from and where this is at. So where do you want to begin? Because again, we have limited time. So I want to make as good a use of time as we can. I think we should start with the first question I sent you, if you have a copy of that. But I'm wondering how I approach that issue is similar to how you think about it, the whole idea of the monarchic vision. Well, tell me what you've grasped so far, what you think about it. Okay. So my idea of the monarchic vision is that it's sort of this God's eye view that where he sort of sees or from the monarchic vision perspective, there's all of history as one linear progression with no, no, it's sort of like you were talking about the three dimensions. The fourth dimension would be the monarchic vision, because you have all of reality just stretched out like a queue and everything's happening inside one after the other. And my idea is that if this vision, if there's no God, this vision of reality doesn't actually exist. So all we're left with is individuals who are sort of trying to grasp reality and trying to understand what happened in the past and what the good is and what truth is essentially. And if there's no monarchic vision, there's really no objective truth about history. I'm following so far. And so all we're essentially left with is individual subjective interpretations of what happened in the past, which are all equally valid because the past isn't real. So that's just an interesting train of thought I've had. I think that I think you took it in some some directions. I didn't, but I like the way you I like what you did with it. I was kind of looking at it in terms of Sam Harris's objects in space and the monarchical vision isn't exactly right. It's a God's eye view, but it's a fairly static view. And the fourth dimension problem is we have two fourth dimensions. The fourth dimension as time I like because you integrated that into what you just described, how you know now God exactly God can see God sees every tree falling in every forest where there is no human seeing it. And and part of my critique of the of the celebrity atheists have been that they that they trade in this monarchical vision, but they don't actually provide the perspective and the unique perspective that God only God could have of this. And so in a sense what they do is they sit in God's seat. They sit on God's throne and imagine they're looking down the world like that. And when I listen to them, I think yeah, but you when I say you can't do that. What's that? You can't do that. You can't transcend your your subjective culture or your natural construction essentially. And what I what I've thought about there's this big big emphasis on scientific consensus. And what that really reminds me of is okay here I have an interpretation of history. I have an interpretation of history and that's all bent together. We can create this power of favor and come up and we can have this objective view because it's we're subjective interpretations, but we can come together and get a majority. The majority becomes God and a tree. You see that everywhere. You see that in ethics. If more people agree, that's what's good. See that in truth. If we agree, that's the good. If I must support one. I'm thinking in terms of transcendentism. The good, the true, the beautiful. And I haven't completely integrated the beautiful into this this whole argument. So maybe you can help me with that. Well, I think that's I think you're the fact that it's difficult to integrate the beautiful into that argument exposes the the difficulties of subjectivity inherent with that approach just like you described. Well, do you think beauty is something objective? Right and I think beauty is objective, but objective beauty cannot exist without the subjective. By nature, beauty has integrates both of those things and that's why I love you know I'm thinking boy get this guy a book contract. You've got some great ideas and some great ways of articulating it because I think you're dead on right what you just described to me and that's why beauty well how you you cannot you know you're going to crowd source beauty you can do it agree and let's say someone like okay cupid you know so they have all of these pictures out there and okay cupid complains that they're trying to match people and all of the men say I want to go out with her. So there is a hierarchy but it's more complex than that because if you're looking at a two-dimensional picture well all of those pictures again have been it have been taken out of time and it exactly illustrates the the falseness of the monarchical vision that that the objectivists state because God can actually see all of this within time and see it without bias and now someone might say well that well God therefore is you're defining God and and that then gets into my ontological argument where I say yeah but if there is no such God then we're exactly where what you describe that but we're all lost in our subjectivity and then what science kind of becomes and not even science but history becomes is well a group of us can agree upon a least common denominator and we'll go with that because that's the better and here's there were sort of two objections I came up with that the first one is if you take a B theory of time where have you heard about this where time like the monarchical vision of time where the past is present in the future are all equally real like they exist out there somewhere we could have a monarchical vision in some sense because if you take the correspondence theory of truth here's my proposition about the past let's say this hypothetical figure John existed in 580 okay we can point to that in the monarch in the this cube like vision yeah so on the B theory I think we would avoid these problems at least in an ontological sense yeah no I think you're I think you're very much right and I see what I really like about the way you've you've sketched it out here is you show I mean you you very complete what do you what kind of education do you have I'm really interested in philosophy great well yeah it's just something that interests me like I graduated last year then I came back and did a western civilization course it's a bit complicated how that works but I sent you my my essay for the end of the year on on epistemology which just fascinated me just the whole truth and epistemology of my goodness well you've got to you've definitely got a talent for it I can I can see that and and you should continue to you should continue to develop your talent because it's you know and this is what's been fun about these conversations is that we have these hierarchies and those those hierarchies filter and limit yeah and and hierarchies corrupt isn't exactly the right word but let's use Jordan Peterson for example so he's ra he's rocketed up this hierarchy what that does is it closes him off from conversations with people like right I was thinking I should find myself at a lower hierarchy Jordan Peterson it's not like I have a conversation that's right I'm a B list I'm a I'm a C or a D list Jordan Peterson that's exactly what I've been doing and it's it's probably so weird to you that that suddenly you have hard rights from men to a ceramic conversation with you just the last couple of months but it's but it's really beautiful because again and it's and it's so helpful to me because I get these little inklings of ideas and I vomit them on all of you on the internet and and you pick a part and you say hey wait a minute this is cool and you construct it and you see it in a way I haven't seen it and then you give it back to me and it's like oh wow that's great so I should stop emoting and get back down to the they get back down to the the work of it so no I think you know I you know do you blog or anything I mean part of the thing is like there's the written world and then there's the spoken world and so and and this is all part of this because obviously in a in with God with a God view of the universe all of that is integrated and no human being can integrate so therefore we use community to try to transcend the limitations of our subjective perspective and and then we use communication and language to try to facilitate that transcending of it but and and another interesting thing about language I was I was reading Neil Postman and his point was that even language has sort of this ideology infused into it and he made this point about how there's Japanese and there's English and Japanese is actually a language inadequate for for the scientific worldview you can't articulate the scientific ideas as well in Japanese as in English so it's sort of like there's this culture that emerges and this language is suited specifically for this culture and within our tradition we we speak a Hatterian dialect like this is a sort of a German dialect and like our foreparents started out in Moravia in Germany then wandered all throughout Germany and then finally came to to North America so we speak this this weird language that has elements from all of the different regions we we walked through and today we're just speaking this conglomeration that's slowly being infused by English and that's really tragic because this language is intimately suited for our culture like it expresses our way of looking at the world in you know way that can't be replaced it has this constructiveness like this Jordan Peterson way that he is evolving out of time and if you know what I mean no I know exactly what you mean and it's so cool it's just it is it's so cool and and I I see exactly what you mean that you know because and also all of us not only do we have at this moment our perspective which is subjective in time and the limitations but all of our histories are built into this and what I love about your story I mean similar to my story I come from the Christian Reformed Church which has its own particularities and then the Dutch immigration but my father's side was Jewish who knows what was going on with them my mother's side was Frisian so another tiny little sub-ethnic group with its own language but then the social dynamics and you know again in history all of this stuff comes through and and so then when I talk to atheists and they're like and they're like wow there's yes I think if there is if there is not someone watching and remembering and knowing this absolutely glorious thing called the story of humanity this should be a loss that completely crushes us because it is just it is just an unfathomable loss maybe I'm maybe I'm I'm evoking my inner Nietzsche here you know in that God is dead and you're all killing him stop yeah for sure so I and that's you know and I love and you embody in this story you know think of what you embody in this story it's it's magnificent absolutely absolutely I should stop I watched my I watched a conversation I did before and I thought I talked too much I gotta shut up I need to shut up more you're the only advisor so no maybe just old but old and foolish enough to start a YouTube channel so you've got all these ideas what are you doing with these ideas how old are you I'm 19 oh gosh so yeah what I started a few months ago was a little journal so I try to write in it every day and you're just watching your channel it's just getting me making me go off in all kinds of directions and it's just it's just wonderful and so are you going to go to college I mean you're studying you're taking some things go to college I'm not gonna ask you I'll tell you I'm kind of frustrated with the whole institutional learning thing right now so I'm right now I'm just sitting down and reading all my books and listening to my podcasts and my videos and enjoying that immensely so well here's here's the other day just if I can interrupt the other day oh go ahead sorry um the other day I was kind of counting up how much how many hours of information consumption um was going on in a single day and this is a bit of an extreme case but I counted about 12 hours of podcasts reading and watching videos and that's just just just insane and especially from a from a near postman perspective you're living the new education and irony is and this is maybe this is something you should think through and make your decisions obviously it's your life you're going to make decisions but it might be that you can get a better education doing what you're doing the downside is no one will know you and you won't have access to the kinds of hierarchies that enable you to not only know things and keep them in your head but one of the things that I have discovered in this in terms of people writing to me is all the brilliant people out there that nobody knows about and there's many of them I would at least love to have conversations with them that's that's that's a plus so yeah and we can't I can't talk to Jordan Peterson because he's too busy because he's in a hierarchy but I can talk to you and you can talk to me and and now I'm getting in a hierarchy and so this is starting this frustrates me because you can't it's hard to say no to the hierarchy but because it affords more opportunity but it also it you're also limited to opportunity and Jordan Peterson didn't have a chance to sit down with you and that's his loss and mine for sure right and yeah you lost me oh yeah um just we were talking about information and um how I consume 12 hours of information a single day what I'm realizing is that that's way too much because you don't have the time to process it and it's really difficult to I'm also finding out that um I'm really a very bad thinker like this is something Peterson talks about all of the time um somehow he's he's he's advancing the level where he can have these two or three different personalities fighting out in his head over an idea and um that's just not something I can do in my head I need to have a conversation with someone or write it down or but I'd really like to develop that over thinking so but you're only 19 your brain hasn't even finished developing well I hope not because I don't want to have this kind of a break for the rest of my life well you know but that capacity that Peterson talks about I'm not a psychologist I'm not a doctor I only play one on YouTube um but I I suspect you know the continued development that your brain is going to go through from 19 to 25-ish that it's it's those higher level of functionings where you'll be able to in a sense differentiate the the voices in your head and the the community of of watchers that you have and talkers that will continue to develop so but you're right and that's and it's so so you're stewarding your own education which which means that you're not limited by some of the hierarchies but you're also it's it's very it's very hard to know what's best yeah and with with Peterson's old critique of universities um there's another thing to keep in mind I guess um so well and I recommend my kids don't always listen to me two of my kids have gone to Calvin College I I do recommend that people take a look at religious universities now part of the reason for that is so what I think we have going on in the country is this progressive liberationism which I've talked about before that is in a sense a religious structure okay that's an ideology it's a religion yeah happening what what you have at least at religious colleges is that there's at least competition between an old religion and the new one and what I see happening for example in the Christian Reformed Church that's you've got old and new ideologies battling itself out whereas I think what has happened in a lot of public universities is that they have no resistance to the new civil religion that's exactly and that pretty much is what Peterson is complaining about and I think he's he's right at least at a religious university there's another powerful perspective within the within the university that says not so fast there progressive liberationism we're going to critique some of what you're asserting here and I some of them I guess but but again some some I would guess some of the the Christian universities would completely go along with the progressive liberationism because they they can see some of the positive aspects and they just ride along with the whole thing yeah but if you have a conservative if you have a conservative religious tradition like your own like mine there's resistance to it and right you know good bad right or wrong conservatism at least gives the past a voice and resists the tyranny of the immediate so yeah that's something I want to touch on a little later I'd like to go back to our discussion of the monarchical vision yeah so we were talking about how the majority decides the ethical and this brings me to it in a really interesting thing I read from kirkegaard in trying to work my way through and it's concluding unscientific posts it's like it's sort of like chasing a hound or something because sometimes you catch him and then he just gets away it's hard to follow what an early stock about most of the time but sometimes I get these these little diamonds and he was talking about how people confuse the historical with the ethical so this very progressive liberationist thing where what happens in the past is history will judge you essentially so this idea that the movement of history shows what the the ethical course of action is and this also reminds me of sort of what the new atheist conception of ethics is and it's really different from what ethics actually is they seem to think that ethics is equivalent to human flourishing or ethics the good is equivalent to what what works or what helps promote survival and that really isn't the case because I don't think the good can be reduced to pleasure or pain or survival or or non-survival and what kirkegaard says is he talks about how there needs to be this single individual who stands alone and pursues the good seeks to follow after god seeks to follow after jesus irrespective of what if history smiles upon him or how people in the future will think of him he needs to pursue the good courageously and not care what other people will think and I think I've gone on long enough to forget my entire train of thought you're doing well I was thinking of this in light of peterson peterson is sort of doing this he's sort of this individualist stands alone and yet he's on top of the hierarchy he has these millions of people following him and we see all of the criticism so we think he's standing alone but is he really right is he really that alone is he really that parades and I think this is something he's said himself so any thoughts on that well I think you're exactly right he and this again gets back to the difficulty of the limitations of our capacity to see and to and to and to apprehend is he alone in some ways yes in many ways no it's and reality is often like that it's it's yes and no and so is he alone well he he feels like a lone voice out there because there are many powerful institutions and what I think in a new testament Jonathan Bachel I think nicely laid out principalities and powers out there that are standing against him and part of what's so heroic about the Jordan Peterson story is that in in a sense it's one dude taking on the New York Times and the the the university industrial complex and and what really impresses me about that is if I listen to the ideas that he promotes and just the whole conservative sort of conservative Christian message he brings across I it really abuses me to think of what the those the far left types must be thinking that this is a message that's going mainstream it it's just quite it's quite astounding to think okay Peterson is saying something everybody hears it and wow like this is mainstream I can't imagine what the far left types are thinking about and and in that way so often the left the the left elite keeps drinking its own Kool-Aid and and keeps suffering from its own delusions and and whatever whatever you think of Donald Trump what the election of Trump exposed was the their pretense and and their belief their belief in their own religion and it exposed their religion to to say no and it you don't you don't have it you you have not you have not captured the world and history by the tail history hasn't ended yet yeah nope which is quite the thought that that we are not at the end of history no we are not and we and our grasp and I think it's again you said it you articulated it beautifully that the grasp of history our grasp of history is so we we know so little and here's another thing um I don't know if you're all that familiar with Stefan Baladie but it was this I don't really like that guy he's so whatever um so I was listening to one of his podcasts with Stephen Hicks have you run across Stephen Hicks I've heard his name I haven't really gotten into much of much of him now but he says he wrote this book understanding postmodernism and he went on his podcast and they were talking about postmodernism and he outlined this this this I call it the mythological history of the of the new atheist times and it's sort of like and people were stupid and barbaric and religious and superstitious and then suddenly pure enlightenment and pure reason fell upon a divine individual and reason incarnate I guess which would be somebody like Kant or Bacon or whoever or no not Kant, Kant is one of the bad guys so it falls upon this divine individual and just like there's no pretext to this this reason falling on it just happens in one revolutionary moment and then suddenly we were enlightened and then we move towards this beautiful utopian future the divine individual etc and like there's that there's this this completely ideological conception of history and it's just so outlandish and you can compare that to the postmodern conception of history there's there's just power games or then maybe what your conception of history or my conception of history and your cultural perspective you have that your I guess your your Dutch reformed tradition history and that plays in so everybody sees their little slice and their little ideological possessed version of history and we all critique the others from where we stand so and and the the the hubris of modernity is exactly what you articulated that here finally we have the tools where where we have they confuse the limited vision they have and they they dress it up and say this is the monarchical vision we now see all right and in a sense what Peterson comes along and says is oh that's a bunch of crap you don't you're not beginning to see all and and in fact what you what you're forgetting what you say you're supposed to know because if you actually paid attention you you would realize that the more you're learning the more you don't know and as in that that Neil deGrasse Tyson video that I played that the more you know the larger the frontier is because by knowing a oh now I see that I don't know b c and d well now I know a and b so a and b all have all have three windows into into the world we don't know so the more you know that you're the the the amount that you now know you don't know expands exponentially and here's another point that I think this is this comes from Thomas Kuhn have you read his book I should read his book yes you should read his book I read it in college that's a that's a place that I spent a lot of money and and wasted a lot of time but you seem to be able to do it a lot cheaper so go ahead definitely read his book well try out thrift books it's been around a long time you can probably get it for nothing well there's this online website called thrift books and you can get books for really cheap that's what I so um his idea that the scientific paradigm um sort of is a is a worldview in itself where you kind of see the world through the scientific paradigm and interpret the evidence to fit this paradigm and just check out the evidence it doesn't fit and eventually this starts piling up and you have to create a new paradigm so there's limitations to the scientific worldview as well oh and that's that's at heart you can see you can see within Kuhn the you know the resonance of the postmodern critique that the postmodern critique is is it essentially the critique that the Dutch Calvinists critique the modernists well they do so from their own perspective and they have their own biases and the limitations of the Dutch Calvinists are exposed in the critique that the Dutch Calvinists give to the modernists let's say but as C.S. Lewis said well you can keep seeing through things um and and if you just keep doing that you'll never see anything the point of seeing through something is to actually see what's there and I think Peterson rightly then critiques the postmodernists and says yeah but your your critique eats itself and and leaves us awash and there's another great article I picked up from Tim Keller that basically one artist going through all of the postmodernity saying then it all that just comes down to is money you know who the only thing that we finally money is finally the only religion that we all really can agree on and which of course to me as a Christian sets up Matthew that you know the gospel of Matthew and Jesus says you can't serve two masters doesn't say God and Satan or Christianity and Judaism or or Jesus and Caesar he says God and mammon or you know money and it's like ah wow back down to this and yeah who would have thought that we would find this writing from a man who lived in the first century and still find it relevant um and that we're back to Jordan Peterson no Christ is the ideal the ideal person and it's like yeah that's what Christianity's been saying all along nice so here's another thought um if we reject the monarchical vision and like we said we're left with these individual subjects and you've talked about the the iron box of naturalism you could say that the iron box of the Sabbath because you really can't get out of that and it seems to me what one of the disagreements between Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson is that okay they see that we're we're all these individuals and we need something to unite us so that we can get this um this hierarchy of the of the majority and and get our way to to to consensus truth and yeah this is this is also why Jordan Peterson maybe is a pragmatist because it works well enough if we band together and get our own conception through it works well enough um so it seems to me that the difference between Peterson and Harris is that Harris thinks that what unites these individuals is the reason um if we all use this innate capacity to reason we can reach consensus and that's how we can gain our our our truth and our morality and our beauty and what I think what Peterson thinks unites us and you know more about Peterson than me so maybe I can correct me because we have this shared evolutionary history and we're all built up in the same way and we all have these archetypes that that work work themselves in the same way we all have the same constructiveness and there are these these truths or these these archetypes you can use to to see what's the best mode of being for all of us what's the the most pragmatic way to live that gets us the best society so there's sort of this constructive this try to prove pragmatism and this united reason between Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson how does that sound no that's that's correct and see now what pragmatism so so Peterson often recommends a book the um the metaphysical club and so you can throw that on your book list yeah it is in my book it's a good it's a good book and I haven't finished it but I've I've taken a number of whacks at it I just keep I've been I've been on books I'm always off to with the next book and oh yeah I gotta get back to the metaphysical club and it's like oh I want to go back and start that again because anyway can I can I just interject here sorry um do you think you were reading so many books at a time they started that um does that sort of come from this information age where there's just so much information bombarding you that you can't keep track of or could you point to yourself 20 30 years ago and see the same habit manifest itself I think I I know I'm ADHD I'm dyslexic I've got learning disabilities and if you listen to Jonathan Peugeot had a conversation with another university of Toronto professor I can't help but say his name in the Dutch way because that's what it looked but he he has some very interesting ideas about attention and he and Peugeot talk about that and there's some other lectures of his attention is there's more going on in attention than than we tend to dismissively appreciate our minds are again where our conscious self is a small thing and our minds our whole minds are smarter than our conscious self and now obvious I connect this with God because I'm a theist but you know I I often find that reading some of one book and then reading some of another book it it helps me do some integration and I often find that the mix the mix which seems random now again for human beings random is a word for too complex for us to see that is that seems random actually in some ways is probably my subconscious I'm reading this and I'm thinking oh you know my subconscious is itching in a place and I think I'm going to read that over there and then I'll often find is it pattern recognition is it is am I just fooling myself but if I take these two things and I put them together well then there's kind of a new thing and I can see it from a different perspective and and on I go and so that's part of the reason why I read this one book for a while then I read another book and I think well these nobody I don't know if anybody else is reading these two books right now but but I can see they're helping me see the world through the angularity the combination of these two things so fascinating that's that's often what I do where what were we talking about before okay you were talking about all the books you read yeah right before that okay we were talking about Jordan Peterson at St. Harris with these different um conceptions of how we unite these individuals pragmatism pragmatism there we go the the beauty of pragmatism and again if you look at Charles Pierce and the metaphysical club and and how when they discovered statistics the beauty of pragmatism says things are too complex for us to handle not only our limited brains but even our systems which tend to expand the power of our brains therefore because because the world is too complex we need a strategy for simplification and that's essentially what pragmatism is it says we are going to we are going to simplify it so for example uh mpeg mpeg 3 compression for audio files that that is a lossy audio file compression now you can use flak which is lossless but you know before there was flak there was mp3 and basically said mp3 will give you a file that's good enough and that's essentially pragmatism and and so what you're exactly right that that harris says i've got this vision for rationality and via rationality we can establish and and we can you know we can have the monarchical vision okay that's what sam harris says can you just looks at that says no you're never going to get there it's you we we'll we're not going to get beyond pragmatism because the universe the universe is too complex the thing that harris that that sam harris isn't recognizing which thomas nagel really points his finger out and that everybody wants to ignore is okay sam harris let's imagine you achieve a monarchical vision well what does that make you do you think you're going to what are you going to do with stephen pinker who may be you and this gets back to your articulation of kind of this community of agreement you know well okay so sam harris and stephen pinker are the two eyes well monarchical vision only allows one it's a king monarchy mano mano arki a little bit of greek helps um so so that the it's a at some point this is what's always hilarious is the the celebrity atheist say ah these religious people can't agree and i think and you guys are you know right right you know so if sam harris establishes a monarchical vision via via rationality he becomes god and as a religious person i say yeah there's a long history of us wanting to be god and and it starts in a garden with a man and a woman in a tree and yeah so and so this is where peterson so so what's what's lovely about peterson is i think he recognizes the complexity that religious systems always engaged with and and so when he sees when he reads the bible in a sense of what he he sense he says you know what this is and i've i've laid this out in my last previous few videos if you really want to know humanity you mean as much you need as much data as possible and and this idea that via psychology we will know ourselves psychology and sociology well that's what what those do is it's the it's the lie of the scientific monarchical vision and because they don't have near enough data and here's the thing here's the thing about about psychology and medicine it seems to ignore the fact that like we said each individual is constructed from a specific historical past from a specific cultural context etc you can infinite amount of of tiny little things that differentiate individuals and now you want to take the averages across these individuals and construct something that's going to fit each of these separate individuals forget it and and again it's they're trying to take this average and get this monarchical vision and it's just not going to apply no and and i think part of what's happened now is via peterson we are learning enough to know that this system that we put our faith in won't get us there and that's what peterson's exposing and so the likes of sam harris they're they're they're at the end that the asteroid is coming baby it's it's gonna hit you're a dinosaur and um sorry that the old the old you had a nice run but really world war one killed you and you just haven't recognized that you're done yeah yeah and that's it seems to me that the the the new athias modernist types really hadn't owned up to the postmodern critique at all and um it just always strikes me as as naive or something when they when they continue to just articulate these things that have been talked about since since the 1800s and i just need to get more sophisticated yeah yeah and sam's trying you know he's got consciousness and he's doing he's doing psychedelics and it's like well i i can be cool i can i can do consciousness i shouldn't be flipping to mean but you're gonna get a lot of thumbs down on this video but that's but that's how i you know and then he looks at me and says oh gosh you're an iron age religionist and i'd say yeah but you know what um you can learn a little something from the iron age because that was as real as 19 as 2018 and another thing about the christian world that fits with this is that somehow it it manages to fit into every culture in every different time here it manages to twist its way into this culture and fit um you can have modernist christians you can have postmodernist christians you can have you can have african christians you can have whatever it just fits with with every situation no that's right and and the i mean the craziest thing that you may oh the bible blah blah the craziest thing i find about the bible i've told this story before you know so missionary goes into the jungles of vietnam and translates the bible into their language but then the war breaks out so has to leave and leaves them you know first helps them you know write their first gives them you know written text you know because all they did was speak their language gives them written text and then teaches them how to read and then translates probably only the new testament or maybe the whole bible in their language gives it to them and then leaves and the people start to read it and they do something with it you know go to that you know translate give them a copy of i don't know give them a copy of a of a chemistry text translated and give it to them they're going to use it for toilet paper or to burn no use for it and and so the the crazy and this is where peterson's kind of darwinian view of ideas that there's a reason no other book in all of human history is anywhere close to having being read translated and studied and propagated as this particular book we don't know why and then jesus says you know my word won't my words won't pass away and it's kind of like true so far i don't account for that so it's it's a crazy crazy thing all right we've got 10 more minutes yeah when we could make a quick transition to the um to the post-modern conversation one thing i've been thinking about is that jordan peterson really likes to critique the post-modernists but um he's definitely not a modernist and he's definitely been influenced to a great degree by the post-modern critique and if you look at his um obviously his pragmatic definition of true um what's the second one his this whole idea of of constructiveness that's that's really not a it's a very post-modern idea that that we are constructed by our culture and our history our society etc and just as old battle with the meaninglessness of life and his recognition of his recognition of the full consequences of the death of god and and it seems to me that that's not something that the modernists have grappled with because they seem to have um killed the god number two um this is god this is object in the sky they've shot it down with their arrows but they haven't dealt with um the denomorical vision the the real problems associated with um with killing god it seems to me that if you look at god is sort of the foundation of truth of goodness of beauty and they've sort of blown out the foundation and these things are just hovering in mid-air and they want to keep them anyway and the post-modernists come out you have actually no right to these to these hovering um platonic ideals right and sort of this platonic definition of truth this platonic definition of goodness this platonic definition of beauty well you have no right to these things they just blow out the sky and we're left with meaningless and now peterson comes along he sees this landscape and he wants to see what what can we do how can we um fix this problem so no i think you're again i think you're articulate articulated it very very well peterson is hard to categorize he's got enough enough modernism in him he's got enough post-modernism he's got some pragmatism and what he says to sam harris you haven't taken mitcha into account that's except what you just articulated is exactly that point that they they really haven't they really haven't figured out what nicha has said or nor dostoevsky those are those are huge critiques of that perspective and that they're they're just not aware of it but that's again that that reflects the our incapacity to actually attain this monarchical vision you can't we've got 24 hours a day we've got to use at least a third of them just to survive there's so much to process you can't know it all and even if you like you say you can spend you know let you're working you're working a blue collar job you've got you know which is affording you lots of time to listen to stuff part of me is jealous because i don't have as much time to process stuff as i used to everybody wants to talk to me it's like that's a stupid hierarchy but at the same time there's really no better way of processing information and throwing out ideas and seeing if they come back dead than having an actual conversation because it's it's really like jordan peterson says you can't have these two or three people fighting it out in your head well you really got to find a physical person and just throw ideas back and forth oh it's my 11 o'clock he's early well we can we can throw his perspective in here too i guess that's right so i i'm just gonna have to keep i'm just gonna have to keep recording now because um so larz meet julian julian meet larz oh can are you live can we hear you julian yes i'm oh you mean larz larz sorry larz can i hear there's a little on the lower left hand there's a little if you move the mouse it'll you'll want to probably unmute yourself well here's one more question i had i guess i could throw this one out um um thinking about the relationship between jordan peterson and this sort of um progressive liberationist worldview um i was thinking does jordan peterson's definition of belief um not map on perfect into the unconscious bias definition of racism um if what we act out is what we believe doesn't that make people to perform microaggressions racist regardless of what they say on the topic of race so they're an interesting thought that's a good that's a that's a very interesting thought and here's another way of looking at it um peterson likes to talk about how the christian worldview has really shaped society so we're completely we have all of these positive um all of these positive elements coming in from the christian worldview but what about he seems to completely forget the negative um the negative things that could come as a result of history if you look at um white supremacy in the united states that's 200 300 years of not familiar with the history of racism of segregation of slavery etc and isn't that going to build itself into society build itself into collective psyche isn't that going to have a constructed negative effect that we also want to fight against that's that's right and and this is where this is where the social justice warriors have a point when they say american culture is white supremacist it's it's that way in the same way that sam harris is a christian it's it's the it's a similar argument and and so what you have to do is if you look at say white privilege well i i like to say white privilege is a good it's a helpful meme but not a helpful way of life in the sense of you that as a meme it helps expose the fact that if you have if you have black skin in america there is a cost and that's true and it's helpful for white people to recognize that having said that and this is where peterson gets involved in the monk debate he says okay i'll buy what's the tax can you put a dollar on it and that's and this is the problem that post-modernity has and it's a general problem that we have it's easier for us to see a problem than to address the problem and if i could jump sort of again for interrupting but this post-modernist social justice warrior worldview is really just another low definition way of looking at the world and i think this is something really brilliant that peterson brought up in the monk debate you have this word this collective social justice like worldview and you have this individual worldview and both of them don't completely get the whole picture if you i think this is true of white privilege as well if you look at all of the individuals who are white whatever white means i mean this is a critique i would have if you want to say black is a social construction it doesn't really exist does the same go for whiteness yes it does yeah and so yeah one of these white individuals and they have there's all kinds of different distinguished different factors that play upon these these white individuals they're they have dutch descent they are christian they are they're gay they're transgender whatever they have all kinds of different essentially individual is is is this this membership of many different groups and this is what makes this individual individual is a unique conglomeration of groups so you want to say that all of these unique individuals who are parts of many different groups all have this this white privilege um it seems to be very low resolution because quite evidently um you your experience of whiteness is different than mine maybe different than ours and maybe different than this this hate guy out of southern south american or whatever so it's really low resolution that's exactly right and peterson talking to david fuller in the in in his last conversation with him that david put up on rebel wisdom peterson makes that point he said each of us has i am an oppressor and i'm oppressed i have white privilege and i have well what are we going to call it we're going to call it white liability and and in fact as soon as the assertion of white privilege is made and finds traction in the culture i now have white liability too and and we have to negotiate both the privilege and the liability and and and hierarchies naturally begin to integrate these things and so no that's and and you're exactly right that you know the conversations that we are seeing that they're too low resolution and again what peterson is trying to say is we have to if we're going to survive we're going to have to improve the revolut resolution and actually deal with them yeah well julian your your time is up and larz is beginning so yeah thank you that was that was a wonderful conversation yeah well we'll have to do it again and and if you i think i would love to share this conversation if with your permission um let me think about that you think about it what i'll do is i will i will send you a video file and an audio file of this conversation you can look at it and after looking at it and pondering it if you say i don't want it to be public it won't be public if you say no this is helpful send it back to me i'll post it and we'll go from there great great okay okay thank you thank you very nice bye bye