https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SOpxt-xFoBw

 Hi, this is Paul and I've got a special guest on with me today, Kale Zeldin coming from Rhode Island, a place that I know fairly well. I have a niece that lives there. My mother lives just over the border in Whitonsville. I asked Kale for this conversation because I read his piece and I was really impressed by it and really touched me, and thought that we would have something to talk about. So thank you so much for being willing to come on today, Kale. My pleasure. It's very exciting. I've often joked in my many walks listening to your podcast that you, from time to time, make reference to being able to talk to randos on YouTube or randos on Twitter. And I'm pretty excited to be one of your randos today. It's a real pleasure, honestly. Thank you for having me on. Well, why don't we begin as I usually begin? Why don't you introduce yourself and especially pay some attention to your faith development, especially as that very much relates to the piece that you wrote? Yeah, that's great. So I'm a Louisiana native. I was born in New Orleans. I'm a cradle Catholic. A little bit of a funny story in that my mom and dad were married in 1968. And my mom is a Catholic and my dad was a non-practicing Jew. And so it's pretty unusual back even in 68. It's after the council, of course. But even in 1968, it was pretty unusual for a Catholic girl to marry a non-Catholic boy, even in New Orleans. But at any rate, they got married. I'm the second of three boys. And my mom is interesting. She is a really scripturally soaked Catholic, which is a little bit of an anomaly. I didn't quite appreciate that growing up. I knew it, but I didn't understand really what that meant. And she was also charismatic. And even then, I didn't fully understand what all that was. When my oldest brother was going through his first communion, my dad, the parish priest, found out that my dad wasn't Catholic and so kind of coaxed him into the fold. And so we've been a serious Catholic family growing up, but deeply sort of culturally Catholic too, if that resonates with you. And so we went to Catholic schools. And I went to a Catholic high school. And around 16, I decided that I no longer wanted to be a member of the Catholic Church. I was much more comfortable being a member of the Church of Rolling Stone magazine. I was really into music and really into sort of like in a retro way, because we're talking about this is the late 80s, early 90s, sort of retro into the musical revolution, the sexual revolution stuff of the 60s and 70s. And sort of I kind of enjoyed leaving the church. I don't think I was an atheist. I was probably more of an agnostic. I don't know if I would have had words for it then. But really, the gospel that I grew up with, and I'm talking about in the classroom, because I went to Catholic school all the way from kindergarten through high school, was very post-council, very, in Catholic circles, we call it the kind of felt banner hippie church of the 70s and 80s. And I sort of, not that I'm like massively intelligent, but I'm very observant. And I sort of put two and two together that the gospel that they were talking about in class and that I sort of absorbed was really a kind of a social justice gospel. I was like, well, I can kind of do that and not have to wake up on Sundays. And so that's what I sort of decided to do. This caused a great ruckus in the family dynamic. But I was pretty adamant about it, and I would say for about two and a half years, sometime early on in junior and high school and then through my first semester of my college years. I went to LSU, the local state college, still a big fan of the college, of course. But it was there that I started reading, like really reading stuff. I encountered, I joked that it's sort of three books, three authors that kind of jolted me out of my bigotry, I would say, that I had adopted, my cultural bigotry. And it was Homer, CS Lewis, and Augustine. And I was reading that in the, I was reading Homer and Augustine in my honors college classes at LSU. And a friend of mine, my best friend was an evangelical Christian, which was a little strange because he was in a Catholic school. And so he was a tremendous influence on me and really saved my faith at a crucial moment in my freshman year. Because he's smarter than I am. He was certainly much better read than I was. And anyway, the long and short of it is Homer, I remember after reading Homer, my professor, this is at a secular college. But I found out later on he was a kind of conservative Anglican, which is where those kind of people hang out in at state colleges, the honors colleges. It's a great books program type thing. And he said at the end of Homer, and he was a great teacher, and he really brought it alive. And he said, yes, what Homer accomplished in the Iliad has never been topped. And it really like grated on me right away. Like, wait, wait, wait. And then I sort of, he said, now it's been equal to like, you know, and he references Dante and Shakespeare and Dostoevsky and others. But it's never been topped. And I remember that really bothered me, deeply, deeply bothered me. Because I just presumed that, look, we're in the 90s. You know, we're smarter, better. You know, that whole sort of myth of progress thing that I had drunk deeply from. And it really caused me pause. And I recognized it. And I really had my work cut out for me. You know, I remember confronting, you know, like, well, Shakespeare, like, he's a really smart guy. He's a really accomplished guy. He's the artist of artists. And you know, I'm pretty sure he probably believed or certainly didn't traffic in the kind of unbelief that I was entertaining. And so that really was really, this is going to be a funny story. I've never told anybody this. But Dinesh D'Souza, of all people, wrote a book called Catholic Classics or Christian Classics. It basically goes through all of these people in history who were Christian. And that really blew my mind, because these were smart guys. I knew that I couldn't, you know, I could dismiss my mom. I can dismiss my dad. I could dismiss the ex-seminarians who taught me religion in high school. But I couldn't really reject these guys. I had to take it seriously. And so I really did a deep dive. And based upon that, I decided to transfer to a Catholic great books liberal arts college up in New Hampshire and did a real deep dive in the great books. And I had some great teachers. And you know, we read all the big stuff, all the main great books, and then a lot of the sort of the upper echelon secondary sources. And that was a huge part of my conversion. And so for me, my intellectual conversion was all of a piece. And Lewis's abolition of man in particular was very impactful on me with all of this. That was the third that I mentioned. And then that was it. I mean, once I became intellectually convinced that there was some there there, that I really took a deep dive, came back into the church, and ate crow with my family. And that was fine. And they were cool about it. But that was where I went to graduate school. And that was a great experience too, because I really had to. So I went to a Catholic liberal arts. I finished up at a Catholic liberal arts college, then went back to the state school. And I'm reading Foucault and Derrida and Guattari and all the postmoderns. And it was great experience, because I really had to own where I was coming from pretty quickly. And then on the church front, it was primarily an intellectual thing for me. But I look over my shoulder, and I mention this in the piece. I look over my shoulder, and you've got a veritable rock star sitting in the chair of Peter with John Paul II. And he's really the only pope that I knew at that point. I mean, I literally remember sitting in the living room, watching my mom watch the announcement of Habemus Papam with John Paul II. That was a very early memory for me, when I was around five years old. So really, up until that point, he's all I knew. And not only was he this towering physical presence who traveled the world. And he came to New Orleans at some point, and I went to that. But he was also an intellectual giant. He was the real deal. He was no dabbler. I mean, he was a philosopher in his own right and historian in his own right. So that was huge for me. And so that's how my intellectual and spiritual journeys are really coterminous. So moving into then your career, you've been teaching for how many years now? That's a good question. So right after I went to graduate school, so I graduated in, I think, 97. I wrote my master's thesis. I made English from LSU. I actually wrote it in poetry. And then I went back up to the college and taught for a couple of years and worked in student life and went back down to Louisiana and actually wrote for a golf magazine for a year. Because I love golf too, which is another addiction that I have with Twitter. And then I taught at my old high school for two years, which was a great experience. Baton Rouge is sort of like a big, small town. And so you kind of know everybody. And that was good. But they said, Kay, we love you. But if you're going to stick around, you're going to have to get certified. And I was like, yeah, I'm not really interested in getting my teacher's certification. And I've always loved movies and television. And I had been kicking around the idea. How about I want to write those things? Those are great. And this is where my story kind of gets interesting from an evangelical standpoint. Because I got involved with a group called ACK-1 Writing for Hollywood, which is a sort of an inter-denominational program for writing and producing in Hollywood, which I still think is operative. And the director was a woman. She's now no longer there. But her name is Barbara Nicolosi. Actually, she just wrote the movie Fatima that just came out. At any rate, so she was a huge influence on me. Because she sort of was looking to make some inroads. I was familiar with the great books world and the intellectual world. And how does that intersect with pop culture? And so she was this sort of Catholic intellectual force of nature that was running a largely evangelical group in Hollywood. And this is right around the time of the emergent church and ecclesiastical and all that sort of stuff, of which I knew nothing about as a Catholic. So I became very conversant and comfortable with the evangelical world back. So this was in around 2002, 3, 4, 5. I was there. I lived and worked in Hollywood for five years. In that time, I met my wife. And we got married. And at the time, we were expecting our first child, an old friend of mine who was working out here in Rhode Island, said, hey, Kale, there's a job out here. I think you'd be really interested. It's a boarding school. And we have a great books program. And I'm like, yeah, thanks, but no thanks. And anyway, I went up talking to the headmaster. And there I've got my wife. I've got a new baby. And I'm like, I probably should think this through. And so anyway, we came out here. And I've been here. I just finished my 13th school year. Wonderful. And so you teach great books? I do. Yeah, I teach great books. And yeah, I do a variety. I coach. I do a bunch of other things out here. The draw for me is the real thing that I love is the great books. So in a few short days here, I'll be starting with Dante's Inferno with another group of kids. So it's exciting. And you're teaching high school age kids? I am, yeah. So it's an ambitious course. Yeah, Dante's Inferno, not an easy book. Well, talk to me about what you're seeing in, because on my channel, we've done a lot of talk about the meeting crisis. Last week, I had a conversation with a young man. And part of he's a college student now, but part of what shocked me is I read Camus in middle school, and I thought. Yeah, I saw that. I saw that piece. I watched it yesterday. And yeah, precocious guy. Yeah. And I was struck by your comment. You said about your own kids that they sort of are reading things sooner. And I think there's probably a truth to that. But I still think him reading Camus a little bit, it makes him a punch of an outlier. But yeah, no. I mean, and this is, I teach at a Catholic school. And so there's a certain home quality that we're reading. So me and my team teacher teach sort of concurrently. I'm doing Dante, and he's doing the Letter to the Romans. And then I do Sir Gown the Green Knight, and he's doing Augustine's Confessions. And then I'm doing Chaucer, and he's doing some Aquinas. So it's kind of a hop, skip, and jump through the Western Civ. And then we'll move on and do Shakespeare and Milton's Paradise Lost. And he's doing Locke and Moore's Utopia and Descartes and Pascal. So it's a course that takes the place of their history course, their theology course, and their English course. Would it be fair to say that in some ways, you're living in at least a Roman Catholic version of Drear's Benedict option? I mean, I'm very familiar with Rod's stuff, and I've corresponded with him a little bit throughout the years. And no, I mean, I don't want to get into it too much here. But no, I wouldn't say. We are a very mainstream upper echelon. We serve the elite. I mean, do a quick Google search. It's super expensive. So I don't think I would say it like that, Paul. I'm very familiar. I've been part of sort of proto Benedict option communities, and I'm very drawn to that. But I don't think that that's really what this is here, even though I think that Rod's ultimately right. Just put my cards on the table. Well, I was, because when I first, I followed his blog before. I mean, it was actually, it was Rod Drear that sort of tipped me off to Jordan Peterson. That's where I found Peterson initially through. But you and I probably got tipped off to Peterson the exact same day, which was the 18th of January, 2018. Because I saw the Kathy Newman thing on his blog, and that's what started my dive into the IDW. Yeah. No, I found Drear back earlier than that. It was in 2017. Or I found Peterson in 2017. And he had a couple of small comments about him. But you know. Just during the whole C16 thing? Yeah, in the aftermath of C16. Yeah, I ignored that stuff. I'll tell you why in a minute. So, but it was interesting when I, when I, you know, when I found, when I, you know, started, you know, kind of processing Drear's Benedict option, because I had felt that in the Christian Reformed Church, we had in some ways lived the Benedict option up until the Second World War. And after the Second World War, the Christian Reformed Church sort of took down all its walls. And the war had that, the war in, you know, in many respects had that effect. Scholars, you know, young CRC youth who had grown up in rural places, you know, joined the military and in the military were introduced to this whole big world. And so the Christian Reformed Church had very much been a group of people that emphasized Christian education. And so you could be Christian reformed and just stay within Christian reform institutions all the way up through. And, you know, it's interesting that the, I mean, the Roman Catholic Church, obviously far, far larger community, far more ancient, obviously. But in America, you know, obviously, it's a very different history. The, go ahead. But I would say, oh, Matt, Paul, I mean, I've been thinking a lot about this and I think I sent you an email. Like the thing that I've been chewing on is tribe and creed in my head, this sort of tension, right? And, you know, I don't wanna get down too much of a rabbit hole, like with Latin and pre-council, post-council stuff, but I'll just say this, like, you know, I grew up entirely in the wake of the Second Vatican Council. Like I have zero memory of Latin, you know, we, you know, the mass was changed when, you know, five years, I think, before I was born. So I have no memory, lived memory of that. But if you look at Catholic, like it was a real tribal world. I mean, like for instance, there's a town right around the block from me in Bristol, and there are three Catholic churches that are literally within walking distance of one another. You've got St. Mary's, which is like the sort of the French and Irish parish. You've got St. Elizabeth's, which is Portuguese. And then you've got Our Lady of Mount Carmel, which is the Italian parish. Now, this is a tiny little town and it's all around the village green right there. And so now you sort of, you know, for me as a post-conciliar person, you know, you sort of scratch your head like, why would they have done this? Well, you know, you dig a little bit. I mean, you know, the Italian Catholic Church and the Irish Italian Church and the Portuguese Italian Church and the French, you know, that was something not part of my world, but there's still an existence sort of memory of all of that stuff. And, you know, and it's hard to tell like what caused what, but those tribes were still very much, I mean, like if you think of the Italian American Church in this little town in Bristol, I mean, how different is that really from a CRC community that was, you know, 50 miles outside of town in Hoboth, Massachusetts, right? I can't imagine it's actually that different. Obviously differences with class and sort of interest, if it's rural and farming versus, you know, professional or pre-professional, I mean, those things can make differences, but I think those little tribes did in fact exist, but in Catholicism, I think those tribes were utterly obliterated with the Second Vatican Council. I mean, you know, which is ironic because you would think, well, Latin, you know, would be the thing, but ironically, I think that what it really did was it just destroyed ethnic tribes within the larger tent of Catholicism, which I think then precipitated the, or helped bring about sort of the dissolution that we see now. That's fascinating. I mean, part of what, part of, I mean, to be, to have grown up in such a, you know, small tribe like the Christian Reformed Church, you know, when you think of something like the Second Vatican Council that just, you know, the Catholic Church is just so massive that whoosh. So- Overnight. I mean- Yeah, overnight. Essentially, I mean, historically speaking, overnight. It's still required, I mean, to have that kind of, well, talk to me a little bit more about that because, you know, at some point, we have to get into the piece that you wrote. Yeah, yeah. Because, you know, I recently watched Bishop Barron made a video about Vatican II, and he was chiding, seemed to be American, neo-traditional- The tribes, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. And, you know- Fascinating. I mean, just, if, do you read the ape who understood the universe? No. The book on evolutionary biology by Steve Seward Williams. The premise of the book is, you know, basically this alien comes in from outer space who knows evolutionary psychology, evolutionary theory, and comes down and he kind of watches the earth, right? And so he could kind of do this, you know, this sort of experiment in its, you know, in whatever anthropology or sociology or whatever it is. And why did I go here? Because what's going on with Barron and all these other folks right now is really, really fascinating. But most people are, they really can't see, because it's kind of this weird inter-tribal fight. But I think it's very important, actually. Well, tell me more. You've really got me, you've really got me fat, because I listened to the piece and I thought, this is so interesting, but as, you know, with the little CRC place that I live, so often CRC people are talking to each other, and it's like, they're talking to each other. But others are overhearing, and it's like, you don't really know what they're saying to each other. Yeah, okay, so I'll be that, I'll try to be that guide for you. And obviously I'm biased, and I have my own prejudices and whatnot. But anyway, so again, so think about me growing up. So like in, you know, 1978, when Carl Witte is named pope, is elected pope, you know, there had really been this interesting fight between like the sort of the radical reformers and the kind of conservative reformers. And there's still is this fight over who owns the council, right, and is the council the documents, is the council sort of like the spirit, there's all this kind of fight, right? So for the entirety of John Paul II, those early fights, if you really dig into that stuff, you can see that he's fighting the sort of the progressive element of the reformers, right? And so his, and there are groups like there's like, I think it's Communio is the conservative reformers, and Liberazio is, I forget the name of other, the trad, my trad friends are gonna kill me right now, but anyway. So it was largely a fight between the liberals and sort of the capital L liberals. And it was the conservative liberals, and it was the progressive liberals. The people that got completely sort of kicked to the curb were the trads, right? And they were essentially irrelevant and kind of the cranky people who flirted with anti-Semitism and John Birch Society stuff, all that kind of fringe element, and they'd really gotten kind of kicked out. And so it was really a fight between the conservative liberals and the progressive liberals. And so what happens with John Paul II's very lengthy papacy, which was, he was putting out encyclical after encyclical, which were all serious works into themselves, and then with Ratzinger taking over afterwards with Benedict C. So they really sort of thought that they had kind of won the war. And I did too as someone who was largely sympathetic, I mean, deeply sympathetic with both of them. I've tempered my position on this in the last couple of years. But I thought it was ascendant. I thought that it was, we in fact, we joked in the conservative circles that we were playing the biological option, right? And so that it was just a matter of time when all the progressives die, because they don't have any children. Conservatives have more kids and more priests, and they were all JP II priests, and the new evangelization was very much an exciting thing. And then boom, flush, Benedict resigns, and that's weird. And we still don't talk about how utterly bizarre this is. And then Francis emerges. And Francis, in essence, all these people had been kind of an institutional and ecclesial life support for 20 plus years, all of a sudden, they have this sort of new resurgence. And you see this, right? You see this with things. Now, Baron is a fascinating figure because barons don't become bishops, right? It's weird that he's a bishop. You always have like the main guy who's essentially a politician, right? And they run the big Cs, right? They tend not to be intellectuals. They tend to be managers, right? Occasionally, somebody like Baron will get thrown a bone at the end of his career, kind of like the way they used to hand out nun seniors, and it was sort of an honorific. But it's very interesting because he's this kind of rock star, right? And he's got his channel and his outlets and word on fire, and it's huge and massive. And I think he puts out great stuff, to be fair. But it's weird that he is a bishop, even though he's sort of an auxiliary in a larger LA diocese, I think he's out of Santa Barbara. But all of a sudden, because you have... So the reason why I put that stuff in about McCarrick into the piece, and the thing that really rocked my world, is that McCarrick was a creature of the system. And I'm not talking about the sex and the money and the abuse and all that, he was a cardinal. How many of those are? In other words, very few. So he was a real creature of this. And for him to ascend into that position and then hold onto that position and to rise up all of his guys, that sort of pulled a lot of the scales off of my eyes about the political reality of church. When you've got JP II in the chair, you're like me, you're like, oh, this is great, this is awesome. We've got the equivalent of Francis of Assisi and Thomas Aquinas in one person sitting at the top chair. Like, that's cool. How many people get to live through something like that? So at any rate, that all got changed with Francis and his various things. And I don't wanna bore your audience with all the various encyclicals and whatnot, but it's definitely, it's a different church. And Barron is a conservative liberal. He's not a trad. And in church taxonomy, Roman Catholic taxonomy, that's a different thing. And so he and his boys have really been punching down on the trads as of late, which I find very fascinating because the trads have encroached on his term. Hold on one second. Hey, my dogs are chewing on a chew toy. I don't know if you can hear that. So he's punching down on the trads because the trads have figured out YouTube. Yeah, and he was really the only, he was sort of the master of Catholic YouTube up until about two and a half, three years ago. And so that's an interesting, you know, fighting for eyes. You know, it's- Yeah, yeah, yeah. Heather always talk about the gig economy and all of that. And I think that, I think there's a little bit of that, but he's a bishop. I mean, he's got standing. You know, if you're a rando who's got a YouTube channel, you might be saying all kinds of true things, but you know, anyway, so that's part of that text on me. Can you just hold on one second? Yeah. You're killing me. Okay, girl. All right, sorry. Oh, no more squeaky toy for the dog. Yeah, yeah, I have two big dogs and they, you know, they're whatever. Hi, girl. So, you know, so that is what, that is sort of the part, when you were talking about Baron, you know, when you were talking about Baron, you were talking about modernism, which I really, I feel like I want to talk to you about that, because that is sort of an interesting moment here. And Baron has always been able to kind of surf that, whatever that line is. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And, you know, and he got it, like in the trad world, they crush him all the time because of his conversation with Shapiro, right? And if you recall in his conversation with Shapiro, he was saying, you know, Ben, to his credit, asked a point, like, well, like, do I have to be Catholic? You know, and Baron really winched on that. When if you're, you know, if you're an orthodox, believing Christian, he really winched on that. And he said something about Jesus being the privileged path, right? The privileged way. And, you know, so as you imagine, the trads just, you know, I mean, go on Catholic Twitter and it's like, like, you know, it's, you know, calling him a Balthazarian devil and, you know, and all this kind of stuff, you know, so, you know, that's a little bit of the subtext there. That's fascinating, because, you know, again, I live in such a smaller world, but this is huge and long. And, you know, for many people who aren't Roman Catholic, I mean, Baron is a, I mean, he's a tremendously impressive figure. I mean, he's eloquent, he's, you know, clearly well read. You know, my conversation with Brett Sockel, you know, when I was reading Brett's book, was fascinated by all of the, you know, but all the footnotes to Bishop Baron, it's like, I didn't know he had written this kind of stuff. And his, you know, his conversation with Jordan Peterson, obviously displayed his credentials. Now, maybe to zip over to your piece. You know, what a, I mean, when I read it, it was, yeah, it was, you know, obviously, I read a lot of things on the net and this just was sort of a bolt out of the blue in terms of the clarity, the honesty. Talk to me, in my experience, at least, you know, when I do a video or back when I was writing more things, you know, often something, you know, not necessarily a thing, but just kind of a mental flow precipitates, you know, a piece like this where it seemed to me just kind of, you know, opens your heart with respect to the church, our context and where the, and now knowing a little bit more about your story, your background, you know, I can imagine I can see more, but talk to me about this. What, where did this come from for you? Yeah, so, I mean, part of it, you know, so I mentioned the McCarrick thing and that, you know, has come at the end of a very, I mean, since basically 2001 with Boston and then the slow trickle and the explosions and all of that, you know, I've been, you know, and I've been that entire time, remember I've been in sitting in front of high school students, right? And some, you know, some of my kids are cradle Catholic, some are not, but you look, I'm teaching at a Catholic school. I'm an out Catholic, you know, teaching, I self identify as that, as funny it is to say that out loud. Again, I work in a mainstream world, right? And, you know, you know, if, you know, there's a certain fatigue that sets in, right? And for me, you know, one of the things that I've always loved about you, you talk about like low res and high res and, you know, and recognizing, you know, that, you know, that at the end, so when all this sort of stuff comes out and I had this sort of very simplified, like, look, you know, a priest who wears his clericals and says a reverent mass good, and a priest who like, you know, throws the liturgical prayers out and straps on the guitar and starts performing to his group bad, right? And that's in my very sort of simple Catholic world, my frame. And it slowly dawned on me that actually, you know, and maybe even especially the worst of the predators were the ones who would wear a cassock and could talk Thomas and, you know, and, you know, there's a special kind of wolf and sheep's clothing who would adopt the clothing of overt orthodoxy. I mean, within the Catholic church, as opposed to sort of the heterodoxy of the spirit of the Vatican council, you know? And so I knew that I had to upgrade, right? That that was not operative, but you don't really know who to talk to about that stuff, right? You know, you've got a couple of friends who are deep readers, but, you know, in the normal parish world, you know, I'm not gonna like talk to my neighbor over donuts and coffee after Sunday mass about this kind of stuff, right? So you kind of retreat into your bubble a little bit and, you know, go about your work and you do your thing. And the McCarrick thing just was, it was just absolutely and utterly disgusting. And what was particularly disgusting to me is that McCarrick was the face, if you recall Dallas, at the Dallas charter when they implemented zero tolerance and all this sort of this public displays of we are serious now, he was the face of it all, right? And so, and not that I ever liked Ted McCarrick, but I, you know, he was the Cardinal of the Cardinal Archbishop of Washington, DC. You get a certain amount of credence to that and to hear about that and just to see just the, just what a scoundrel, right? And then I'm like, all right, you guys knew about this stuff. I mean, I've been holding your water for a frigging decade more. I mean, it's 2018. So for 18 years, I've been basically been like, yes, yes, a few bad apples, but the truth, Jesus is still real. The church is still real. I'm gonna, and then you're like, okay, what the hell is real anymore? Like seriously, what's real anymore? Because you guys knew, they didn't do anything. And you cared more about the brand than you did, you know, about the truth. You cared more about the brand than you did about these kids. And you know, you just sort of, you're done. And then you start to think, all right, well, he was a creature of the successful church, right? Of the Vatican. So then you start doing this whole unravel job. Like, you know what, screw you all. I'm just gonna go become a rad trad because at least they've always thought that all of you were a bunch of scoundrels. And I'm just gonna go be cranky with them in the corner. But at the same time, I stumbled across Peterson and I'm just like, all right, this guy is doing some real things, you know? And he's not hung up on church politics, obviously. You know, he's not, you know, he's, but I was just struck how deeply respectful he was of scripture and what the stories could possibly mean. You know, sitting through modernist homily after modernist homily for the duration of my liturgical life. I'm like, this guy takes the Bible more seriously than any of you yahoos, you know, who wear the robes at mass, you know? And so that, so I just did my deep dive with that. I'm like, well, at least he's taking it seriously because I was never, like, it never occurred to me to like not be Christian and not to be Catholic. I mean, that sounds weird, but I'm in this sort of weird head space even right now where I like, what does it mean for me to be a Roman Catholic who has zero faith in the institutional church and zero faith in, you know, the people who run it, yet I believe the thing. You know, and Baron, you even made a funny joke about that as a Protestant, you know, Baron sort of, you know, very, for him a very unguarded moment to say, dare I say Protestant, you know? And I'm like, well, that's interesting, you know, because that's always kind of the threat, right? That's the way that you sort of police the boundaries of orthodoxy is that, you know, what are you Protestant? You know, that kind of thing, you know, so. Well, yeah, wow, wow. So when I'm writing the piece, you know, so what, so then, okay, so, you know, so all of that kind of conservative edifice of John Paul II and Benedict XVI, all of that gets quickly unraveled because quickly you see, you know, the church politicians, the bishops, very quickly sort of insinuate themselves, oh, all of a sudden they become sort of moderately progressive on X, Y, and Z, and then you start to realize, well, a lot of these guys tacked to the right with John Paul II and Benedict XVI, and now we're sort of subtly tacking to the left to sort of aggrandize themselves to Pope Francis, and you're like, all right, well then, you know, sorry, I'm not doing this. And so then that's, you know, you start entertaining, you know, more, and so it really opened things up for me. So I'm not only my entertaining sort of the traditional Catholicism more, but I'm also doing all this IDW stuff because it's so intellectually engaging to me. Oh, that's fascinating. That is so fascinating, you know, because the, I mean, the strange thing, well, as a pastor, you very quickly realize that there are ladders, there are pastoral ladders, and there are climbers, and well, if you kind of- I love the way you talk about this. I love, yeah, I love the way you talk about this. And again, I think for Catholic people, they don't quite understand how entrepreneurial the model is for Protestant pastors. But you know, you're making certain decisions. Are you gonna skyrocket to a camp? What is it, what is the Warren type stuff or the Willows Creek, all that kind of stuff? You know, the Wood is a New York City guy. I always forget his name. Oh, Tim Keller, Tim Keller. Yeah, all that sort of stuff. Or am I gonna do something really local? Well, and that was, you know, that's fairly new to the Christian Reformed Church too, because the Christian Reformed Church was, for many CRC pastors, there was a ladder, and you would aspire, you know, you would take a starter church, and then your second church would be a place that you would spend longer, and then you would aspire to be a denominational bureaucrat, and then whatever top office there was too. Right. But in the, so the Christian Reformed Church basically has been within the tensions of, is the CRC evangelical, or is the CRC mainline? And then the third group that has emerged out of the middle, I call the Reformed Catholics, because suddenly I began to notice, 15 years ago or so, colleagues, but especially pastors younger than myself, were wanting to do things like we want to, they don't call it the Lord's Supper anymore, they more often call it Eucharist, and we're remembering the baptism, and we're all of these things that the generation of my grandfather would have called papist or- No way, right, right. Because I was around tables like that, when I was in Hollywood in 2004, five, six, I might, you know, I'm at these sort of inter-denominational tables, and I'm listening to all my evangelical friends talk about like Eucharist and stuff, I'm like, you guys are talking about you, I mean, I got a lot of this, if you want to talk about this stuff, like I'll do it all day long, I mean, like really, like you're talking about liturgy, like my goodness, like I'm gonna have to change my whole categories here because this is not, you know, this does not compute. But that was about right about 15 years ago, 16 years ago. And so then, you know, now making videos, and then we start this Bridges of Meaning Discord, and I talk to the people who watch my videos, because that's, in many ways, the most interesting thing about this whole thing for me is, gosh, who would listen to the stuff I'm putting out there, and then watch everyone meet each other, and you know, I'd have a number of people on the Discord say things like, you know, they'd grown up Roman Catholic, and they'd sort of left, and then after Jordan Peterson came back, but, you know, but they're like, and it's weird, because I listened to this Calvinist pastor and his videos, and you know, the little homily that we get at the mass, that's just, you know, that's kind of the, they're not there for that, whereas a Protestant, of course, is there for the sermon. And so, and of course, then the onslaught of the Orthodox, which, you know, you know, Jonathan Peugeot, but of course, Peugeot raised, you know, French Canadian, and you think, well, surely, he must have been raised Roman Catholic. No, evangelical, but then, and I'm just watching all this stuff happening, and it's like, what on earth is going on in this world? Yeah, it's like this sort of interesting resort, the Shufflin' Resort of all kinds of things, and that's kind of what I'm getting at with Tribe and Creed. Yes. You know, like, there was sort of this, like, you talk about your grandfather, right, and like, your grandfather, you know, you know, couldn't have like been real friends with my grandfather, you know, on my Catholic side, because like, it was just different worlds. It's just different worlds, like, you know, maybe friendly, but, you know, at the end of the day, like, you know, one's looking down the nose at the other as how he's a papus, and the other was looking down his nose and saying, you know, he's a Protestant, you know, and there the two show me, right? I mean, that just wouldn't have happened. Yes. Well, and the, in Whiteensville, Massachusetts, which is not far from where you live, the Christian Reformed Church and the Roman Catholic Church are right across the street from each other, and I was blown away when one of a guy had an internship with me and he was a church planter, and then he went and pastored my parents' church in Pleasant Street, and he told me that they do, I don't remember what they called it, but they, you know, they're cooperating with the Catholics, and when I was growing up, that the worst thing that could happen to any of my cousins would have been to meet and marry a Catholic girl, which one of them did, and the sea change in this, and now, you know, and then when I read your piece, you know, of course I'd followed Rod Dreher's path, and, you know, he's, you know, of course he's from Louisiana and he grows up in that milieu, and he decides, okay, this is the church of my roots, I wanna take it seriously, and he and his wife talk about they want to, you know, practice Roman Catholic, you know, family, you know, this family framework. Yeah, he's so right about that. And the priest rolls his eyes, and it's, and. He's so right about that. Oh, yeah, he's so right about that. So my question then is, it's so funny that, you know, this Western Canadian who kind of becomes acquainted to the world because he doesn't wanna say Z or them or something like this, you know, sort of takes us, takes a status rocket up into the sky, and in his midst, all kinds of Christians separated by various traditions start coming together and talking. I mean, it's just insane. It's totally insane, it's totally insane. I mean, that's what, you know, that's what I find, you know, like I don't know what to make of it, you know, like, because look, if you look at the comments in the piece that I wrote, right, and One Peter Five is a trad site, right, and it's run by Steve Skodrik, he's a great guy, a friend of mine, and a virtual friend, you know, like this, but, you know, he and I both knew right away that, you know, the way that the Catholic trad tribe would respond to the piece is like, careful. Like, you know, what do you mean you can find truth outside of the walls, right? You know, you know, the church holds the fullness of the truth, right, and, you know, and again, I get it. Like, I am a Catholic, I'm not, you know, I'm not trying to pretend otherwise, right, but there's this, you know, it's like pious platitudes will kind of like get you through some rough patches, you know, and it's like, well, no, no, actually, you know, so that the response was like, well, you know, you're flirting, basically, Kale, you're flirting with some dangerous stuff, and that's why I had that kind of fake confession to start off the piece. You know, it's like, you know, I've logged onto the internet and I've met atheists and mathematicians, you know, and I'm sort of doing a funny taxonomy of the IDW and they kind of make sense, you know, and how is it then that these guys, and I'm, you know, and I'm my big, the guys that I like are, you know, I like Jordan Peterson, it's probably my favorite, but I love Eric Weinstein. I find him just utterly fascinating. Brett and Heather are amazing, you know, and, you know, there's sort of two Ben's that you've talked about before. There's Ben the pundit, and there's Ben the one who can have real conversations, and I look, I'm basically conservative, so it's not like he's saying things that I wildly disagree with on his daily podcast, let's say, but that's not, I don't jam on that stuff. I mean, I like, you know, the deep conversation stuff, and, you know, a powerful witness of a man of faith, of deep faith and orthodoxy who lives this public life. I mean, I think I find it inspirational, but at any rate, you know, but, you know, with certain, you know, certain Christians, you know, well, this is kind of dangerous stuff, and it's so funny, you know, like the, you know, I think the Protestants get a bad rap about being, you know, deeply suspicious, especially obviously fundamentalists, but being deeply suspicious of evolution, and it's certainly a lot of sort of the public noise is generated by evangelical counter apologetics, right? But in certain Catholic circles, you know, like you'll find a lot of young Earthers in Catholic Facebook groups, you know, who are like, wow, you know, they're lying, and it's probably Jewish. You know, like guys, you know, it's just, it's, you know, it's disgusting because obviously I'm, I identify as Jewish too, right? And so it's just these weird flirtations, like I've just never understood it, but anyway, I don't want to get down that rabbit hole. But, you know, as Peterson himself points out early on and often, you know, look, his entire project is based on evolutionary thinking, you know, and I don't know what's wrong with me, but I don't see the necessary conflict, and, you know, I don't see that there has to be a necessary conflict between the two of those things. And so I've spent a lot of time in the last couple of years reading all the evolutionary stuff I can get my hands on just because I feel like I need to be conversant in it. So that was part of it too. So where's all this stuff going? Because it's interesting because of course Peterson has been, you know, out with all of his medical things in some ways, you know, Brett has become quite reasonably possessed by, you know, what was first local to his life and his college and now local to him and his city. Eric is Eric. Okay, so right after you put out that piece, you know, sort of what next with the IDW and you mentioned that Eric has really sort of taken up the baton, but I don't know if you've noticed this, but like in the last three or four weeks, he's gone. Like, I mean, he's done some things on Instagram, but like, I don't have time for that, you know? I loved his conversations. Like I listened to that one he did with Ross, like two times. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I was just utterly fascinated by the conversation. So I really mesh with Eric the way he thinks. And I think that's partly generational. I think he's done a wonderful job of kind of articulating things for us Gen Xers who get kind of lost in the shuffle between the boomers and the millennials. And all his talk about, you know, all of his little funny acronyms, I find really helpful and useful. But, you know, kind of like you, I kind of miss these guys. Yeah. You know, I certainly miss Peterson. Yeah. Well, and I wonder, you know, I thought his conversation with Douthat was just, I've listened to that a number of times. Yeah, yeah, really. But Douthat too has, I mean, his book on decadence just really grabbed me. And of course, I've been looking at the Stephen Smith, Douthat piece a few times. And one of the things Douthat says in that conversation, which has really clung to me, I've just been busy with my day job lately. So I haven't done enough monologue videos lately. But that day job thing. Yeah, that day job thing. Yeah, I know. And I don't want to give up my, I mean, because, and it actually impacts this, because the thing that Douthat said in that piece at the American Enterprise Institute was, you know, if Marianne Williamson had lived in the 19th century, she would have started a church, because that is the Protestant thing to do. And I think that that very deeply connects with your piece. And it's happening in the Christian Reformed Church. Evangelicalism, of course, is not a church. It's a, you know, like talking to the conversation I posted today with Jess, because why wham something like these parachurches are, you know, they're not a church. But now, you know, and especially in something, you know, I had caught on earlier that, you know, because it's not like evangelicals don't have their own sex standals. I actually have a copy of Ted Haggard's cover of Christianity Today on my wall in my office, a new kind of evangelical. And it's like, oh, boy, I kept that cover because, of course, everything that had happened. Yeah. And but yet the, you know, what's gone on in terms of the Roman Catholic priests, obviously, with the theology of the church, impacts it in a way that it doesn't with Protestants, because since Luther, there's always been a sense with Protestants that the, this institutional thing, which has developed, which develops a culture of ladder climbing and political appeasement and, you know, looking, you know, protecting the brand at all cost. Yeah. That is something that obviously, because of Roman Catholic theology, the scandals of this nature make, you know, and then I read your piece and it's like, I completely understand where this is coming from. Yeah, because like with Catholics, you know, the responsibility for the brand really gets kicked up to a celibate caste, right? And, you know, almost essentially defined by the fact that they're celibate, right? So any children that they have have to be conscripted, right? Because, you know, a priest can't make their own, right? And so sex is- And they're called father. Right, right, right, right. And it could be, so I think the sex thing is absolutely front and center, you know? And so, you know, Luther and those in his wake obviously preached, you know, many quivers in the bone. That was a major sort of, I don't want to say talking point, but you know, you allow me that. Major talking point for the reformers, sort of these large families. And it's always funny how that always kind of follows movements, right? It's like we're just going to make more of us, you know, and expand the tribe, you know, that way. So I think most people look at the celibate priesthood always with that kind of raised eyebrow. And I would say that and certainly, you know, even sort of, you know, red blooded American Catholic males sort of always sort of like, well, that's kind of weird, right? I mean, you know, and I teach Dubliners, Joyce's Dubliners every year. And there's an opening story where you've got these two guys who are talking about the boy who has a friendship with the priest. And they're just like, I don't know, it's just weird, you know? And like, I swear, I hear the same kind of conversations even now. I mean, if anybody even cared anymore. But that's yet another wrinkle to the story. But I think that the sex thing is front and center precisely because priests aren't supposed to have it. You know, and that burden for replication, again, you sort of using evolutionary terms here, you know, the burden, you know, sort of rests in the memes, not the genes, you know? Yeah. Well, and even and I don't know much about, you know, Roman Catholic trads, but... You know, in some ways, the Protestant Reformation, and I loved the conversation I had with Brett Sockel, and I loved his book because it just sort of opened my eyes to seeing, you know, Luther, you know, at least according to Brett, Luther trying to discover what Aquinas knew, but all of the history between Aquinas and Luther made Aquinas obscure. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And then that comes through then with Calvin in the real presence because, you know, I got into this because again, a friend who's been on my channel, Len Vanderzee, wrote this book, you know, Christ, Christ by IVP, Christ Baptism and the Lord's Supper, where he, Len is such an interesting guy because he's been on so many different, he's been on so many different, when I was in seminary, at Calvin Seminary, I don't even remember how on earth I got root, but basically I had to do a conference or something and Lou Smedes, who never taught at Calvin Seminary, but taught at Calvin College and went on to teach at Fuller Seminary. Hmm. And... Fuller, oh yes. Yeah, so Lou Smedes, very interesting guy. He eventually, so at Fuller, John Wimber, this is going to connect with your Catholic, the charismatic piece of your story. John Wimber, do you know who John Wimber is? I don't know, sorry. This is what is so interesting is that, you know, you're a bit younger than I am, but not a whole lot younger, so we got a fair amount of overlap. And so John Wimber was a Presbyterian who also had a, you know, very much a charismatic revival in his life. And he went on to write books like Power Evangelism and Power Healing and eventually taught a class, he and some others taught a class at Fuller Seminary in Pasadena, where they were teaching seminarians the practice of basically facilitating divine healing in people. And what's interesting to me about this is that, you know, because the Roman Catholic Church is so ancient, I mean, you have rights for exorcism. And I mean, this is all built in and has not been lost, whereas Protestants are such creatures of the moment so often that... So here at Fuller Seminary, they're having this class on signs and wonders. And then Lou Smedes writes a little pamphlet, basically, is it always proper to celebrate a miracle? Because they're processing this now, north of us in Reading, there's a whole new thing with Bethel Church going on, not a CRC church, but an evangelical church. But anyway, so Len Van Der Zee, we got, I asked my pastor, Dave Bealan, who was sort of on the charismatic edge of the Christian Reformed Church at that time, you know, who should I get to talk at this conference? He said, I'll get Len Van Der Zee. So Len talks at that. And then Len also in many ways was spearheaded the Reformed Catholic thing. And now he goes to Church of the Servant, which is one of the most liturgical, neo-sacramental Christian Reformed Churches, but right next to Calvin College. But they're also sort of on the cusp of the LGBT conversations. And I mean, it's just so Len has always been there. Yeah, so that's interesting because when I... No, no. So... I was just going to say, you know, when I was out in California, you know, I knew a bunch of Fuller people and they were right on... They were right on the verge of really getting into the woke stuff, you know, early on, you know, and I found that to be very fascinating because... I knew they were going to lose and lose fast to the woke stuff. You know, and, you know, what I found interesting is that, you know, places like Fuller, if I understand my American Protestant history, places like Fuller rose up originally as an antidote to the sort of progressivism of the mainline churches, right? Right. So then they've just done their own version of that literally in the last 15 years. Yes. Yes. Right? Yes. Okay, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Well, and Fuller is sort of on the cusp of that because that war has basically been going on in Fuller. So Richard Mao, who was from the Christian Reformed Church, he was a philosophy professor of mine at Calvin College, went on to be president at Fuller Seminary. And now Mark Laberton is president and he's, you know, they've held a pretty hard line on the LGBT stuff. But now the woke stuff is making all of this far more complex again. So... Backdoor. I mean, you know, that's a backdoor. My completely, you know, I don't have any skin in this game directly, but that's just another way of getting at it, in my opinion. Yeah. Well, and, you know, but then, of course, you know, on your side of the line, Joe Biden. And John Kerry a generation ago. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's the thing, you know, the cardinal archbishop of Chicago, maybe he's not a cardinal yet, but soupich. He just came out this past Sunday and was castigating all the conservatives and the treads that would dare question, you know, anyone's sort of, you know, real Catholicism. Right. And so it's always this sort of question that harbors like, well, are you really, you know, the thing? Are you really Catholic? Is he a real Catholic or a fake Catholic? Well, what does that even mean? Like, is he a real Christian or is he a fake Christian? Like, what does that even mean? Right. And so, you know, when does orthodoxy matter? Right. I mean, like, what are the contrasts? What are the boundaries? You know, when is orthodoxy permeable and when is it not? And we're constantly sorting this out. Right. And you bring Holland's book up a bit. And I read it again recently. And, you know, what I found so wonderful, frankly, about Holland's book, I worried that maybe it confirms my priors a little bit too much. But it's such an eccentric retelling of a history that I basically know. Yeah. Like, I'm certainly, you know, probably a little bit better read than the average Catholic. And I'm pretty familiar with the broad scope of the way that Catholics tell church history. And to watch him tell the story was just fascinating to me. You know, it's always a slightly, slightly different emphasis. And so then all of a sudden, all these things open up. And so I'll give you an example. So reading about the Gregorian reforms, you know, where, you know, no salvation outside of the Catholic Church. You know, growing up, I didn't really think much of it. But if I did, you know, I was like, oh, like, that's the sort of the pronouncement of a strong and robust church who sort of telling the people like it is. And now upon rereading it, maybe, or re-seeing it at the age of 47, I'm like, oh, that's the kind of stuff you say when you're weak. That's the kind of stuff when you have real doubts about the veracity of what you're saying. And so, you know, talk about a paradigm explosion, right? Yeah. And, you know, I don't know why I went down that rabbit hole. No, I, yes. But that for good. Well, you know, and when you talk about orthodoxy, I mean, because Protestants, in a sense, said, OK, well, we'll not worry about the, we'll start our own institution, but we'll make orthodoxy itself. We'll make it, we'll make assent and to the psychological, the thought of it itself. That's what we'll make the thing itself. That's what we'll make it itself. And so, you know, I really feel for the trans because where on earth do you go? What on earth do you do when it's, when you're in the kind of position they're at? And I loved how you described, you know, imagining, OK, I mean, it's the winner's dilemma. Because once you win, now you have the terror of what if we, what if having won, we lose it? Because that's worse. Can you say a little bit more about the winner's dilemma? I love it. Well, so I was talking to, I was talking to Jess again, the conversation I posted today, and he was talking about the pressure he felt as a kid when every, all these evangelicals would say things like, and you've got so many more advantages than we had. And then when he basically is in the deconstruction point of his life, he's like, and I just gave up the inheritance. I just, I inherited the kingdom and I squandered it. I am the prodigal son that, you know, lost, that lost the father's money in dissipation and then looking hungrily at that pig slump. And circles, Paul, in your circles, do folks talk about Rekour's concept of the second naivete? No. Have you heard of this concept? No. Might be worth looking into. He sort of talks about, like, you have a naivete as a child, right? And then you spend much of your childhood blowing up that naivete that you had, you had inherited, I guess. And then you have to kind of put it all back together again. And now I'm no Rekour specialist, but the phrase has always stuck with me because I find myself in that sort of situation, right? Especially being on the other side of modernity and modernism. And I know that modernism means a bunch of different things in a couple of different contexts. And that's probably important to maintain those distinctions. But modernism, of course, in the church tradition is pretty clear. And on the other side of modernism now, it's done its thing. It's wrecked everything, right? And so the version of this in Catholic circles, and I don't know if this happens in Protestant circles, but you go on the Sunday in which they're talking about the miracle of the loaves and the fishes or the feeding of the 5,000. And invariably, you're going to get some version of like, well, well, kids, you know, the real miracle is a miracle of sharing. Right. And I'm just not original me. Other people have talked and joked about that. And it's like in the movie Millions, it's right there in the movie. And it's so dumb. And yet, you know, that just kind of, you know, and this is what I'm going to get snide about, you know, OK, boomer. Right. And, you know, but that's so dumb. Like the fruit of that church is death. Like it doesn't exist anymore. Right. And so that's why I'm as this sort of weird Gen Xer, I've inherited modernity. Right. I haven't inherited tradition in the same way because I'm purely postconciliar. And I've inherited a heap of ashes. So what am I supposed to give to my kids? Like, I'm not going to give to my kids. Well, the real miracle is one of sharing. You know, it's like, no, because that's not true. Like that. That's not. Hold on. Once again, shut the door. Hey, guys. Hey, I'm in the middle of my podcast. Can you can you be quiet? Sorry. No problem. So, you know, so so that that's sort of that was probably like me bleeding on the page is like, you know, it's not making sense to me. And part of it is anger, Paul. I mean, I'm angry that I mean, look, if you look at the my journey that I chart in the in the. I don't really get too much into it because I didn't want to bore the readers. But, you know, I'm a product of Catholic education all the way, you know, through high school and eventually in college again. But high school and like I knew nothing. I knew absolutely nothing. You know, not only was it true that I basically didn't know scripture, but I didn't even know any. There was no catechism. You know, it was basically Jesus loves you, which is good. Right. But like, that's it. It was MTD. Throwing through before it had a before it had a title. It was MTD. And so so any any knowledge that I have of my inheritance is I've scrounged for it on my own, you know, in the libraries and in the nooks and crannies of, you know, and so so you've got a completely drained out intellectual inheritance. And if you're liturgically minded, you know, if you've ever seen, you know, a modern mass and a traditional mass, it's like, is this the same? How can this be the same church? Right. And that's the kind of thing that I avoided thinking about for years and years and years like, yeah, fine. My local suburban parish is a clown show dumpster fire. But at least the church has got like the thing and I can look at documents and it can be weird and and all of that. And and now like you're like, wait, it's all a clown show. It's all, you know, wow, wow, wow. That's going to be a clip that was that's so but that's so helpful to me because I again, I'm I'm about 10 years older and of course, so I talked to Eric's been on my show. He planted a church in Davis, which is, you know, University town, just just near here. And he came in and, you know, so he's Eric is 20 years younger than I am or something, almost 20 years, perhaps. But. This is so fascinating to me because we we don't because that that tradition. So so the video that I haven't made this week, the one I want to make it, I haven't had time to make this week, is all about the symbols and how these even the word symbol isn't doesn't really cut it because obviously in in a in a traditional mass, it's. And from a Protestant point of view, that the the knock was always well, the people, the people don't understand it. Yeah. Which, of course, would be the Protestant knock. Yeah, right. So so right. So for me, so a massive part of my own education in this, right. I mean, we're really talking about sacramental realities, right? Yeah, yeah. That the world is a sign of these other things and not just the world. But but, you know, I remember. So when I was a sophomore in college, really one of the reasons why I went to the college, they had a Rome program and I had never I had been in a plane once, I think, to go to Disney World when I was before I went to college. And so I had not been out of the country. And so when I was so I was 20, 21, I was 20, maybe 19. And I go to Rome and it was a semester long program. And it was a great program. And, you know, I'm not really sure what I thought about time. I'm not really sure what I thought about 2000 years. But all when you go to Rome, you're like, oh, like this stuff is old, really old. And the oddity, of course, is that the church in Rome is new. You know, I remember this one day this really blew my mind, telescope my sense of time and space. I'm I'm sitting in a church in Rome on a Sunday. I was going to my Sunday mass and it's an Italian, but you could follow along. Right. And it's a place called Santa Maria Interstevere. And Santa Maria Interstevere is what they call a titular church, which means it was one of the original churches of the Roman of the Roman population. It was an old house that eventually ended. So they built a church on top of it and their miracles that are attached to it and all that. But at any rate, as it happened that Wednesday before mass, I had gone to an architecture tour and they were telling us about the columns and this, that and the other and whatnot. And so anyway, I'm sitting at mass then Sunday. And I'm thinking because I don't know Italian, so I'm just kind of thinking and praying and doing my thing. And I look at the columns and I hear the voice of my teacher saying, and the columns are taken from the Roman Forum. And the thought occurred to me so that the columns in this church are older than Jesus. Like, and then you just sort of, you know, your mind just does this like, wow, you know, it's a long time, like the church is old. And the tradition, and I don't mean, you know, just the Roman Catholic Church, but just our church, you know, is old. It's ancient, you know, and I, and I remember another story that kind of gets at this time thing. Chesterton writes in his book about St. Francis. I don't know if you've ever read it, but it's a wonderful book. I really recommend it. But Francis steps into a church that is as old to him as France is to us. You know, you're like, oh, like that's old and long, you know, and so that really gave me, I mean, that really cured me. Any, any vestiges of my belief that, you know, sort of the myth of progress was shattered in that moment. Because you look at these churches, right? You know, you look at these churches, and I grew up in the American churches, and the post-conciliar church in which, you know, I went to churches that look more like the church you probably grew up in than anything that I saw in Italy. And you look at those churches, you're like, wow, like they all mean something, right? I mean, you know, like every church in Rome, it's got, you know, it's got the lion, the young man, the bull, you know, it's got the four, everything means something. It's got seven candles for the seven churches, you know, and everything's lifted right out of the apocalypse. Everything, all the iconography and all of it means something, right? And so, that I had to learn really what sacramentality was, and how sacramentality means something in space and in time. And therefore, when Peterson, for instance, talks about the cross as being the center of meaning and where all these things intersect, I always think of Eliot and, you know, the four quartets and, you know, the still point of the turning world. Well, like in Catholic iconography, the altar is at the still point of the turning world where the ultimate sacrifice is made. And, you know, and then you hear Peterson riff on sacrifice. I mean, look, I grew up, you know, understanding the holy sacrifice of the massacres. You don't really think of the words, right? And to have him talk about what sacrifice actually means, especially when he's talking about Abraham and Isaac, and I think it's five and six of the biblical series, you're like, oh, and like, what's crazy to me, Paul, is like, I read the stuff, like I read Gerard and I've read, you know, Eliade and all the stuff that he talked about. And then you're like, oh, but I can now kind of see it again. Maybe that's why I like Peterson so much is that he's given me eyes to see again, you know, stripped of all the crap that, you know, the modernist decretions or something like that. Well, and how did he do that? This guy who, you know, has been on this quest, and of course, you know, I watch him go right to the line of, you know, with the resurrection and Sam Harris kind of bullies him. But how does, you know, how does he do that? How does he do that? And where do, I mean, and the other question I have just listening to you is, you know, where do you find the power of the resurrection? And I mean, and the other question I have just listening to you is, you know, where do you go? I mean, it's, again, getting back to the institutional thing, because, you know, there are a few, I was just talking to a woman in my church who, and she says, I listened to all your videos, I thought, oh, that's interesting. But, you know, where do you go? Because you mentioned, you know, you write a piece like this, which probably more people, because of course, Dreher picked it up and put it out, way more people read that and have this, their only picture of you is this window into you brought by that piece. But, you know, you show up for mass and you teach in a Catholic school. And so, you know, I deal with the same thing. But in some ways, it's a little bit easier as a Protestant, because we're always sort of chafing against the institution. You're always protesting, right? Yeah, we're always protesting. It's always in front of you, right, Paul? So, I mean, yeah, it's terribly healthy. But yeah, yeah, I know. Right. So, I don't know, Paul. I mean, you know, I didn't write the piece with answers. I wrote the piece because I have real questions. And I don't know why, like when I take my dogs on a walk every morning at 5am, I listen to Peterson podcasts or Weinstein podcasts. You know, I don't listen to church stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And when I listen to Barron now, I want to throw my iPad across the room, because I know the kind of passive aggressive game I feel like he's playing. And it's a lot uglier than it looks on the surface. I mean, you know, they are closing ranks right now. I mean, Paul, when did the McCarrick thing break? Do you know what I'm talking about? When did it break? I don't, I didn't. Over two years ago. And they promised the report any day now. And they've been playing the game like, oh, no, next month. Oh, no, in six months. And you're like, stop it. Like, I'm an adult. Yeah. You know, and it would be nice to have adult conversations. You know, so when I listen, you know, to Jordan Peterson, have a throwdown with Sam, it's like, at the very least, it's an adult conversation. Yeah. Yeah. You know, and when I hear Heather and Brett do their thing about whatever it is they're talking about, like, it's an adult conversation. You know, they have their own blind spots, and they frustrate me, you know, because, you know, but I'm not having, you know, those kind of adult conversations with, I mean, they wouldn't even talk to me. I mean, you've quipped about this before. I mean, who are you? I mean, they're not, you know, I can't talk to the bishop. What would I say? Yeah. You know, but but yeah, you know, I believe in Jesus, you know, I believe in sacraments. I believe that when I go to when I, you know, drag the kids out of bed and drag them up to mass in masks these days, you know, that I'm in the presence of the Lord, like, literally, and so I don't know what to do. I don't know what to do with it. But my sense is that it's not like I think that Peterson is going to save the church, right? I'm not saying that the blindsides are going to save the church. But they've certainly given me some strength of heart that the way that I make sense out of the world can be bolstered or emboldened or or or or entrusted or strengthened by me listening to Eric go off in one of his weirdo cool riffs about blues music or you know, whatever it might be, you know, it's like those things, those things they give me and like, with Peterson in particular, like, man, all these things that I know through theology and scripture and philosophy, like, he's giving me, like, he's firming up my foundations, you know, in a very real way. And he sort of came up to that edge in his conversation he had with you. He said, well, of course, I won't go over that line, because then I'd lose three-fourths of my audience. It was a pretty cagey moment for him there. You know, and I think there's a lot going on. You know, I think he knows what he's doing on some real level. But anyway, so I don't know where that sort of leads me. So I'm going to try to write this piece on Peterson and what the trads can learn from him. I think the funniest piece will be Heather and Eric, Heather and Brad and then Eric. I mean, my gosh, they're going to, you know, who knows? I mean, I might really get kicked out of the tribe then. But I know that they have something important that we need. Like, they're having conversations about very important things that we need, you know. Yeah, I do. I do. And it's not dependent upon being in the good graces of the bishop, right? Right. And that's part of my, you know, and I chaff about against this too. Like, you know, I teach at a Catholic school. I don't want to cause trouble to my headmaster. You know, and that's why I'm, you know, I've been pretty good today. But, you know, that's a real concern. Sure. But like you, I mean, and you know, I love teaching. I mean, I really love teaching. And I hope I get to keep doing it. I mean, we'll see what happens. I suspect you're very good at it, that comes through. Well, I've pestered you with my own curiosity. Anything in our time remaining that you wanted to touch on that we didn't? My gosh, I could talk to you for days. I mean, I really would love, you know, at some point, I'm really interested in your sort of what you think is going to go on with post being after modernism, not being postmodern, after modernism. Part of me suspects though, like everything's kind of on hold right now. We see if we can have life past November, was it 7th? I mean, I just get this sense that everything is going to be really bad. Yeah. Until we can get past this election. You know, I'm not a hugely political person, but it's just sucking all the air out of every room I walk into. And this sort of great awakening is no exception. I don't know what either path looks like depending on which one wins. It's so difficult to know as much as I... Well, here again, Peterson is prophetic, right? If you remember, he was on Maher after first election. He's like, how are you all going to live with each other? And he was right. I mean, he said, yeah, so you think all these things. You think he's basically Hitler with a comb over and maybe is, right? But how are you going to live with half the country who thinks you're the problem and vice versa? So I mean, look, if Biden wins, we lose. If Trump wins, we lose. I don't know how we survive past it, but that's a sort of dark musings on a Tuesday afternoon. Is it Tuesday? Yeah. So no, it's Wednesday. It's Wednesday. Yeah. Those are the dark musings on a Wednesday afternoon after a long day of faculty meetings, I should say. Are you having in-person? We are. Yeah. We're starting on the 14th. We already have a bunch of kids. We're a boarding school, so we already have 35 kids quarantining with us. We bring them meals and the whole thing. So yeah, we're going to be able to start hopefully on the 14th and who knows? Wow. Wow. Well, that's that. Well, we'll have to talk again. Yeah, this has been fantastic Paul. I really appreciate your time. I've been watching you early on, since I stumbled upon Peterson after the Cathy Newman stuff. I think I watched the interview he did with the Danish guy. Yeah, that's very interesting. That was the one that really opened up Peterson to me because at that point, I just thought he was a suspended conservative academic who was cranky about political correctness. And I'm glad that he's sort of doing that, but I didn't care about that stuff but when I saw that interview, I was like, okay, there's some real stuff going on with this guy that I have to take him seriously. And then I think I even probably Googled Christians and Peterson. I think you popped up. That's how I stumbled upon your channel. So thank you for your channel. Thank you for your work. Well, thank you for watching and listening and for the conversation because we're at one of these moments in history where people paying attention, I think, have the understanding that, well, maybe if anybody paying attention knows that there's no obvious script moving forward, it's just a little bit either easier or more tempting to imagine that there is a script writer. Which is ironic because some might say, no, that's the argument for there being no script writer, but who knows. You and I are in the same spot, right? I mean, that's what that's like my frustrations with Verbecky and you know, it's like, and you quiped about this, you know, the rebel wisdom guys, it's like they're just allergic to Jesus. They just can't, you can't possibly entertain that Jesus might be real. You know, it's an audacious thought. I mean, I gotta respect them for it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, no, for sure. But it's like, you can entertain the what if. I mean, look, if I have to entertain the what if on the other side, yeah, yeah, I figure you could give it a shot here. Yeah. Well, and that's where I finally land because it's like, okay, well, there's a lot of unknowns. I'd rather, I'd rather, I'd rather opt, I'd rather lean this way with my unknowns than the other. And so we're back to Pascal, right? Yeah, Pascal. Well, thank you so much, Cale. This has been an absolute delight. God bless you. Please pray for me. I have to write these articles, so I'll pray for your work. All right. Well, I look forward to them. All right. All right. Be well. Okay. Bye-bye.