https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aI4JGNp0dj4

 recording. So how have you been? I'm great, thank you. How are you and how was vacation? Vacation was great. My daughter graduated from college. Oh yeah, oh yeah. I saw that on Twitter that that's so nice. Yeah, so she's home now and she'll have her summer job and then she'll look for a regular job and all the process of getting them out of the nest. Right, it'll take a while before I get there. Yeah, got three out of college, two out of the house. So actually her older brother will move out this month. He's got his own apartment now, but he's got his job so it's like one step at a time, get him out there in the world. Right, right, right and well I guess this gets me to the topic I never got around to last time right, which is parenting, well fatherhood specifically. You know I've said this in the previous chat that being in this is if you told me if you told me five years ago that I would be in this situation now, I would be telling you like are you kidding right, I'd be totally shocked right, but I'd be like, but here I am, I'm married, I got two kids right. How old are your kids? Two-year-old, I have a two-year-old son and my daughter is turning one-year-old this Friday. Little, little, little. Yeah, yeah, they're really little right and then it's strange because I was listening to the Jordan Peterson, Joe Rogan podcast last night in the car. I was on the road, I was going to fetch my wife from her office and there was something that Joe said there that okay so he was talking about, he was talking about, the Jordan was asking him how do you get into stand-up comedy and Joe said well you just got to go there and do it because there are no books, there are no classes that you can sign up for that's going to tell you how to do this. You just have to, number one, look at it, look at the people who are doing it and see how they're doing it and number two, just do it right and you're going to screw up a lot for the first couple of years and that's pretty much it and you know, who was that guy on your channel a couple of weeks ago, he's having a baby I think and he was asking what books and resources and so on, and right. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah but you know we've made, I mean we've attended our fair share of parenting and relationship classes. My mom has given me some books here related to that sort of thing. I bought a couple of my own but fundamentally it's like stand-up comedy as Joe tells it. There's really no one who can, there's really no book or yeah, there's no book, there's no class that you can take that's really going to prepare you for this. You just have to see other people do it and you just have to do it. Well part of it too is, I just finished recording a video on language where, so let's say you read a book about parenting. Right, right. We have a great deal of confidence in this process. I'm going to read a book and then I'm going to apply it. Right. Those are two different systems. What you naturally apply tends to be the way you were parented and so to actually disrupt those patterns with another pattern usually involves, well you might read a book, then you might discuss it with your wife and then you might do something and the other watches you and says this is why parenting with two people is especially parenting with a man and a woman because then you've got two different, you've got two different opinions on it and I'm not trying to discount your father watching your parent or your mother watching your parent but basically, I mean the idea is parenting is so important that one thing is okay, let's say these are good rules about parenting. Okay, well let's gain some wisdom there. Well another thing is getting that wisdom inside of you and actually being able to act it out because what we know is that we hear good advice all the time and we don't live it. This is a big deal. Yeah exactly, otherwise people wouldn't be leaving church. Yeah. You know, the church would be full and all of the emails of the world would have been sold right. It doesn't work that way. No. But I've just, you know, it's been, it's not been a long time, it's been three years and exactly that process that you're talking about I had a good fortune to, I guess, come out of a good household, right. I mean my parents didn't divorce, they're still together, right, and both of my parents were working but they were pretty intentional about it, right, and even up to now I, at least I'm trying to distinguish the part where like I tell my wife, okay this is from the school of parenting of my mom, right, and one of the most important things that I got from that school of parenting is that my mom always says, you know, kids, there are other people except they're smaller, right, right, and I think that's important, that seems trivial, right, but I guess it's important because what that means is that they have their own minds, right, and they have their own personalities, they have their own, they're basically their own thing, right, and a common temptation in modern society is that kids are somewhere between pets and lifestyle accessories. That is true. It's like, no, I don't want the baby, I just want the dog because they're easier to take care of. I'm not sure about that. That might be the title of this talk because and what you just said there, well sometimes they become idols too. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. It is a really complex deal but you're exactly right. Well, I want to get into that but I just want to say something, right, so some people, okay dogs are easier, not necessarily. I have a cousin who has a Saint Bernard, imagine having a Saint Bernard in the Philippines. This is something like, I spent, let me think in my head, what that is in US dollar terms. Oh, I can't imagine because I had, you know, I had in the Caribbean and so I know what it is that live in a tropical climate. I had Rottweilers in the Caribbean that are at least short hair but Saint Bernard in the Philippines, oh yeah, that guy, yeah, yeah, I like that dog. He's a really nice dog but he's in front of the fan. This is what my cousin is, okay, how much do you spend for feeding that dog? This is something like, thinking about this, it comes out to something like $200 a month in the US and I said, you know, this is more than what I spend for my two kids. So yeah, not necessarily guys, right, but anyway, I want to get into that idol part that you said, that's so true and here in the Philippines and I think in the US also there's a very strong, what they call the cult of youth, right, so when I was in school and really this really connects to how Jordan Peterson is managing to reach out to young people, right, because they tell you, you're the young people so you're like the future of the country, like yada yada yada, yada yada, blah blah blah, and I never believed that for one second, right, because I knew my teachers were lying, I knew the priests were lying when they said that, right, all of the authority figures were lying when they said that, basically something to the effect like the youth are going to save the Philippines and they're going to save the world. No, I never believed that for one second, right, and I knew that they were lying and I'm not saying that they were, I'm not saying they were liars, but that's sort of the message that they grew up in and I never believed it for one bit because I knew that I was young and at the same time useless, right, if you're 14 years old, what do you know, right, and I don't think I could even do long division consistently when I was 14, I never went, I don't think I can do so now with all of these gadgets, right, we didn't have smartphones when I was in high school, gosh, I feel old now, I feel old now, but you know, and I think it's right to deconstruct that because you're right, there's a few things going on there, number one, a lot of kids hear that and this, well, you just put a whole lot of pressure on those poor kids because exactly if the kid is smart and self-aware, they know how little they know and number two, it's sort of a humble brag on the part of the present generation that's telling them that because what they're in a sense saying is that the past generations that educated us were morons, we now know things and so we're indoctrinating you in the truth and so it's, you know, in a sense, they're saying more about themselves than they're actually saying about the kids, it's a, and I agree with you 100%, it's a, and Jordan Peterson, I love the way he takes this on, it's a dumb thing to say and it shouldn't be said. It's completely dumb and I now see these, you know, these social media activists or teenagers like the Swedish girl and those and then you have a couple of those school shooting survivors in the US, one is on the anti-gun side and one is on the pro-gun side so basically both guys, David Haag, yeah, now I remember their names and Kyle, whatever the name of that guy is, both sides took two teenagers to say that okay, these are our mascots, right? That's exactly right, these are our mascots, right? That's exactly right, yep. Right and you know, you have to believe them because they're kids, you stupid idiots, no, you don't believe, okay, which gets me to another cultural myth, this is a specific Filipino cultural myth, they say kids don't lie because they're kids and maybe not teenagers, right, but we mean little kids, right? Really? Yeah, kids don't lie and I also never believed that for a second, right, and yeah, maybe not teenagers but some little kids, something like younger than six maybe, they don't lie, but actually they do, they do a lot because I also didn't believe that because I remember lying when I was a kid and I remember lying mainly to get myself out of sick situations and also I remember lying just for the heck, for the sake of a social experiment, you know, because you're a kid, you know, and where was it? I read some report on some psychology research where they found out that kids were smart and I was a smart kid, or at least they said that I was a smart kid, right, and I I did pretty well in school in the early days, so I guess I was, I was smarter than the average kid, they learn how to lie earlier and I guess, okay, so that's all right, I remember lying to my classmates about their being, let's say, because we, let's say we only had PE class, physical education, twice a week and I remember one time my friend asked me, do you, did we have PE today? I said no we didn't, but actually we did, I just wanted to see if he'd believe me and not show up and he didn't show up. I was like, yeah, that sounds really mean now in but you know, I didn't just lie as a kid to get myself out of sticky situations, I also lied to just to see what the heck is gonna happen if I lie, right, yeah, right, and that got me thinking, why do we have this whole cult of use thing and as you said, it's a humble brag, like okay, this generation is going to race, like the generation that's going to cure cancer and colonize Mars and crack nuclear fusion and that sort of thing, and because the ones previous to it are total morons. Yeah, and once you had them, yeah, I've kept, you know, we're getting a long way to deconstructing this narrative now because now we're into the ones who came before are morons. I like the way, you know, modernity is very anti-traditionalist, but I like the way GK Chesterton explained it, right, the tradition is the democracy of the dead, right, so you're not any better just because you're walking around and breathing, right, and there's something to be said about having to learn from the wisdom of your elders. Let me tell you something interesting, right, so here in Filipino or in the Tagalog language, which is what we speak here in Manila, there are two words for that mean old, there's luma, which roughly translates to old, and there's matanda or nakatatanda, so that's the same root word, which generally maps out in English to mean elderly, right, but the word matanda, right, which comes from the word tanda, which means a marker, right, so a marker, so literally when you say matanda, a person who marks out things, or we also use tanda to mean to remember, right, there are actually two words for remember as well, there's alala and there's tanda, alala is more of reminisce and tanda is more of to remember because there's a lesson to be learned out of that, right, so you never, in English, like you never refer to objects as elderly, right, but in Tagalog you never refer to people as luma, because that just means oh that guy's worn out, right, maybe if you're being really insulting, right, and yeah, that guy's luma, that means he's like so worn out he couldn't stand up, that would be the, I mean if it was a if it was a white guy saying it would excuse him, but if he looked Filipinos, like you're being insulting, right, because that's the connotation, and in Asia generally there's a lot of respect for elders, right, but at the same time we're probably the second most Americanized culture here in the East, the first one being Korea, right, yeah, I watched, you know, my wife and I continue to watch these Korean dramas and I'm just constantly amazed at the ritualized respect for people older than yourself, I mean how they drink and hand gestures and I don't understand Korean, I know that's, I hear that it's, you know, it's built into the language, but that's such a stark difference from, you know, in at least in American culture just so dismissive of anyone who's older, it's really pretty brutal. Yeah and you know the song Father and Son, yeah, by Cat Stevens, yeah, yeah, let me just pull up the lyrics, there's actually a song in Tagalog by a popular group that's, it's actually the same song, right, and this is the same song in the same sense that Jordan Peterson says it's the same story, it's the same song, it's an elder person and a younger person talking and the elder says that you have to listen to me because I know how things work and the younger person says no, no, no, no, I have to see for myself how this is, right, and at some point I noticed those, yeah, this Father and Son and there's the Tagalog song which is Batang Bata Kapa, right, so which means you're still very young, that's what it literally means and I noticed they're the same song, but the way the younger person talks in Batang Bata Kapa is very differential, it's something like, yeah, I know I'm still young, I still have a lot to learn but I want to see for myself because I want to see the different colors and vagaries of life and I have my own rights, whereas, yeah, I just loaded up the lyrics here for Father and Son and the tone is very different, yeah, how can I try to explain because when I do He Turns Away Again, it's been the same, same old story, the moment I could talk, I was ordered, yeah, that's the word that he used to listen, there's a way and I know I have to go away, right, that's just like so, this is such a market difference and it's the same song, right, but the Tagalog song is very differential to the elder, at least the way the young person is talking, the way the elder person is talking, they actually sound pretty similar, yeah, but well I think, yeah, well I think American society has lost, parents are now, it was so interesting when I was reading Jordan Peterson's 12 Rules for Life for the first time and I was listening to his child-rearing advice and that part of the book got quite a bit of criticism, yeah, chapter five, that's my favorite, yeah, and I was reading it and I thought, sounds like my mom, I mean, the way Jordan Peterson describes, you know, but my mom was not, my mom's probably going to listen to this too, but my mom was not intimidated by a child and she understood that, you know, that little squirt's going to have to learn how to put him or herself to sleep, going to have to learn how he or she behaves and fortunately my wife grew up from in the same school and my children grew up in fear of my wife in some way, she was by no means, I mean, she didn't, I mean, my children got very, very few spankings and especially, I think, maybe the oldest got a few and then the second one, but after him it's like, after that we didn't have to, you know, timeouts and so, but my children all grew up to, all grew up in a sense this fear, it's not really fear, it's not that they're afraid of their parents, you know, we have good relationships with our children, but to respect them and I look around in society and I see so many parents who, they're not parents and kids need parents, so I thought Peterson's chapter five was just very good and very commonsensical and much needed because I see parents, people are afraid of their children and Peterson is right, have your, the world, raise a respectful kid that knows how to deal with a boss, knows how to deal with an employer, knows how to be an employee, knows how to learn, is teachable, if your child has all those things, they will go far because the world will enjoy having them around. If you raise a brat, poor that poor kid, they're gonna have a tough time. Yeah, yeah, gosh, so well, and we dealt with, you know, so when, you know, when we lived in the Dominican Republic, with, you know, it was a very strange experience for us to have domestic help, so we had a woman, a Dominican woman who worked in our home and my oldest son Philip was very young then and one of the things that we kind of had to train our, train Angela, who worked in our home was, the kid is not in charge of you and, you know, because I saw a number of situations in the Dominican Republic where kids were ordering around adults and I thought, not my kid, and when I was growing up, you know, I was growing up in the 60s and 70s and my parents taught us, that's Mr. Clark and that's Mr. Prather and some of the adults would say, no, call me Bill and my mother would look at me like, you're not calling him Bill, it ain't gonna happen and so, you know, and then the adults, but what that created in us was a healthy respect for our elders and part of this is just from the Bible, you know, it's from, it's the fourth commandment, honor your father and mother and part of that is show respect to elders. There are plenty of stories out there where people are not worthy of respect but part of respect is, it doesn't matter so much how worthy they are of it, it's a self-discipline within you and I'm so impressed. Yeah, it's just, how do I say this, I mean, even my own kids, yeah, they're now, they're now, like, this is so little, especially my son, I'm just surprised how much daddy superpowers I have that my wife doesn't have, right, and well, and I'm not talking about, you know, those things that are going viral now, right, those daddy reflexes, speaking of which, just this morning I almost woke my wife up because I was dreaming that my daughter was falling off a ledge and actually lunged to reach out to catch her and I physically lunged out of my bed, oh, okay, yeah, yeah, yeah, right, but what I'm talking about is more of, my kid, look, I took Jordan Peterson's personality test and they came out to something like first percentile agreeableness, right, and my wife, I think, she's pretty disagreeable for a woman, so I guess she's, I'm a lot more disagreeable, but I'm guessing she's something like, she didn't take the test, but I'm guessing that she's somewhere around 20%. You couldn't get her to take the test, could you? She's high and disagreeable. Yeah, yeah, she's high, never agreeableness. Yeah, and so are my kids, right, and my kid is extremely stubborn and I tell my wife, look, that kid, just let him be, let him make some of his own mistakes, even though that's his little, and he climbs up the stairs and he's fallen off at once, but he can run around and he falls and, yeah, just like in the Dominican Republic, like here in the Philippines, having domestic help is very common, right, they just go around and some people, they look for odd jobs and then they do some, we've hired our own right now and they're mostly there, they look for other jobs and then they leave and then you hire somebody else, right, and when I see a lot of the other kids, right, running around and then they fall and then you have all of the moms and all of the nannies chasing after that kid to pick him up and I remember physically stopping the, because we were at the party and our nanny and the other kids were running to chase my kid and they were like, say, stop, right, let him pick himself up and normally, he's really cute the way he does this, he falls over and then he stands up and then he shakes himself down and says, I'm okay, I'm okay, and all of the other kids are, he's, my wife is the youngest among her cousins, so all of the other kids, all of his other cousins are older and so he gets pushed around a lot and he can take it, right, and just, there are lessons to be learned by, and I remember, I was just having some drinks with a high school classmate of mine last week that I haven't met for, gosh, something like 13 years or for 14 years, yeah, probably more, right, because he went to the States, joined the Air Force and went to college and stuff and he came back for, because his brother got married, right, so, but anyway, we were talking about some of our, like, school playground exploits and how, there was this one time I turned the tables on the bully, it was that guy who was the class bully, right, and he tormented everybody and when it was my turn, I had an umbrella and I beat that guy out really bad, right, because that happens when there's no teacher and I don't remember and nobody told the teacher what happened, but everyone was staring at me holding the umbrella, screaming at this kid and nobody bothered me again, right, and if my parents found out about that or if anybody else's parents found out about that, if the teachers found out about that, there would be hell to pay, but then there would have been no lessons learned, yeah, right, because the way the whole anti-bullying thing works now is so counterproductive, I mean, okay, so if things get really out of hand, the adults have to intervene, but a small thing, an insult, a minor shove, things like that, the kids have to know how to deal with that because you as a parent are not always going to be there, right, and they have to find out that, okay, if nobody's going to be here for me, how do I, there was another incident in high school where I got, well, I wasn't really beat up, but someone was chasing me throwing punches at me and I just ran away, and the next day, that guy was still challenging me to a fight after school during recess, there were a lot of witnesses, and I tell people this was a formative event because I learned office politics that day, so what I did, that guy was a year older than me and he was part of the basketball team, so he was very, you know, I was a nerd, right, and he was challenging me to a fight, but then it was during recess and there were a lot of people who saw it, so the first thing I did, I was really scared, I was actually very scared out of my wits, and I had, what I did, I talked to the other big tough guys in my class, right, because they knew me, and I just asked them, hey, do you know this and that guy, right, yeah, yeah, we know him, he's part of the team, yeah, he's, he, and yeah, because, and then all, and then the other, the other kids would come in and say, yeah, because there was this incident earlier during recess where he was challenging you to a fight and that, and then I told the teacher, so I first, and I don't think I was really, I was just scared, in hindsight, the way I'm telling this story makes it seem like I'm very smart, not really, I just sort of stumbled into the solution by accident, right, and again, it didn't involve teachers until the very last minute, so as I first started building a coalition, among the other kids, right, and especially those who are, especially among the jocks, right, and then they would figure out, because then they, they would, if I told the teacher first, they would probably not be very sympathetic, but since I told them first and they're like, now, hey, well, why doesn't that guy pick on someone his own size and so on, and then I told the teacher, and then, actually, they suggested to me, less of the teacher, right, and that's, that's when you do it. Yeah, well, you learn, right, but, I mean, that was an important lesson in terms of, you know, people want, there's a lot, there's a, wisdom is, wisdom is being able to navigate a situation that you don't know how to navigate based on other situations, and learning from others, and so you practice, yeah, you use the community to figure out how, really, because you don't want a community in which some people are just beating up other people because they can, so, so the community comes around and says, that's not how, that's not how we are going to live, and, you know, obviously, when you get into high school age, it's a different story than if you're in, if you're in playground, you know, elementary school age, in terms of what's appropriate, the damage that can be done by people, so on and so forth, and so, yeah, you figure it out. Yeah, and then again, that, that, that story makes it sound like I was very smart about it, but I stumbled upon the solution by accident, and some lessons you just have to learn by accident. Yeah, yeah, that's true. School of hard knocks, right, no book, again, going back to the Joe Rogan, at the Powerface Joe Rogan, no book, no, no class is going to teach you this. Yeah, yeah. And certainly the way that, you know, it, it's, it's gotten, I guess it's gotten so bad there in the States that they have no safe spaces and things in college, of all places. Yeah, that doesn't really help because there's not, there's this strange, we want to take down the authorities because, you know, they're morons, but then we want to run to them because they're going to save us from all of this racist and, and, and so on. Yeah, that you can't have it both ways, right? But there's, you have to be able to, you know, keep a balance between, there's a tension there, you have to both respect authority and at the same time recognize, you know, have enough, yeah, I guess the word is wisdom, have enough wisdom to know, you know, I like the way Jordan Peterson puts it. Do things the way everybody's doing it because there's a reason why everybody's doing it, right? And then how, how like, if you, if you, and then like break rules, I mean, don't follow stupid rules, break rules judiciously, right? Because the rules are there for a reason, you know, and, and yeah, chess are fans, you know, and everything, you just can't keep, and that, that's what a book and a class cannot teach you, is how to distinguish those situations where, okay, and you know, I've worked for huge corporations where everyone is just a stickler about following the rules, and it is insane. You just have so much paperwork, and you have these guys who are setting up meetings to basically ask for permission to, for extremely trivial things, right? And, and that's just a complete waste of time. Guys, you're grown adults, you have college degrees, you can do this by yourself, but no, we can't, because, you know, the process says that we have to, you know, fill out this form and get signatures from, from, from this and that, right? And you have to know how to, right, I, I'm getting scattered brain at the moment, but let me just jump on to, to another point that I remember reading in the book, right? The job of a parent is to make himself useless as quickly as possible, right? And, yeah, and, and I immediately knew what that meant, and, and there is this, there is this strong tendency, I guess it's a stronger tendency among mothers than it is among dads, right? To, yeah, just, just baby your babies because they're babies. And, and I remember my wife and I were talking in the car, because I go to, every weekend I go to my parents' house, so this is the, just so they can see the kids, right? And, and my, my, my mom especially loves, loves little kids, right? And my little kids love her back very much, and they hate it when we, when we leave. And my son will be kicking and screaming and crying, at least until he gets into the car and gets his milk bottle. And my wife, my wife told me, there's going to be some point that that milk bottle trick is going to stop working. And he said, you know, that's a good thing, because that means that kid is growing up. Right? He's going to figure out that it's a trick, so you have to find out some other trick. Yeah. Right. And, and, and I tell my friends, because, well, a lot of them are also married now, but we're all, you know, young. And I was, I wasn't the earliest, I wasn't the youngest who got married, but I was among the youngest who got married. So the very funny thing happened, people started approaching me for relationship and parenting advice. It's like, that's so strange. Since when did I become the group expert in this? Well, you are now. Yeah. Yeah. I told one of them, said, you know, to be a parent is to live in the domain of chaos. And she was like, is that, is that a good thing or a bad thing? Yeah, it's not a good, it's not, it's neither. It's just a thing. Yeah. Yeah. And, and I make jokes about, you know, if you're, you will learn physics when changing a diaper, right? Yeah. Classical mechanics. You have that projectile motion and that, and because you will see that that parabolic arc getting drawn in the air as you're changing the diaper. And the kids decides to, well, you know, I just want to do it now while you're changing me. Yeah. Yeah. I make fun of that. But, you know, like I said in the last video, do you ever get tired of it? Like, of course I do, but what worthwhile thing isn't going to exhaust you at the end of the day? Right. And nothing to me is more delightful than coming home from the office. Right. I'm very lucky here in Manila. It's a premium. If you live 10 minutes away from the office, because traffic is just so bad. Right. Right. Think of, I know you, yeah, I'm like, I think of LA traffic as bad. You ain't seen nothing yet. Come to Asia, people. Yeah. I've seen pictures and just having lived in a country where traffic does not flow like it does in the United States and the Dominican Republic. So, so, you know, the road would cross a train track. And so a train would come. And so normally everyone just stays in their lane. Well, the Dominican Republic, they would, so the car in front would stop and then a car would go on the shoulder. Then the car would go on the other lane and then the car would go on the other shoulder. So the train would be gone and you had, and this would happen on both sides. Yeah. All these cars. And it's like, people, don't you know what's going to happen when the train goes away? And so then it's like everybody honks and you know, 10 minutes sorted out and on it goes. It'd be like. I think it's actually gotten better since, I mean, the driver discipline has gotten better, I think, but then there are more cars. So, I mean. Yeah. I believe it. Yeah. Where were we? Well, the job of parent is to make yourself useless as quickly as possible. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's to make yourself useless as quickly as possible. And I think part of the reason, I mean, you mentioned that, so you were one of the earliest to get married. You're probably one of the earliest in your peer groups to have children. It's interesting how, again, we have this built in, we have this built in natural tendency to look for someone who's a little bit ahead of us. And you might say, well, why would they ask me? But part of it is context, because if you're a peer group, you know, you just have this bond with your peer group and then you all sort of do it together. And that's a fun thing in terms of parenting too. And I look at young parents often and you know, it's because the irony is that, so my oldest child is 28 now. Yeah, it's 28. And things have changed a lot in 28 years. And so someone having a child now, some things are the same, some things are sort of timeless, but other things have changed a lot in 28 years. So people naturally look to their peers. They look to experts, they look to parents, they very much crowdsource that knowledge. And hopefully somewhere in the mix, if they have any wisdom, they'll do okay. Crowdsource, crowdsource. Okay, so there's a word that I want to latch onto. And I just want to connect this with this whole Jordan Peterson phenomenon and how you've been talking about like modernity versus post-modernity, etc. Right? Crowdsource. Okay, so one thing that one major blind spot I would say of the secular materialists, the rationalist people, okay, so we can just figure out everything because we are smart. Well, number one, you're not as smart as you think. Right? And you know, that's just an appeal to authority because this is an appeal to tradition. Well, why not? You know, I mean, if you, it's not okay, just because something is set by an authority, just because something has been traditional, does not mean it's the right thing. But it's a good place to start. And it's just the world is just way too complex, just way too big for you to be able to pack it in your head. Like how long does it take someone to, let's say, get a PhD or get an MD? Right? It takes a decade, right? Before you get to that point. And you're simply never going to be able to, and then what, and like, what the hell is peer review anyway? This is just basically appeal to authority, right? Gosh, that whole, it's not in a peer review journal, right? Because it was set by some, but it was set by some authority, like guys, what the hell is peer review anyway? It's an appeal to authority and that authority being your peers, who presumably are about as familiar in your field as you are. This is like my friends asking me, how do you go about this and that? Right? It's not a bad thing. It's not a bad thing, right? Because we just have to, we were social creatures, right? And maybe we were cats, but then cats also learn from other cats, and they also learn from the environment, right? So we're not angels there. Oh, we are not. Yeah. We are not angels. And, you know, here's, okay, so here's a, here's a heretical thought, right? Because in the previous video, there were some good nature jokes about saint worshipping by a bunch of Lutherans in there, right? If you want to take the edge of your modernity, pay to a saint. Because I remember you mentioned secular modernity as late stage Protestantism, right? And like, why, like why pay to a saint? I'm not going to get into the theology, because that's a whole other kind of worms, and I'm not the expert on this. But I've done it, and it works. Okay. And, you know, you can test the spirit, right? You can, you can, you can, like, you can, like fence your little prayer and say, like, Jesus, if this is a sin, please forgive me. And to, I don't know, who do you pray to? I guess if you're a Baptist, you pray to Billy Graham, or something like that. And say that, ask for a small favor, right? That your mother-in-law gets well, because she's in the hospital. Right? I'm not praying to Billy Graham. We don't know what those, we don't know what those with the Lord can see or not. But I think if you prayed to Billy Graham, you'd get an answer, something like Samuel gave to Saul. Why are you bothering me? What's wrong with you praying to me? That might be the case. That might be the case. And then you might be surprised that he gets around to doing it. I've just, I've just offended the Protestants here because I asked them to pray. I've just offended the Catholics for saying that. I ain't praying to Billy Graham. That's funny. Well, we're about out of time. You got any last minute things? I gotta close it up and walk around a little bit for my next conversation. Yeah, sure. Sure. Okay. Okay. So, yeah, just to take off your, take off the edge of your modernity, right? It's a, you know, praying to saints, you know, just, I just want to wrap up that point. You know, praying to saints is a strange phenomenon because, you know, why would the Lord need assistance from the saints, right? And, you know, if, again, there's a lot of things to unpack here, but if you go with, let's say, Catholic and Orthodox ecclesiology, right? So, like the saints are part of the church and that's part of the whole crowdsourcing thing, right? So, and you're not alone, me, Jesus, and my Bible, right? So, you're you and there's me and there's Paul VanderKlay and there's, you know, Billy Graham and so on, right? They're all part of the church and that whole thing is part of the whole economy of grace that the Lord has set up, you know, and, you know, not to, you know, go and go back down to earth, right? Not, my wife asked me this once. Is parenting now harder than it was before? And again, you said a lot of things have changed in 30 years. Some of the things are good, some things are bad, but one particular thing, one particular pitfall in modern parenting is that it's no longer the community, it's an armistice. It's an armistice, right? Like I said in the last video, what do you want to be? And the answer to that is usually, what, CEO of Fortune 500 company, President of the United States. I want to be an astronaut. How many astronauts are there? There are like a dozen of them, right? How many presidents of the United States? Just one. One at a time. Yeah, how many how many Fortune 500 CEOs are there? Only 500 of them. Right? And that whole thing, right? You can draw a straight line from what do you want to be for when you grow up to two things. One is the college admissions scandal, right? You can draw a straight line from here to there. Right? Right. And if it's not the college admissions scandal, it's the hikikomori phenomenon. You know the hikikomori phenomenon in Japan. There are something like half a million young men who are simply disengaged. You know, you guys think you've got an in-cell problem. That's nothing on the hikikomori phenomenon. They just don't, they just never go out of the house. They don't have jobs. They don't have relationships with anybody. Really? They just stay in the house. Half a million men. Wow. Right? So if, you know, when Jesus said in the gospels, mamayuk is easy and my burden is light. And then you read that other passages says, and like, how do you reconcile those two? Right? And we're out of time, but I'll just wrap this up. There's still a lot of things to unpack here. Maybe in another conversation. Compare Christ's burden versus the burden of the world. Right? So we say, like for example, in Opus Dei, we teach people, you have to try to be at the top 1% of your profession or your trade, which is not actually so hard. Just apply the, I call it the Peterson Adams rule, after Jordan Peterson and Scott Adams. Just get good at multiple things and start intersecting. And for me, this is the true intersectionality. Start intersecting your competencies and you will find some niche where you are the best at it. Yeah. And I've seen disabled people, you know, and sick people who are very good at what they're doing because of Peterson Adams. But then you have the burden of the world, which is you're not only to be the top 1% of your profession, you have to be at the top 0.000001% of your profession. And at the same time, there's no grace, there's no mercy. If you don't become CEO, you don't become, like, if you don't make, if you're like basketball but you don't get into the NBA, you're garbage. That's the burden of the world. So that versus the burden of Christ. So it's like a cross versus carrying a container ship. I like that. I have to go because the other guys don't want to leave them online. But I will end that. Yeah, I can wrap it with that. Yeah, that's all I wanted to say for now. Okay. Okay, Carlos, I've been talking to you again. I see the sun is up. Yep. And I already had my coffee, so I'm going to take my breakfast now. Today begins. All right, Carlos, take care. All right. You too. Thanks, Paul. Bye.