https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rVYHoUVGmC0

 All right. Why don't you, we've never met before, so why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah, it's quite surprising. Oh, you just broke up. It's quite surprising that you meet these strangers. Oh yeah, there you go. Why not? Why not? Hope I'm not breaking up too much. I'm not sure about the quality of the transmission here. Okay, okay. So yeah, I'll talk a little bit myself. Yeah, I wrote a little snippet here about who I am. Well, I currently live in Montreal, Canada, and I've been here like all my life. So the French part of Canada, right near where Jonathan Paget lives as well. And so I grew up with Korean parents. So you talk a lot about the Korean revival and it really relates to me because, yeah, well, the legacy of the revival, you know, no effects me as well. And so, you know, obviously my parents have a Presbyterian background and I currently attend a Pentecostal church. I used to attend the Korean Presbyterian churches here in Montreal. I switched around quite a couple of times with my family. And then my parents had enough of all the Korean Presbyterian like drama. Yeah, exactly. And they're like, oh, you know what, for you, for your sake, we're going to go to a Pentecostal, like English church or white people church, we would call it. A white people church. And now we're now I'm at this Pentecostal church in Montreal, a pretty big one. I think it's the biggest one in the Montreal area. Mind you that, you know, Montreal is a highly secular, like Quebec itself is a very highly secular province. Like, I don't know if you knew about that. And so, like, obviously I grew up within like a social, like socially liberal frame, like a paradigm. And, you know, just into like, just thinking about who I am, I'm trying to be very honest. I guess a lot of like, you know how I hate to associate socially being socially liberal to sexually immoral as well. And I think I was plagued by that sort of thinking a lot. And so, like, don't mind, you can ask questions as we're going, because I just wrote about a half page and a half of snippet here. I don't know if it's going to be enough to cover the whole hour, but. We'll have no problem with the hour, trust me. Seldom is there a problem with an hour. And so, yeah, there's something about that in my mind. I still associate social liberal with, because. Sexually libertine probably, those two. Sexually libertine. Because they often, well, in the course of the sexual revolution, that was a very pretty tight association. But I think you're right in challenging it, because obviously in the United States in terms of our politics, We had the Barack Obama, the Democrat, lived like almost like a Puritan except for his smoking, which his wife wanted him to stop. And now we've got Donald Trump who appeals to the conservatives. Libertine is a good word for him. So you're right in terms of challenging those facile relationships. Yeah, yeah. And so now I'm going to start, like, I'm not going to talk about my whole 23 years of living, but I'm going to talk about the. And you were worried about filling the hour? I was reflecting upon what's more important according to my current journey with Jordan Pearson and the church. Okay. And how I could bring Jordan Pearson within the church framework and how I've been working towards that kind of mindset. So I think my journey starts with the journey of chaos, obviously, you know, of depravity, of some sort of destruction in my life. And about a year and a half ago, I went through an episode of death anxiety. And so I don't know if you've dealt a lot with people. No, I haven't. Okay. So death anxiety is. Okay. So I guess it's just like a huge, huge dread, a huge like fear of death. Like, like, and it's also very tough to talk about because it's such a strong thought in your head that you're afraid that if you speak of it with someone else, they might catch it as well. And because it's such a dominant because it's such a dominant thought in your mind. Like, so I was just thinking about death. Like, I'm just a statistic. I have a zero point zero zero, somewhat percent of dying every single year. And and even though I, which is silly, even though I grew up with a faith. My naturalistic frame of work wouldn't allow me to actually believe in an afterlife, right? The resurrection of the body. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So it's a very hard concept to talk about because it's still the unknown. No one's. We can't empirically say what happens after death, right? It's it's it's still a great unknown. It's a dragon of chaos, I guess. And and so it comes with great depression. Like most of the time I would have I would feel like there's a great big hole in my chest and there was better days and worse days. And and so this period almost lasted a year and it gradually went down. November 2017 was was the start date, I think it was an on and off thing. And then boom, I broke up with my then girlfriend and just the chaos flooded in like like that. And and so it kind of possessed me. It it helped me. And and and about for a whole year. It's also associated with crazy dreams. So I I don't think the symptom, but when you're when you're when you're when you're like head when you're drowning in chaos, I think the only thing that could happen would be like terrible dreams. You know, like terrible dreams is something that probably happens quite often for people that are drowning in chaos. And so there's this great chaos in my life. And from that point, November 2017 to today, I've had about three, four apocalyptic dreams, like very lucid apocalyptic dreams. And I've talked about this with Christian counselors and, you know, no one really gives me a solid answer. I really don't know what to do about it. But there's there were messages within these dreams. First one was probably associated with like I probably should have broken up with my non believing girlfriend sooner or something like that. And so, yeah, I know I also had a hypnagogic hallucination. So that's one where I wake up and I'm still in dream state and around me still appear as if there was something. This area that I'm actually sitting on was actually a little girl in my room. And so I got up and I shook the chair. And once I felt the fabric within my hands, I was like, this is a chair. And the girl quickly turned into a chair. And I was like, my heartbeat was racing so hard. And so when I think about these episodes, like I want to tell these episodes because I was talking, I was listening to the podcast of the guy involved in cults and he saw a being of light. Yep. Yep. And I was like, I resonate with that so much because. Because it's experiences that are very close, closely linked to what I've experienced. Like, I'm pretty sure that might happen to me at any moment. Yeah, which is interesting for me because whenever I feel like and I'm being very evangelical here, I understand. I don't know if this is just say what you think. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And you could you could interject any at any moment. I feel like whenever I feel God's presence, the closest, like a powerful purifying presence, right. A holy presence. I shy away from it because I'm so afraid of his presence. And I have a lot of friends in my entourage, Christian friends. I've made Christian friends since then, ever since I switched into a Pentecostal background. Like very charismatic friends are like, if you truly. And it's a struggle. And if you truly are acceptance of God's grace, like that shouldn't happen. It's interesting thing. Like she doesn't she didn't say it. That's what she said. That was her judgment on what you just told me about being scared or being a little reluctant with respect to God's sense in God's the strength of God's presence. Exactly. Exactly. That's that's her judgment. She wasn't she never says things in a condemning way. She says it in a manner to be helpful. And I'm like, OK, I understand. That was her evaluation of it. Well, it's valuation judgment. But yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm tracking. Keep going. OK, great. Because, you know, obviously, I've been listening to you a long time and I know you're a very smart guy and you have a lot of experience. So I'm not afraid of you losing track of of whatever I'm about to say. And then so so that's anxiety. Right. We're back at the anxiety. There's a lot of chaos in my life. Right. And I I got in. And so I started investigating near the near death experiences. And so near the experiences are like just people that died of heart attack or like brain dead, presumably, and experience something on the other side, because it's an obvious track from from from where I was. Like, I'm afraid of dying. So I have to, you know, verify in it within a rather empirical framework work. If the afterlife exists and and and and it kind of and that experience kind of really shook like experiencing investigating those experiences kind of like kind of shook a little bit of of whatever like a little little little dent was kind of a little dent was was was caused by it, it within my naturalistic framework. And I was like, OK, OK, I could accept that. And so the supernatural kind of slowly flood came in could come into my life. I'm actually reading Miracles right now in the first few chapters of CSU is Miracles and how they're talking about the difference between natural and the supernatural. And like, yeah, that's that's sort of what happened. Like I'm I'm breaking the shell of naturalism, right of materialism in my life. And I'm letting sort of, I guess, God's presence fill in fill into my life. But I wasn't seeing it initially. And so and so let me check. Yeah, so I was investigating paranormal activities as well. And then I started reading, started reading. Actually, I never actually read. I was a typical Asian boy playing my video games. Relatively, I think I'm relatively good at school. So like I'm currently studying civil engineering. I'm finishing my bachelor's degree. And, you know, it was it was easy right for me. But, you know, as we know, easy is not the way to go. You have to carry a burden. And, you know, I associate some of my fall into chaos because I I took life with such a great level of flippancy. Like it didn't matter to me. I was like video game, like drinking, clubbing. Like it just didn't matter to me. Right. And it changed within the year and a half now with the near death experience. I really enjoy this chaotic episode of my life. I'm grateful for it because or not I wouldn't be feeling so much of God's providence today. Right. And I'm getting to the Dern of Pearson part. You're doing fine. You're doing fine. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So and so throughout this time, I was talking to my evangelical buddies, my Pentecostal buddies, my my actually my student pastor, my young adults and youth pastor. He does a really good job. He's a very open person and very agreeable. And and he really has a gift of being a good pastor. And I was during this time, I was like wondering if I should stay in the church because like all these near death experiences don't actually relate to to Jesus. Some of them do, but some of them meet Buddha. And I'm like, what's happening here? If this is the one true religion, shouldn't they all meet Jesus? Now you're talking about near death experiences that you've been reading about. I've been reading about. Exactly. Not near death experiences. Now you're not having multiple near death experiences. No, I'm not. I'm not repeatedly dying and coming back. Just wanted to be clear. Yeah. Yeah. And so, yeah, he just kept me in the church and I still have to battle with these highly Christian these terms, right? Like giving yourself up and and all of these sorts of lingo. And I'm like in the Holy Spirit, that's something I struggle with deeply initially. And so, you know, what best to cure my my doubt about my faith than to read apologetics. So I delve deep into Rabbi Zacharias books. And I'm actually interested to think about what you think. What do you think about those evangelical apologetics books? But we'll talk about that later if we have time. And then and then C.S. Lewis, actually, I started reading Near Christianity. And and this is about three months before I started reading 12 rules. And so I started with Near Christianity. And I like, wow, this guy, very smart guy. Right. And I'm like, you sort of explaining what the Holy Spirit is. And I'm and I'm struggling with this. And as you know, the Pentecostals are really strong in talking about the presence of God. And I'm like, OK, that's interesting. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I could I could sort of make something of it with my background in quantum physics and like like how like everything's a wave. Everything is a everything's a presence in this form, but in a wave like form. So like, OK, that could be a spirit. Right. And I'm OK. And then C.S. Lewis explains what it is. It's when it's when you're fleshing out Christ likeness or something like that. I'm paraphrasing terribly and I have to be really careful of my words because I haven't read Near Christianity in a long time. Yeah. So fleshing out. Being less of yourself and and being more of Christ. OK, I get that. But it's hard to let go of my naturalistic presuppositions. It's hard to let go. My sexual libertine. That's right. It's hard to let go. And it's a pride within. And I discovered how how deadly pride is. And like and then pride, let go of pride, that demon pride. And I always struggle with it. Right. And I love how C.S. Lewis talks about how like the pride pride is the the king demon. It's it's the one that that that comes before all. Right. You need pride for lust. You need pride for gluttony. You need pride for every every sin. And you just like you just need to. And you just need to think that your will is better than God's. You know, you know best. It's just like I'm like and I struggle with this every day because obviously and I associate this with my Korean background. Koreans are very prideful people. Yes. Pride is extremely prideful people. And it came down on me and my dad has a very short temper. And I had one too. I'm trying to battle it so bad every day. And so and I started reading Sword of the Kickerguard and it's like, yeah, you're a naturalist. Well, in within any axiom, you can you can find yourself regretting the actions that you do. Right. Like you will eventually even regret committing your own suicide, like committing like you'll regret, you know, getting married to this girl. Like just me and I'm paraphrasing. I think it's just just let go. Just let the spirit God take hold of you. And and that's when the shell started breaking. And so and then I started listening to Ben Shapiro and so before Jordan Peterson. And so I would watch these videos of Ben Shapiro because I would associate my chaos with with social like the social liberal framework, a frame that I would live in, especially Montreal and like a metropolitan city. And like I was like I was like hating on whatever I used to hold. Like I was hating who I was like like like the sexual morality in my life, all these like things that I would do that came up to it. And I'm like, I just used to I hated it so much. And so Ben Shapiro was my gateway drug to that. I was like, oh, but he's like, oh, this guy is on on media and he's telling all these things that I don't like. And he's telling all these things that I don't like, like that finding things for me to cues. And I realized not a great thing. I realized, you know, it's don't blame don't blame the world for your sins, you know, and that's that's where I stand now. But back then I would I was I was, you know, I was very happy that I found Ben Shapiro. And then I would see like Jordan Pearson in the equation. And I'm like, OK, this guy talks about Christ. OK, but he's not very he doesn't use Christian these terms. He's probably a charlatan. Like he's probably like a snake oil salesman using Christianity for his own benefit to go to get on the show. And and so I paused and Jordan Pearson for a bit. And I kept reading more rather Zechariah's books. And during the summer of twenty eighteen, I I took I took a swing at 12 rolls and I started reading 12 rolls and I saw the parallels that Jordan Pearson has with with C.S. Lewis. And I know you emphasize that on a lot. And I saw it like straight away. His relationship with consciousness. I took a great interest in consciousness. Right. So because if you want to live after life, the only thing that actually matters is your consciousness. Right. And so he took he takes a big emphasis on consciousness and I realized I'm like, OK, yeah, this guy, this guy might have something and finished 12 rolls. And like 12 rolls really put the framework of like how to within a rather materialistic frame of work, right, evolutionary framework. Yep. Flush out the commandments of Christ. Right. The biblical principles. And it was really helpful. But now from that frame of work, I'm trying to work towards like how to work out my spiritual life. Right. And. And it could I think it might occupy the same space. Right. We talk a lot about super superposition and in quantum physics and. And like, you know, some things might be super positioning. Right. So like this, the psyche and the spirit. Right. And in my position, like at a certain point, I like. And yeah, I mean, that's where I'm at. And I'm on the Jordan Pearson train full on right now. Like all this thing. But at the same time, I use it to help my spiritual life. I use it like through him. These biblical principles are passed down to me and I can understand them. And I'm and I'm able to live. Like a better Christian life, a spiritual life that's that's better than it was before. And now I'm reading, I'm writing all thanks to him. All thanks to Jordan Pearson. All of like, because it makes sense. And then I'm and then he he gives also understanding of what the Holy Spirit might be as well. Like the spirit, like in that video, I think. I don't know who he did this interview with, but when he was asked about if he believes in God and. I and I believe that he does. I believe that he does. He does believe in God. I think I think he has enough in him. To be and I'm thinking about it in the great divorce framework work. Jordan Pearson comes up to refrigirium, right? Oh, yeah. Jordan Pearson comes up to refrigirium. I think he'd be able to bow his head down and accept Christ as a savior in this afterlife. And I think that's the point of understanding God saving grace is that you just have to bow it out. But it's the pride that you have the devil, right? The pride is devil, right? Lucifer Morningstar, right? He's the highest and he fell to the lowest point. It's because of pride, right? Because it represents pride and you have to let that go. You just have to let that go. And you could and you could feel the full embrace of the Lord. Right. And and and I guess that's where I'm at right now. And I'm in constant conversation with these great friends of mine, like this one friend of mine. I'm going to name drop her Crystal, she's because she's an important part right now. And Crystal is really helping me out with because her knowledge of like she's one of those evangelicals. She used to work for the Salvation Army and she knows like all these Bible verses by heart. And like I'm still new to it because I only start like actually reading. And this is this is where I'm at with my faith. I've actually only started reading the Bible about a year ago around this time. And I'm right now a Deuteronomy. I finished I finished the whole New Testament and then I'm a Deuteronomy now. And so this is where I'm at. And it's it's all thanks to just read, just sacrifice your time. Stop playing the video game and sacrifice your time to a better understanding of God. And and just like I really know that that's that's that's what John Pearson has done to me. Wow. And that's great. I guess. God's grace. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's really good. That's really wonderful. Yeah. That's really wonderful. So why talk to me? Why talk to you? Well, I found you. You're the. You're the. I want to know more more about this because you talk about like ecumenical conversations, right? We need to have these conversations. Our angles are so finite and like, I mean, you're a man of significant intelligence as well and experience as well. And I and and I can't find that in my entourage, especially now. And that's why I was like, I'm going to use another evangelical term. And I like to preface everything that I say that are evangelical for your listeners, if we're ever going to put this like like that, I feel called. Yeah. Kind of felt called to have a conversation with you so I could have a better understanding of. Of someone that understands the Christian framework and like and understands Jordan Pearson's framework and how that to those two places at least at least still trying to work on understanding them. It's exactly. It's a continual process, but it sounds like you are. I mean, it sounds to me like you've been reading the right books, like you have good people around you. You know, it sounds it sounds to me like you've you've really been blessed through through all of this. That's God's providence. Like I was just thinking about yesterday. I was talking on Easter Sunday to my Korean pastor, the one I used to go to before I go there because my grandparents still go to that church. And I like Easter and Sunday, so an Easter and Christmas service with them. And we always talk about these things because he has a Presbyterian background and he loves talking about John Wesley. And then and like, it's just like your typical reformed pastor. And he was talking, we're talking about the I've never heard about this exactly, but I know that the revival happens in some time in the 20th century. But I didn't know it was before the Japanese occupation. Oh, I didn't know that either. Yeah. 1907. It started in 1907. Interesting. The revival started in Pyongyang, North Korea, current day North Korea. Really? Yeah. And he actually and and so this pastor, like one of the first Presbyterian Korean pastors was holding this huge conference outdoors, I guess, or indoors. I don't know. But I'm that's how I'm picturing right now. And he started a sermon and he started he stopped in the middle of the sermon because there was something in his heart that he had to say. And he started confess confess something. And apparently he wasn't honest or he stole from someone and that he didn't like this. That he didn't like this or that person in the congregation. And he just started confessing. And one by one, his his is like in tears, right? He was starting to confess and one by one people start to confess one by one, confessing repenting their sins to God. And then this what this was supposed to be like a five day like a revival like a five day Christian like a revival conference sort of thing, a meeting, and it turned like the five days turned to 10 days. And the 10 days turned to even more like 15 days. And they're they're supposed to, you know, like, like, worship the Lord from seven to 10. But they went seven to the early hours of the morning. And they just like every day to start praising the Lord. And and that's one of the first revivals that happened in Korea. But the main point is that. Like that was God's providence. God gave grace there because in 19 and 1910, that's when the Japanese came in. Yeah, right. And started using their women as sex slaves and like all those all those things. And like, and he was just talking about this and I was like, Wow, that's that's truly God's providence. Do you is there a is there have you read any books on the Korean revival? No, I have not. I have not not a single book. See, I've been lately. So my daughter a couple of years ago, my daughter introduced my wife and I to the the Korean drama Secret Garden, which we absolutely loved. And then we watched a few others which she didn't like so much. And then we watched Mr. Sunshine on Netflix. That's on. And we really loved that. So my wife and I have been watching, you know, some of these Korean dramas and it's you know, there as a Christian pastor in California, there are a number of one tenth of the Christian Church is Korean. And so I and a lot of them are on the coasts and most of them are in California. I'm a synodical deputy, so I often have to go down to we have two Korean language classes. And so I have to perform some functions of those classes sometimes. And we have Korean churches in our classes. And so I've been quite all the way back to my seminary days. The guy on the other side of the study carol I where I was he was a Korean graduate student. And I would help him with his English sometimes and going over his papers. And so I've always had an interest in the Korean culture. And and so then lately we've been watching these Korean dramas. And it's been so fascinating lately. We've been watching one about some office people in an office and and I've just been fascinated by the culture. And in terms of issues of status, pride of of showing, you know, of hierarchy and age. And of course, because I don't know the Korean language, if I knew the Korean language, I'm sure it would be far more vivid. Oh, yeah. Catch whispers of it in translation. But it's so and so lately I've been I've been I've been quite fascinated by the the period, the run up to World War Two, the expansion of the Japanese empire, what that did to Korea. And I mean, that that whole episode set in motion so much in Asia. And then, of course, this this Korean revival, which, you know, when you think about it, this this just this has completely changed the history of a good segment of Christianity. And it's been Korean missionaries that have been going out all over the world planting churches. But then here in the United States, you know, working with the Korean churches and whatnot, it's amazing how so the Korean churches come in and they're very, you know, they've got their program. They're very determined. They're, you know, they've got their prayer services early in the morning. And of course, the pastor is running everything and they're running their pastors ragged. And and then the second generation who, you know, and then just and I'm just, you know, we continue to watch this. And it's just really interesting. And so your story for me is so fascinating because obviously a lot of the one first generation and 1.5 generation are very concerned about the second generation who are. And so your story for me is just simply fascinating. Yeah, because because and this is my current analysis about second generations is that there are some I think the Korean churches in North America have a place more of a cultural hub, like a community center. For Koreans to meet on Sundays and to have like to just socialize. Right. And I think that's I hate to say with my very, my very guess adolescent view of it like it's not refined at all. But I think that was the issue with me. It's because I would go to Sunday being choir. Right. We're talking about my Presbyterian background, you know, very, you know, a lot of huge liturgy. I loved choir. Right. Because I have musical talents and I used to play the piano. And once I got to choir, like I was the only male that knew how to sing pitch among like about no. Well, when I left, I was the only male that could sing pitch. So I sang bass and and but but the night before, right. I'm not blame the circumstances for my sense. But the night before, I would I would I went after our partying, actually. So I would like so I'll go clubbing from three and then three to five. I would be partying and then I would go to church in the morning. Wow. I would never do that now because I'm a that's interesting. That's so interesting. Yeah. And and and I mean, what's so so again, part of for me the fascination. So part of the reason that the Koreans fell in so easily in the Christian Reformed Church is because 100 years ago or so. Plus 120 years ago, 130 years ago, the Dutch, of course, came to America as immigrants. And, you know, when they came to America, it was a very different America. And but they they they were very insular. They kept their own language. They really tried to keep to the Dutch language until World War One forced them to stop because everyone was confusing them with Germans. And of course, even Christian from churches started getting burned down because people thought they were Germans. It's like, no, we're Dutch. We're Dutch. We're not German. I swear. But they could see other English wasn't so good. So yeah, you know, all this stuff going on. And and but all of these immigrant dynamics, just as you said, the church becomes this cultural center and people who don't necessarily go to church in the Netherlands when they immigrated to America, they started going to church. Yeah, because well, there there you're speaking your Dutch language and there you're you've got your culture and your traditions and you're with people that you're familiar with. It's this immigration buffer. But now, America, 20 late 20th and early 21st century North America, including Montreal, this is a far more invasive secular context than the 1890s Western Michigan. Or or or Eastern Massachusetts at my grandparents went to. So the cultural dynamics just are all intensified. And and the Dutch, the Dutch are in a sense kind of like the Korean because the Dutch, they're a little country. They've got they've got the English, they've got the French, they've got the Germans, they've got the North Sea. You know, so kind of one one seminary professor who wasn't Dutch or Korean once said, you know, the Koreans were the only other people besides the Dutch that when they walk into a room, they think they're a majority. And I thought, yeah, so it's these it's these smaller countries in the midst of much larger neighbors where there's, you know, so the Dutch really didn't have a nation. They were, you mean, the Spanish, the Dutch fought their independence against the Spanish. And so there's all these interesting parallels between the Dutch and the Koreans. And it's so interesting that these things are all very down deep into the culture. And of course, the Frisians, which is part of my heritage, too, they they not only killed but eight Christian missionaries. So the Frisians got that on their record. But so it just I've just been fascinated watching and learning about Korean culture, this new this Korean immigration journey, and also how this is playing out in the church. And your story is so fascinating because you've both got the Korean Presbyterian story, but then also your parents making a very non-communitarian move. And so we're going to go to the White Pentecostal Church, which makes a lot of sense given. I mean, people look at Korean Presbyterians and but the Korean culture is very emotional culture, very passionate culture. And so, you know, a Pentecostal church within a North American frame of reference makes a lot of sense. But then, of course, you're just a kid and you're coming through this stuff. So I find I find your story fascinating and the the transparency and honesty with which you tell it. It's I think it's just amazing. And I just blown away. That's just amazing. I love your I love your story and the spirit with which you have addressed it. And I, you know, I think it's going to be really exciting what God does with you and through you. I mean, he's clearly been working in your life and he's surrounded you with with good mentors and pastors and friends. But at the same time, you're not living in a cocoon. You're working through the issues. You're doing the hard work. And that's really important because this important this this isolationist strategy that churches and cultures, I mean, cultures adopt. It's a there there's some and the CRC did this for years. And I very much understand the blessings and wisdom of it because you do protect people. But at some point, stuff breaks down. And once those walls are gone and you're in the culture, you're going to have to do some hard work. And and it's clear you've been doing that hard work. I mean, you've been thinking you've been reading, you've been praying, you haven't abandoned the church, you haven't abandoned your Christian friendships. You've got a capacity to to not simply jettison evangelical language and practice, but rather to, OK, well, let's let's take a look at it and let's let's let's critique it. And let's and I think that's that's very wise and important because, you know, I have one of my one of the sayings, one of the little models I have is ontology is its own justification. And what I mean by that is that evangelical language developed and served and was highly functional for a very long time and very powerful ways. So at this point in time, especially like with Jordan Peterson at Liberty University, it's helpful to critique it. But don't just, you know, to be immature is to say, you know, you're just going to be flipping and be hasty with things. And Lewis is a great guide in that. And so is Treebeard. It's like, OK, so we've got this conflict, but let's not get anxious. Let's not get panicky. Let's let's take some time. Let's trust God. Let's look for good mentors. Let's start to work through these things. And that's that's exactly what you've been doing. So good for you. I appreciate the compliment. Well, if I actually have something else to quickly talk about. Like for me, it's like, what's your what's your current standing with like miracles and like the Gipsy of the Tongue and in all these like because I haven't wrapped my head around it completely yet. I have my own hypotheses. And like, like, like the cessationist talks and the charismatic talks. I listened to I listened just recently on the Unbelievable podcast and they're really helpful. They're really helpful. Yeah, good. The mediator, I forget his name. Justin Briley. Yeah, Justin. Oh, my goodness. Yeah. Like he brings atheists in and like he is so wise that he just he doesn't bash the atheists, right? He's just like he's just there nodding. I guess you're right. You know, like, and so he gives them their due because because and this quote this Augustine quote is my is in my mind a lot. Like if you and I'm paraphrasing again, if you know who God is, that's probably not God. Right. Like if you and and also the same goes for like. Yeah, that's pretty much it. That's pretty much it. Yeah. For me, all the evangelical experience, the all the charismatic experience, let's call it because it's not evangelical. It's charismatic. It's like. We're not supposed to be a logician about who God is. We're supposed to stick our heads into the heavens. Like Chesterton talks about. I really like that when he said it was like you're not supposed to fit the heavens into your head because that's going to split your head open. But if you but if you put your head into the heavens, you know, that's that's the point of being a believer. It's like. You got to enjoy the experience, right? And and that's what consciousness is for. It's to enjoy the experience, to live the experience, not to try to understand it too much, you know. Yeah. So what's your take on it? Well, I think you've I think you've got a good take in that. First of all, we might begin by. By assuming we're not going to now. Now, now a few videos back, I was thinking through some things about what's what's the background of the word explain and explain actually comes from basically to flatten. Oh, and and so explanations tend to flatten, which in a symbolic world or Jonathan Peugeot talk or a verveky talk, kind of an axial, you know, an axial tension to to explain is in a sense to to bring things down. And I think in some ways try to reduce things to causes and especially in our materialistic, scientific framework that enlivens our our ambitions that if we can explain and flatten and reduce things to causes, then we can employ them. And there's a real spirit of Sauron in that. And and that needs to be resistant. So I personally I've never been I've seen way too much in North America and overseas to believe in that that miracles have ceased. I have I have too many friends who I know and trust. I mean, these people these people I trust. I trust with anything because they are that faithful and trustworthy and they've been tested over time and they tell me stories. And who am I to doubt? And CS Lewis actually is very helpful with that, like the conversation he has with Peter about Lucy and Edmund because he says, who would you normally believe Lucy or Edmund? And well, Lucy, of course. So Lucy says she's gone through the wardrobe. Why do you doubt her? And so there is a there is I really learned this from my father. He you know, there's kind of a posture where people tell you things. And if you watch a lot of my conversations, it unnerves some people because in evangelical culture, we keep wanting to check and correct people very quickly. That's a bad move relationally. And so if someone comes on and I talk to total strangers, someone comes on and tells me a story. Jesus says, do not judge. Now, that's a very complicated command. But one of the applications of it, I believe, is I don't need to pass judgment too quickly on other people's experiences, other people's testimonies, other and especially other people's evaluations and judgments on things. I am not the judge of the universe and God is and the big a big part of the fall is trying to get up into God's judgment seat. So I stay out of it. But and that gives me a liberty to listen. And so I and I think actually, if you know, all the rationalists want to say, well, it's all about evidence. OK, well, then let's check our biases. Because what I've seen in a lot of what we discussed here, and I'm going to send this to you and if it's and I want you to watch it and then decide, especially because you're young. If if if you're comfortable with me sharing it, OK, I'm only going to share it if you give me permission. But but we have a huge bias in our culture. And this is also in the evangelical churches to to to flatten everything out and to correct everything and to present things that are all buttoned down and nicely packaged out there. And and especially coming from a Korean culture, you can you can smell the pride in that. Oh, yeah. And and so you're right. I think we should I think we should listen to people. And I think we should take all the evidence and truth be told, when you sit and you look at the evidence, the this this materialistic naturalistic frame that is the dominant framework of academia of in many ways the public political legal space. It just doesn't stand up to the evidence. The evidence is that the world is very strange and have experiences that they cannot comprehend. And all of our articulations of these experiences are themselves representations. And so you're best off keeping an open mind and listening. And when Christians come along and say, well, this this and this about that, you can say fair enough. Fair enough. You want to sit in the judgment seat, sit in the judgment seat. Jesus tells us to be very careful about that judgment seat, because to the degree with the measure that you use to judge others, you will be judged. And it's like, OK, so I am I am not a skeptic with respect to all kinds of things. But at the same time, I also withhold judgment. And I with I withhold judgment to the degree that I don't need to judge. I don't need to say whether this or that happened. I don't need to explain all the varieties of near death experiences. I don't do that because I can't. So I, you know, I listen to your story and I I take it as I hear it. And and I think actually this posture that I've really learned from my father, because he was very much this way and he learned it from Lewis. He was a huge Lewis fan. I have tried to practice this and I've seen it as being a good way to go. So I recommend it. Wow. Yeah, that's and that's what I was thinking. Like I have this one friend from church. He'll remain nameless. Like I grew out of the apologetics phase, right? I grew out of it. And there's something about apologetics that that's that's sort of like that. It's like you have to flatten everything out. And that's exactly the evangelical part of like of trying to flatten things out so that it could be presentable for the outside world. Right. Of the of the world. And so and and so I was like, there's there's there there could be a great danger of falling into, you know, Luciferianism. I'm not saying no. Like I completely understand what you're saying. It's like it's like if you're too high, you're going to fall way low. You know, like you're not you're not it's not too good. Yeah. So that's that's that's a good place to conclude if if it's five minutes before. Yeah. Yeah. We should probably wrap up and I'll stretch my legs and take a drink. And I've got a I've got someone at the top of the hour. So it's it's like it's in the morning. It's in the morning there. Right. In California. Yeah. Yeah. Where it's it's almost it's it's 1055 a.m. Oh, I love I love this technology. Yeah. It's incredible. Thanks. Thank God. Now you're how do you say your name? June June June June. Okay. June June June. We. Yeah. Typical. Yeah. And my Korean name is exactly the same. No, there's no June something. It's it's a quite unique name of having a monosyllabic name. Yeah. The first name. Yeah. Very cool. Well, thank you so much for reaching out and talking. And I will send this to you and you look at it and decide, you know, you don't there's no rush. Yeah. And decide, you know, if you'd like me to share this, I'd be happy to. I think I think people would be very interested in it and and and profit from it. But it's your story. And, you know, there does take discernment, you know, whether share it with someone that you trust, who you trust and say, should I share this? And like I'd say at this point, about two thirds more people are talking to me who very much want to have their to be out there on YouTube. But still about a third of the conversations that I have, they just stay private. And I'm totally OK with that because I mean, you're you and your story are more important than. But the thing that people have discovered is that in sharing their story, at least so far, comments have been very supportive and encouraging and people have created friendships via this strange space. So that's been cool, too. So, yeah. One thing of a Pearson, he expands to let our minds be more open, right? If you're open minded, you become more open. If you're open minded, you learn to be more close minded. Right. Yeah, that's true. That's true. Golden mean that sort of just talks about. Yeah. Yeah. Well, thank you, June. This was a pleasure. Yeah, this is a real pleasure. Thanks for talking to me and hope to talk to you soon. OK, real good. Take care. Take care. Bye bye.