https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aNg5ugXbF8o

 Hi, this is Paul. We've been working on the language of creation and just to the end of the section on heaven and earth chapter 13 wisdom and understanding and I sort of kept this one separate because it's an interesting point. You make some interesting points in this chapter. Example wisdom and understanding. With wisdom the Lord founded the earth. With understanding he established the heavens. In the Bible the union of heaven and earth is often defined in terms of wisdom and understanding. That's an interesting point and one that I never thought of. There are divine principles by which God founded the earth and established the heavens. You know part of the weird thing about being a Christian minister is that you read this stuff all the time and you glaze over things, you don't ever pause to think about them and so when you read a book like this you have to pause to think about them. The beginning of wisdom is get wisdom and with all you have gotten get understanding. Okay what is wisdom and what is understanding? First point of creation wisdom. According to the cosmology wisdom is the first... okay according to the cosmology wisdom is the first principle of creation. Therefore it is often envisioned as a concentrated point, a cosmic seed that contains the whole universe as pure information. The seed was very important symbol in the ancient cosmology. It was the closest tangible example of purely spiritual or heavenly principle. Now that gets into questions of reproduction because sperm, seed, you know often it was thought that sperm were tiny little human beings and they're implanted so you have this virgin soil and if you think about Jonathan Peugeot talking to Jordan Peterson about virginity, what virginity is, you know I'd always heard the perpetual virginity of Mary but until I heard Peugeot talk about it I never had any idea what they were talking about. It just sounded ludicrous partly because I've been deeply steeped in materialism. Well if you sort of change the meaning of the language I can sort of understand what you're talking about. Of course the ancients did not consider the seed to contain a coded language like DNA which detailed instructions to build a living organism. Rather it was seen as a foundational principle that only expressed minimal information. Like an axiom in mathematics the seed is a self-evident principle that implicitly contains everything in a point-like form. God made the earth by powers, he formed the world by wisdom, and he stretched out the heavens by understanding. This is a very imaginative chapter. I mean it's I find it I don't always know what to do with it but I find it stretches me and it's it's sort of seed-like in my brain. Given its seed-like properties it is usually difficult to appreciate wisdom. Now wisdom, chokmah, is it's a very interesting word in the Old Testament and well maybe I should pull up my Bible software. All right let's take a look at let's say what conventional historical grammatical studies say about this word. We can pull up isbi, that's often a good place to start. Wisdom in the Bible in the Bible the most common technical terms for wisdom are Hebrew chokmah in the Old Testament and Greek sophia in the New Testament. Alongside these expressions exist a wide variety of other words and phrases that express the same or related ideas. Because the understanding of these because the understanding of these terms changes over time and different in various socio-cultural settings the semantic field of these terms is not historically constant. For that reason synonyms and related wisdom vocabulary vary throughout the biblical traditions. A full appreciation of the significance of wisdom in the Bible depends on the recognition of this historical complexity. At the same time comprehension of biblical wisdom must not lose its peculiar focus on wisdom as an essential idiom and a particular literary manifestation within the composition of Jewish and Christian thought. Wisdom in the ancient Near East. Ancient Israelites often borrowed forms of wisdom from non-israelite sources through oral and literary interactions with Edom, Egypt, Mesopotamia and other nations. At present the only extensive extra biblical examples of wisdom literature text are from Egypt and Mesopotamia. Tablets from ebola may may change this picture but they are not yet available for our consideration. With large fertile river valleys and prime geographic locations Egypt and Mesopotamia had numerous economic advantages over Israel. In prosperous times they exercised tremendous political influence and their cultural standards undoubtedly spread throughout the lesser nations of the Near East. International reputations for wisdom expertise would be attained both by individuals see Solomon below and whole nations suggesting that despite many variations in what each culture might value as particular manifestations of wisdom some degree of consensus existed among the nations. At a minimum this internationally recognized wisdom would have comprised technical skills, general knowledge of the world and a great faculty in the use of proverbs and riddles. Let's look at Egyptian wisdom. Though we do not have from Egypt a corpus explicitly labeled wisdom literature scholars have taken note of several types of school literature that conforms generally to the pragmatic utilitarian character of wisdom. Wisdom is not an esoteric thing often it's a very practical thing and I think that's part of what Peugeot is getting at here. The most prominent examples of this teaching are didactic texts that sustained popularity from 2300 to 100 BC intended to provide training in mot order justice truth these earliest texts of didactic prose and learning and learning sayings which in later periods contained an increasingly number of aphorisms are usually presented in the form of advice from a prominent official to his son. This practice corresponded conveniently to the teacher-student relationship in Egyptian scribal schools according to the school setting became a surrogate for common education in the home. Some texts such as the instruction of a man for his son portray vividly the classroom setting of scribes who these teachings belong to. Similarly between Egypt and biblical wisdom became odd the similarities between Egyptian and biblical wisdom became obvious in the modern period with the discovery of instructional text of a minor official. Probably belonging to the 18th dynasty this text or an oral counterpart appears to have been the source of much of Proverbs 22 17 to 23 14. Incline your ear and listen to the words of the wise apply your heart to my knowledge for it will be pleasant if you keep them within you if all of them are ready on your lips that you trust that your trust may be in the Lord I have made them known to you today even to you. I have not written I have not written for you 30 have I not written for you 30 sayings of counsel and knowledge to to make you know what is right and true that you may give a true answer to those ancient Near East texts. Derived originally from the 13th to the 12th century BC if not earlier the style corresponds to the father-son pattern of instruction found in Proverbs. The close resonance of part of Proverbs with this Egyptian text confirms that Israel freely borrowed and adapted wise sayings from other nations in the composition of distinctly Israelite wisdom literature. Wisdom literature in ancient Israel essential characteristics and historical development the most common term for wisdom in the Old Testament Hakmah predominantly refers to an educated discipline or skill for performance in the world. This term occurs commonly throughout Old Testament traditions to know almost any acquired skill or learned craft. It includes an ability to wage war tailoring cloth making metal work in carpentry navigation at sea and political administration. Hakmah may also concern one's level of intelligence the absence of it explains why the ostrich lacks the common sense expected of other animals. Job 39 conversely certain prophets and magicians are led astray because of poor judgment wisdom is designated as an attribute of God. The acquisition of some famous persons and distinct assets of some nations a mundane practical wisdom within Israel. The understanding may have been preceded in time a more articulate expression of its religious nature. Undoubtedly some substantial changes in the religious interpretation of wisdom occurred within the history of Israel. Certainly in the exilic and post-exilic periods a transformation took place in the relations of wisdom to Torah and eventually in the perception of this relation to other biblical traditions. Occasionally this way of seeing of seeking to derive biblical wisdom from scriptural tradition that was not wisdom according to either genre is designated as invited is invited by late editorial editions. These historical modifications in the understanding of wisdom are difficult to recover solely from the book of proverbs because of the lack of any historical references and accentuate their their nomic universal nature. I've read this passage before it's from Neil Neil Postman's amusing ourselves to death. It's it's a very it's a very it makes some very interesting points with respect to to proverbs and community. He was first reading Northrop Frye and apart from Frye who I am certain would raise no objection to take his word from me every medium of of communication I am claiming has resonance for resonance is metaphor writ large. Whatever the original or limited context of use may have been medium was the power to fly far beyond the context into new and unexpected ones. Because of the way it directs us to organize our minds and integrate our experience of the world it imposes itself on our consciousness and social institutions in myriad form. It sometimes has the power to become implicated in our context concepts of piety of goodness or of beauty in other words I think Postman again is sort of talking about this this heaven meeting earth here. It's it's word meeting context to explain how this happens how the bit how the bias of a medium sits heavy felt but unseen over a culture. I offer three cases of truth-telling. First is drawn from a tribe in West in Western Africa that has no writing system but whose rich oral tradition was given form in its idea of civil law. When a dispute arises the complainants come before the chief of the tribe and state their grievances. With no written law to guide him the task of the chief is to search through his vast repertoire of proverbs and sayings to find one that suits the situation and is equally satisfying to both complainants. That accomplished all parties are agreed that justice has been done that the truth has been served. You will recognize of course that this is largely the method of Jesus and other biblical figures who living in an essentially oral culture some of this is debatable Postman is not a biblical scholar drew upon all the resources of speech including um Mimetic devices formulating expressions and proverbs As as a means of discovery and revealing truth as Walter Ong points out in oral traditions proverbs and sayings are not occasional devices They are incessant. They form the substance of thought itself Thought in any extended form is impossible without them. They consist in it To people like ourselves any reliance on proverbs and sayings is reserved largely for resolving disputes among or with children Possession is nine-tenths of the law first come first serve haste makes waste These are forms of speech we pull out in small crises with our young But would think ridiculous to produce in a courtroom where serious matters are decided Can you imagine a bailiff asking a jury if it has reached a decision and receiving the reply to air is human But to forgive divine or even better let let us render unto caesar What is caesar's and to god what is god's for the briefest moment the judge might be charmed? But if a serious language form is not immediately forthcoming the jury may end up with a longer sentence Than most than most guilty come most guilty defendants I Read that to give a sense of wisdom and and some of what I think péjot is seeing in the text here There there aren't a lot of footnotes in this book and and so this isn't this isn't A book done by a biblical scholar now that has upsides and downsides, which i'm sure many of you will note in the comment section But but there is there is again I want to focus on the the nature the connection of wisdom to Let's let's say in in peter sony in terms a world of action and and wisdom as As postman notes Sort of settles things It's it's a way that let's say two sides are combating The judge pulls out a proverbs a proverb both sides are satisfied There's you know, there's actually there an authority structure that both sides agree with And and I would say that any resolution any mutual resolution of a conflict depends upon A a joint authority structure Okay, let's keep reading in the book Given its seed-like properties it is usually difficult to appreciate wisdom because it is far too simple and can't contains too much information Therefore the role of understanding is to stretch out the heavens which means developing explaining and detailing the ramifications of the seed and he has a little diagram here of a little ball on top that's wisdom and then arrows down to Stretching out the heavens In this context the role of understanding is perfectly analogous to that of earth soil It is the power that expands and expresses a seed into something knowable With wisdom the lord founded the earth with understanding he established the heavens With his knowledge the depths were split and the skies dropped the dew As shown in the following diagram understanding is the power that supports a principle With specific facts and I just can't read this without thinking about verveky talking about understanding what that what that word means And and it gets into Seemingly that the natural Understanding As shown in the following diagram understanding is the power that supports a principle with specific facts and wisdom is the principle that covers These facts with a spiritual identity boy. Those are words you hear pageau jonathan pageau use a lot Knowledge is the process and the final result of these interactions So you've got wisdom Understanding and then knowledge with wisdom a house is built with understanding It is established With knowledge its rooms are filled With wisdom a house is built with understanding It is established So built is sort of the initiator and and you get the sense here that house is not just Now this is one of these pre Barfieldian splits house is not just Building it's probably house and home together initially before this sort of barfieldian split With wisdom a house is built with understanding it is established and With knowledge its rooms are filled I have to keep avoiding Okay This basic structure is referred to as the cosmic tree It is it is considered the principle of space in ancient cosmology The symbolism of spatial axis will be fully described in section four of this commentary in hebrew the word Understanding is connected both to the concept of building and in between Well, let's look at understanding 89 of the 113 revised standard version old testament occurrences of the word translated the hebrew bin Or one of its derivatives this word group from a root meaning to discern Refers to the sound application of knowledge It is found predominantly in wisdom literature and to a lesser extent in several of the major prophets job and his friends searched for understanding, okay the To discern so the discernment Of knowledge job and his friends searched for understanding. Well, how did they why did job and his friends search for understanding? they searched for understanding because Something had happened Job's calamities Which was unexpected in their fairly karmic view Of the way the world worked and so they searched for understanding they're looking for application Of what happened The good upright men of the psalms and proverbs possessed it and the foolish wicked lack it Job 28 28 Behold the fear of the Lord that is wisdom and to turn away from evil is understanding Underlines the moral character of this understanding to depart from evil is understanding but this does not exclude a cognitive component a cognitive component a Cognitive component That's very interesting because why just remembering something I read about Cognition and Hebrew culture and language. I wish I could pull that up completely Such understanding comes only from studying God's precepts Psalm 119 For it was by understanding that God fashioned all creation This word group appears regularly in conjunction with words for wisdom and discretion Hebrew Sakal or Sokka is the derivative of Frequently interchangeable with bin, but at times put more emphasis on intellectual or rational skills Three times Aramaic Sakal Tannu refers to the ability to interpret dreams Hebrew Lev or Lev or levav is Most often heart it usually refers to the innermost thoughts feelings and commitments of the individual the RSV Translates at understanding in contexts were rational that are rational more than emotional You Can see here on the picture the distribution of Hebrew words with respect to common translations Understand the majority understanding see pay attention consider teach Examine the second understanding cleverness and skill Here's a list of some Elements of it it comes up often in Job teach me and I will be silent make me understand how I have gone astray What do you know that we do not know? What do you understand that is not clear to us? Is it it is not the old who are wise nor the aged who understand what is right? Can anyone understand the spreading of clouds the light of the sun? Understand the spreading of clouds the light the thundering of his pavilion a Lot of uses in the Psalms and the Proverbs quite obviously The ox knows its owner the donkey its master's crib, but Israel does not know my people do not understand and you know part of Hebrew poetry is these couplets which are Showing a relationship and it's really helpful for getting the sense of of words How often how often as it passed Through it will take you for morning by morning It will pass through day by day night by night and it will be sheer terror to understand the message The heart of the hasty will understand and know the tongue of the stammerers will will hasten to speak distinctly That very common word a lot and Daniel Here he's got this nice little chart so wisdom is on top knowledge is so understanding is below and wisdom and understanding make knowledge Another important way to describe these fundamental Interactions with the imagery of building a house in this case wisdom is analogous to the plan of the house and Understanding is the process that puts the plan into practice From one end a spiritual principle must be lowered into concrete reality Use of spiritual knowledge Use of spiritual there I think is really vital and helpful From the other end building materials must be raised into meaningful and coherent structure Another important aspect to this imagery is the notion that buildings are microcosms of creation in this case the roof and the base of the house are analogous to the heavens and the earth Respectively also the symbolism of pillars is especially important in this context they represent the supports of Prince of a spiritual principle and are usually called pillars of the earth at a cosmic scale These pillars are usually depicted as opposites Like the pillars of Yakeem and Boaz in order to express the maximum range of implications by definition opposites are The most different expressions possible, which means they always provide the best support for knowledge This is one of the reasons why opposites are so often commonplace in ancient symbolism. I Think I forgot to turn on the recording for some of this. I'll just I'll just fill it in now Again looking at Craig Bloomberg's Article and is be on understanding the word group from a root meaning to discern Refers to the sound application of knowledge. So in other words Bloomberg sort of going the other way so you have wisdom knowledge and understanding you gain Understanding with hands-on things and that sort of becomes knowledge which is in the middle Which can sort of be reproduced And see wisdom is the seed Goes down to understanding then comes up into knowledge and knowledge is sort of this this middle thing Job and his friends search for Understanding that's key. Of course because what happens with Job's calamity is it breaks the assumed Karmic structure of the world and Job's friends continue to try to apply karma to Job's situation, but Job says basically the Karma doesn't work in this situation because I've done nothing wrong that's at the heart of That's at the heart of the book of Job So maybe I'll leave this video here so it can just be I'll save chapter 14 for the next video But I did think that chapter 13 was important in and of itself Because it was I found his articulation helpful in Gaining understanding, let's say Okay on to chapter 14 Humanity in the image of God, this is a huge topic In fact, I just recorded about 45 minutes of a video that I scrapped. I don't do that often, but I Made the video about Brett Weinstein and his You know, there's an element in which bread is gnostic in terms of this this assumption that if the world is created by Evolution the god of evolution is a an immoral god but bread is not Gnostic in the sense that he he looks at he anticipates an immaterial world and The the question of Gnosticism came up in the Peterson-Pageau Conversation and I thought Jonathan handled that very well because Christianity basically says that the world is good and when Jordan asserts that his skepticism with respect to something like the physicality of the resurrection of Jesus Jonathan leans in and basically says part of the point of its goodness is that the world is capable of Of Physically manifesting the goodness of God Humanity Is a we are strange creatures and and part of what I leaned into in that video with About Weinstein a lot of people I Get I get more comments than usual when I do videos on the Weinsteins About why are you talking about them? I? Talk about them because Usually the people that I pick on out there in the public space I talk about them because they illustrate a lot of the ideas that I'm wrestling with The the idea that we are We behave very strangely for for for materialists Because as maps of meaning Pretty much wrote about Will kill each other over immaterial things Because what we're what we're generally dealing with our mappings of The world most of all is the world Of The world most of which were mappings are immaterial. They might be inter subjective But most of what we're fighting about are the mappings because we know that the mappings will at some point manifest themselves in materiality and And so it's in that way that our battles are indeed spiritual in the sense that that Peugeot uses When he used that word spiritual from one end a spiritual principle must be lowered into concrete reality and I think let's see if I can highlight it there we go, I think that is exactly the right sense of the word spiritual and human beings are therefore Different from the animals No animal that we know of maps Spiritual Like we do they are in that sense purely physical we are not and And part I think of Peterson's real contribution is especially when he starts talking about Sacrifice and mapping the future he's pointing to just how Spiritual we are and and again, I'm not saying I'm not necessarily I don't like the natural supernatural Distinction although I understand it. I'm not talking necessarily about anything supernatural when I use that word spiritual and part of the problem is that Romantics Understand spiritual to be emotional no emotionality is the The way in which we're dealing with the spiritual but the spiritual is between us and it's in this sense that we are Spiritual and it's in this sense that we are These in between creatures between heaven and earth So chapter 14 humanity in the image of God God created the human in his image in The image of God he created him As will be discovered in this section the narrative of creation also provides significant insight about the role of humanity in the universe Most importantly according to biblical cosmology the function of human beings is to act as a mediator between heaven and earth for the knowledge of God Within the creation. Okay, and that's why I read the last chapter because knowledge is sort of this middle thing wisdom comes down into understanding understanding goes up into knowledge and It's in that sense if you've got Plato pointing up and Aristotle pointing down it's kind of down and then up Okay Most importantly according to the biblical cosmology the function of human beings is to act as a mediator between Heaven and earth for the knowledge of God within creation. He's got here three circles creator heaven and earth and then heaven and earth and hadam adam In this context the notion that adam is in the image of God means that humanity is a symbol Of the creator within the creation, I think that's exactly right and if Maybe i'll have to try and remake that video. I just erased because Maybe i'll have to try and remake that video I just erased because If you look at if you listen to brett weinstein and his gnosticism And his half gnosticism, let's say He is in fact attempting to manifest exactly what Peugeot is saying here Because we listen to eric we have to get off this rock that is an image of God move that he is making because He's mapping He's he's bringing spirituality into The spiritual joint mappings that we are working on together And and it's in fact over the mappings that we fight the entire cold war was a war of mapping and You know peterson's point in this book is Is exactly that? Adam is the embodiment of divine knowledge in the world Unlike regular knowledge which involves the union of spirit and matter for created things This type of knowledge transcends itself into a form of metacognition The following diagram represents the ultimate pattern of interpretation in the bible Although it is similar to patterns discussed in the previous section this This structure involves an indefinitely higher level the knowledge of God in creation This overarching symbolism and Adam's general role as mediator between heaven and earth will be discussed in detail Throughout this section so we've got meta knowledge got meta knowledge on top God Down into Adam but earth And heaven also into Adam chapter 15 God formed the humans from the dust of the ground earth and breathed into his nostril the breath of life heaven In the story of the garden of eden humanity is described as a microcosm of creation Thus Adam is created by joining a body from the earth and a breath from heaven As illustrated above the soul and body of adam may simply be interpreted as instances of heaven And earth at the level of human experience Accordingly the word spirit simultaneously refers to the wind of heaven and the breath of living creatures These are one and the same biblical cosmology Okay So this is before the barfieldian split that I keep talking about with respect to the spirit Respect to lewis and again the problem we have is you can't you can't go back through those forks Into the unity you have to sort of in a barfieldian way you have Initial participation this divorce from participation and then final participation But the final participation is not the same as the initial participation And and so right now we're sort of in that that middle phase The primary role of adam in this context is to act as mediator between heaven and earth for the union of spirit and matter And creation moreover this union defines adam completely not just at the moment of creation But throughout his entire life in other words Not only not only was adam made by joining dust and breath But this is also the impetus of everything he does At a basic level human life consists of breathing and nutrition The first is when heaven's air is translated into adam's breath And the second is when the earth's soil is translated into adam's flesh In this manner the cosmic union of heaven and earth is reflected at human levels Thus by simply star staying alive adam is contributing to the greater goal of creation Conversely if adam dies a part of corporeal Reality loses its higher spiritual purpose and a part of spiritual reality loses lower corporeal expression so inform authority from above Symbolize knowledge express in terms of power and the heart is in the middle head body heart interesting For humans it is also important to remember that breathing involves the ability to speak Which makes it a vehicle of language and information Thus in the human microcosm adam's head represents the first principle wisdom as the source of meaning for the body The hebrew the hebrew word head implies first principle doesn't greek too Meaning that also implied in the english world's words as head captain chief, etc The role of head Is to provide a unifying principle to answer the dark subconscious enigma of the flesh In exchange the body expresses and supports the head with actions of arms and legs On the whole adam's existence is centered on knowledge which refers to the union of heaven spirit and earth body Therefore humanity's impetus in the universe can adequately be summed up as informing matter With meaning and expressing meeting with matter this extremely simple formula Surprisingly encompasses all human activity including reproduction technology government and science. They are all instances of joining matter with meaning This reminds me quite a bit of how c.s. Lewis deals with reason in his book miracles and So in this section, he's talking about naturalism as the whole show And then he says well, well dualism is is something that people look at like god and nature are two separate Things as it were and then he dismisses that and then he goes into a little bit of the Of this union that I see peugeot talking about The relations which arise at the frontier are indeed of a most complicated and intimate sort that Spearhead of the supernatural which I call my reason links up with all my natural contents my sensations emotions and the like so completely that I call the mixture by a single word me Again, there is what I have called the unsymmetrical character of the frontier relations when the physical state of the brain Dominates my thinking it produces only disorder and and this is why I didn't make that video I erased that video. This is why the opposite of theism is not atheism or non theism it is mere animality if if my that there is a sense in which Okay, a hierarchy of values develops a sense in which directedness which happens in consciousness Develops that there's a sense of that happening that is separate from the animals we see around us. Let's say Again there's what I call the unsymmetrical character of frontier relations when the physical state of the brain dominates my thinking it produces only Disorder but my brain does not become any less a brain when it is dominated by reason Nor do my emotions and sensations become any less emotions and sensations Reason capital R saves and strengthens my whole system Psychological and physical whereas that whole system by rebelling against reason destroys both reason and itself The military metaphor of a spearhead was apparently ill-chosen The supernatural reason enters my natural being not like a weapon more like a beam of light which illuminates Which illuminates or a principle of organization Which unifies and develops and you can see that in Peugeot's sense here Our whole picture of nature being invaded as by a foreign enemy was wrong When we actually examine one of these invasions It looks much more like the arrival of a king among his own subjects or a mahout Visiting his own elephant the elephant may run amok nature may be rebellious But from observing what happens when nature obeys It is almost impossible not to conclude that her very nature That it is her very nature to be a subject All happens as if she had been designed for that very role To believe that nature produces God or even the human mind is as we have seen absurd To believe that the two are both independently self-existent is Impossible at least the attempt to do so leaves me unable to think that I am thinking of anything at all It is true that dualism has certain theological attraction But it seems to make the problem of evil easier But if we cannot in fact think dualism out to the end this attractive Promise may never be kept and I think there are better solutions to the problem of evil There remains then the belief that God created nature this at once supplies a Relation between them and gets rid of the difficulties of the sheer otherness it also fits into the observed frontier Situation in which everything looks as if nature were not resisting an alien invader but rebelling Against a lawful sovereign this and perhaps this alone fits in with the fact that nature though not apparently intelligent is intelligible that Events in the remotest parts of space appear to obey the laws of rational thought Even the act of creation itself presents none of the intolerable difficulties which seem to meet us on every other Hypothesis there is an there is in our own minds something that bears a faint resemblance to it We can imagine that is we can cause to a we can we can cause to exist the mental pictures of Material objects and even human characters and events we fall short of creation in two ways in the first place We can only recombine elements borrowed from the real universe No one can imagine a new primary color or a sixth sense in the second place. We can imagine In a met what we imagine exists only in our consciousness But we can by words induce other people to build for themselves pictures in their own minds Which can be roughly similar to it We should have to attribute to God the power of both producing the basic element and of inventing not only colors But color itself the senses themselves space time and matter themselves and also of imposing what he has invented on created minds This seems to be no intolerable assumption It's certainly easier than the idea of God and nature as wholly unrelated Entities and far easier than the idea of nature producing valid thought I don't know if Peugeot will go into it. But if you understand this then the stories in Genesis of the cursing of the ground and the cursing of the womb makes sense because well, basically Nature rebels against us just as we rebelled against God So now as the practice of the book is he gives He gives sort of the principles and earlier chapters and then goes into examples And I found the examples often help to illustrate what he's talking about Chapter 16 example manna and flesh God will give you flesh in the evening to eat and bread in the morning to the full The example provided in this chapter is a particularly clear case of the interactions between heaven and earth It is unmistakably It unmistakably depicts the dual influences of heaven and earth in the form of manna and quails During Israel's Exodus it also provides some important examples of interactions between the macrocosm and Microcosm where the influences of heaven and earth are translated into human experiences lowering seed and raising flesh Exodus 16 and Numbers 11 children of Israel Wouldn't it have been better for us to die in Egypt as we sat by the flesh pots and ate bread to the full? Have you brought us to the wilderness to kill us with hunger? God I will rain bread from heaven and the people will gather it every day to test whether or not they will follow my law They will eat flesh in the evening and we will be will be filled with bread in the morning And they shall know that I am the Lord their God And they shall know that I am the Lord their God At evening the quails ascended and covered the camp When the dew descended on the camp during the night Manna descended upon it in the morning There was a fine bareness like frost on the surface of the earth when the children of Israel saw it They said to each other what it what is it and they called it manna It was like coriander seed white and tasted like wafers and honey and it appears and its appearance was like crystal it's really interesting the descriptions of that because Those descriptions You get biblical moments when people can't quite figure things out and the language They're trying to relate it and it very much sounds like eyewitness accounts The people gathered it and they ground it and made cakes from it In the previous passage manna and quails are depicted as descending and ascending respectively And they also referred to as seeds and flesh These two types of food represent the influences of heaven and earth in this narrative One on one end manna is not a typical food, but a spiritual nutrition Its primary purpose is not to sustain the body but to inform the soul that they may know that I am the lord Manna is compared to seeds in this narrative because seeds represent spiritual principles in biblical cosmology These points of wisdom are considered to be full of implicit light Concentrated information which is why manna is described as bright clear and light And why it is associated with the first light of the morning These heavenly principles are high in meaning and low in corporeality They are point-like materializations of divine language as clearly stated below God fed you with manna to teach you that man does not live by bread alone But by every word that comes from the mouth of god On the other end the quail are called flesh and flesh On the other end the quail are called flesh or meat which refers to regular food in the sense of matter to sustain the body They are depicted as ascending in the evening because they are akin to material obscurity in general Flesh represents the counterpart of seed in the process of knowledge its role like the earth's soil Is is to detail or flesh out the implicit meaning of the seed It is a case of manifestations because it makes the implicit explicit see chapter 10 manna means what what is similar to Quiddity of western philosophy like a seed manna embodies the simple sense of phenomenon You shall eat flesh in the evening and be filled with bread in the morning and you shall know that I am the lord your god On the whole the structure of this narrative is straightforward It describes the nation of israel as existing between heaven and earth Receiving to receive the knowledge of god from their union it's really interesting because of course they're in the wilderness and wilderness is the land equivalent to sea You'll notice interesting correspondence between the names of sea monsters and wilderness monsters And and so this is this is really this is really quite fascinating In general the process of knowledge should always be interpreted in terms of two opposite transactions It always envis involves Materialization of meaning from above in exchange for refinement of matter from below These exchanges of spirit and flesh are the two sides of a single coin Because invisible truth cannot be made manifest without material sustenance As Illustrated above the descent of manna towards the earth is a process of Materialization this is clear in the Bible because manna is compared to whore frost which is solidification of dew Which is itself a condensation of air moreover the process of making bread from manna represents the Materialization at the human level indeed making dough from flour a fine white substance Symbolizes condensation and making bread from dough symbolizes Solidification on the other hand the ascent of quails into the camp and the preparation of their flesh is a process of refinement Where meat must be cleaned tenderized and cooked? until suitable for human consumption as We'll be demonstrated in later chapters making bread and preparing meats are extremely significant in the Bible They are important symbols of lowering meaning and raising matter for the union of heaven and earth at the human level That's fascinating Guess I'll leave it right there for now and Yeah, it's it's again. It's very interesting. Look. I hope just walking through and maybe it's not as helpful for you as Me sort of reading it and commenting it is so Well, let me know in the comments what you think I'm gonna have a conversation next week with Vin Armani. I Didn't know who the guy was and some one of you sent me this video and there's a rather extended section in this video where he talks about Jordan Peterson and I've now taken up a correspondence with him and he actually sent me to a video that He had done a conversation with Peterson a While ago on his own on his own podcast and this was sort of before Peterson arose in prominence now, why do I why do I bring this up now? right after working on The language of creation. Where's my where's my copy of the book? I just always want to grab a copy of the book so language working on Dyslexic I always have it can't put it in the right place The language of creation. Maybe I could figure that out. Get that in my head How many times well I mentioned Vin Armani because he was using some of the same language that Peugeot uses with respect to the Bible and creation the way things lay themselves out and When you start reading the language of creation You have a better sense of what Jonathan Peugeot means he means that once you get this sense of Once once you get this sense of The problem is I'm going to use all the same words Peugeot uses and they didn't communicate that well to me Phenomenologically if you understand if you look at how Brett Weinstein is If you look at how Brett Weinstein is talking about humanity as I talked about in the book If you look at how Brett Weinstein is talking about humanity as I talked about in this this last video He can't This is where Peugeot is right none of them can actually pull off Talking about human beings and acting the way human beings are Imagined to be within their own worldview We are always unnatural we are always a little lower than the angels we are always Sort of above it all This is what happens when I make videos and then delete them. I wind up making them again How do people Act out the image of God Even if they say there is no God they do it in this continuous project of human improvement stabilization Security and progress they do so rebelliously and ironically in some ways obediently even within their rebellion so so Brett Weinstein is Gnostic in the aspect that he imagines the evolutionary biology of the world maker is an immoral God But he is not gnostic because he sort of like Peugeot is describing in his book is Using his metacognition his imagining himself as ruler of the earth As Lewis describes in Terms of how to continue what? Humanity we've got to get off this rock. Okay, that's what Eric keeps saying Brett and Eric desperately talk as if they are committed to save humanity But humanity is not the same as let's say the population of ostriches or the population of dogs humanity is Something that we ourselves sort of know even though we are it but don't really know and and to have individual human beings Arguing that humanity must be saved even as we imagine Eugenics and the creation of the Borg let's dip into the Star Trek the Star Trek imaginary We don't even know what we're talking about in terms of that which should be saved Because let's say freezing us all well that wouldn't be humanity being saved because when they talk about humanity being saved They're including the art and the knowledge and the politics and and all of what we treasure and aspire even though All of that has such a short shelf life again, I you know, I had a good conversation with with Rafe Kelly and You know, he was noting which was so right so much of So much of the current strife in terms of the culture war could greatly be helped if people would simply read history and understand that We really don't have much of a grasp of what we're talking about This is humanity a real thing and their philosophical systems Isn't it isn't strictly physical material? It is the colonization of the world by us and so much of us is in between We are the stuff of earth and the breath of God and as Lewis said we marshal all of these things in order to somehow maintain ourselves Humanity is deeply committed to a variety of immaterial visions and it was it is It is it is just shocking to watch celebrity atheists Double down on materiality in the most immaterial way Some of the most ardent physicalists among us are implicitly inescapably committed to this tension and Trapped by their project they construct a vision of a better world and preach like religious zealots I'm working on the the pearly gates story and Lazerous and the rich man and and Kenneth Bailey who I'm reading as I go through these talks about all these pearly gates Stories that you find in Middle Eastern culture with Moses and Jesus and Jesus Christ Stories that you find in Middle Eastern culture with Moses and Jesus and Muhammad they're in Jewish and Christian and and Islamic traditions and and these the point of these stories is not to map out the afterlife in the way that each of us would like to have a House mapped out like a floor plan. The point is to demonstrate the relational the relationality between aspects and to use The afterlife to make points about What ought to have what ought to happen now? And again, this is so much the Peugeot Ian lays itself out idea And you see this in Peterson talking to Peugeot and the aiming for better well What exactly is this better? I mean the animals do it to a degree but not like us We we have transformed the world and and we imagine it needs to be Transformed to even greater degrees and all of this transformation is happening in our imaginations You know You we naturally want it to be better for us and for versions of us that are in some senses our neighbors and our loved ones And then Jesus commands that we include our enemies in that list for betterment as well And and Peterson's talk about sacrifices and inventions of the future, you know That's why naturalists get nervous because it's in many ways very much Spiritual thinking and you can't help but think this way unless you have headroom above Materiality and and again we do this so naturally and easily You know the opposite of theism is mere animalism It's it's not these these that the funny things about atheists are that they They're they can become so esoteric all of our fights are about mappings in this world and atheists fight about mappings just as much as as everyone else And the whole point of maps of meaning is that we kill each other over imaginary maps More than in some ways we do over material goods You know, we're not even tremendously conscious. We're doing this, you know call someone what they don't want to be called Even if it's a ridiculous thing and you will have a fight on your hands Why we that much live we're that much? spiritual creatures And So really all of this is is a search for the image of God How are we and aren't we like or unlike the animals? Are we or aren't we part of nature? What constitutes this humanity that must be preserved? Are we the stuff of earth and the breath of heaven? What is the breath of heaven? and and again, we might say well we can we can we can track all the biology of our bodies Okay, but We're from and we're right there in the middle of the verveky Peugeot Ian split of emanation and emergence If you think God is imaginary go ahead and try to divorce yourself from this breath of God He just keeps coming up and again as I said to Rafe Kelly I said, you know when he talked about I can't believe in a God Well, I think part of what happened in modernity is so that the church could sort of bring God through into our Imagination our one-eyed imagination of the world being a place of objects. We turned God into a thing And And it doesn't fit and and so this is where you get the the bifurcation of God number one and God number two and so when Peterson sort of brings God number two in for Sam Harris the presence of Peterson brings God number one and Sam Harris looks at that and says that's not God this thing over here is God So I think I'll just have to put this on to the This last language of creation video that I just rendered and maybe I'll just put them all together and release them all together For tomorrow, but it's it seems terribly Rambly and disconnected, but I hope that there's some help in it for you