https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Ciod8bZcQ78

 Hi, this is Paul. A couple comments before I continue on with Machu Picchu's book. A couple comments about book reviews and commentaries. Actually, this is only half of the video I was thinking about because I'm not going to talk about book reviews too much, except the decision that I've made because of some... some unpleasantness, let's say. It's unpleasant to me. It's not a bad thing. What's this channel about? I'm not terribly interested in putting out a finished product. If you haven't noticed that, after three years, you're not paying attention. I misspeak, I don't edit, I don't even have a nice little intro where I give you a teaser and then have the intro, and then... not that I couldn't make an intro, I'm just not interested in it. I use this space the way I always used my blog, and I still use my blog this way, but not as much because I'm doing all this talking instead of writing, which I'm not always sure is such a good thing. It's unfinished thoughts and it's thinking out loud. Maybe that's a foolish thing to do on the internet because we have this permanent record, but then again, that gets into the question of if I do finish something, am I still going to like it a year from now? We'll see. Just about anything else that seems helpful to me to figure out how to be a Christian in this world, that's what I'm using my channel for. I got a comment on... I read it last time, but it was on one of the previous Language of Creation commentaries basically saying this, I thought it was a good comment. Part of the reason I do this and part of the reason I read the comments is because I learn from you. And that's something that, well, the Book of Proverbs tells us we ought to cultivate. I ought to listen to you. I ought to learn from you, and I can gain wisdom by reading your comments, and I do all the time. And so this comment from Vic Summers, I think you should have read the whole book before doing the commentary. Your critiques are jumping the gun as you'll find out as you continue through the chapters with a smiley face. So it's a friendly comment, and I think you're probably right. I probably am jumping the gun, and actually Karen wrote and said, I like it that you haven't read the whole book, but we're going bit by bit. Someone also said to comment and said, trying to learn where I can put the book where I pick it up here, that they got halfway through the book and abandoned it. I do that kind of thing a lot. I'm sure that doesn't say anything flattering about me, but it's just true. And I bought this book not soon, not long after it came out, and I paged through it, and I didn't read it, and I didn't do anything with it. And some of the stuff I read in it, I thought, this isn't like any other book I've ever read. And then later, the book's time sort of came for me. And I find that often in my life. I'll buy books, they'll sit on the shelf, I'll look at it, I think, oh, I should read that. And then it doesn't come, or sometimes I'll pick up a book and I'll read a few chapters in it, and then I'll put it down. And then sometimes the book's time comes, and so then I pick it up again. Or maybe I pick it up, maybe I've read the whole book from cover to cover, and it's time to read the book again. Books are that way in me. And so, yes, I'm reading this through the first time, and I'm jumping around. I mean, Karen said she liked the new thing, because I read something, I think, huh, and then I go find a video, or I go find something that I've read, or I check a source, or something like that. So that's what this is. And again, if you don't like it, don't watch. You won't hurt my feelings by not watching. Maybe a thousand or two thousand people watch my video. That means, what, seven plus billion people haven't? I'm not going to go to bed at night worrying about those seven plus billion people who missed my hot takes off the internet. So fair comment. And maybe I'll do some, maybe I'll do it all over again after I watch it once. I certainly did that with Peterson's stuff. Part of the reason I do this is you might not get any content if I decide, well, I'm going to do the definitive answer on this book, and well, then I don't finish it, and then I lose interest, and I'm ADHD, and I'm off looking at squirrels someplace else. So this is what you get. And it's a mess. And I'm sorry. You know, I don't mean to waste your time. And if I am wasting your time, don't let me. That's just the way this stuff is. So, yeah, actually having this book that I can sort of, because I've always got way too many ideas for a video, but sometimes there are reasons I can't make the video right now because it's still too hot in me, or I don't feel that it's right, or I'm not interested in it at the moment, or, or, or, and this is just kind of something I can pick up and read and read with you. And so, yeah, for some reason, YouTube gives me all this space. I suppose I can put stuff on it. So, yeah, you're going to get mostly first drafts and apologies to the authors when I get stuff wrong. And I'm getting things wrong. That's what the comment, the Discord, and the Discord sort of closed right now because we had a bot attack and Joey was able to shut it down. But the main link that I've been keeping on all of my, the main link that I've been keeping on all of the notes on my videos, I had to take that down. So I'm not quite sure how new members can get on the Discord. So now we're exclusive like Clubhouse. There's obviously all this pent up demand when Joey and Rick figure it out. And maybe we'll let exclusive memberships to the, to the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and people will just be running around the streets of Manhattan begging, do you have a way into the Bridges of Meaning Discord server? Please, please, I can't live without it. I don't think so. So I do plan on getting things wrong. And if I reread a book, I'll probably correct my first review. And we need to give people permission to change, to improve, to repent, to discover, to grow, and even to decay. Because this is the age of decay. Okay, on with the book, Chapter 17. Adam as mediator, naming animals and hosting angels. These are the descendants of the heaven, of the heaven and the earth when they were created. So you now see I read that and I think I want to check that in Hebrew, but that would take a little time. So I don't want to check it that bad. In the verse above, Adam was described as the descendant or offspring of heaven and earth. Now I have to check that. Okay, what for you was no time at all for me was an hour. Because I read these are the descendants of heaven and earth when they were created. Just didn't, you know, often if I read a Bible verse that's familiar, it'll just, you know, sink in. And I'll sort of mentally think about some of the issues with that verse if it's a very familiar verse. But then in this verse above, Adam described it as a descendant or offspring of heaven and earth. And I had to pause. And so I read it again and then I thought, oh, he's talking about Toledot. And I know that that's a very hotly debated question in terms of what do we mean by Toledot. So I just was doing a whole bunch of research. Okay, so Toledot Toledot comes from Yelled, which is to give birth or, you know, various forms, various versions of it will be a child. And the the word has a variety of of elements to it. It's you know, you have the root and then all the different all the different elements that come of it. And well, let's let's OK, let's click on this. Let's look at the Hebrew Bible. We'll use the end. You can use different translations comparing it to the Hebrew here. And that's when I saw descendants and I thought descendants, generations. And so these are the generations of heaven and earth. Now, these are the births of heaven and earth. So I can understand Peugeot's intent of that. It's not the birth of Adam, but it is the birth of. So this is this is when this stuff gets really tricky because. You know, and I also know that with a fan base, you know, like when I begin to question Jordan Peterson's use of meek in the New Testament, you know, people know because it's Jordan Peterson's interpretation. But when I read this, it's like, well, it's he's doing something interesting because, of course, there's the structure in the Book of Genesis where you have the descendants of heaven and earth. And that's a very weird construction because it's usually the descendants of Adam, the descendants of Noah. These are the families of Noah's according to their Toledote. These are the Toledotes of Shem. These are the Toledotes of Tara. These are the Toledotes of Ishmael. This is the Toledote of Isaac of Esau, the Toledote of Jacob. And see, you can see something like the New Revised Standard is trying to keep a little bit of word discipline, something like this Lexham English Bible is a really interesting translation. It's basically by the scholars of the Bible study software. And so they do some things that you won't usually get in a traditional contemporary translation, which is sort of helpful for tracking the words. But even they struggle. Is it a genealogy? The generations? So you can see just a lot of a lot of working. So then I went to the Septuagint, which is a very early translation of the Masoretic text. And it's the Genesis, which now you're getting back into this this birth word. And actually a lot of commentaries don't really get into this thing very much. And here you'll get you'll listed it. You know, even some of the older translations, Genesis, Genesis two, four, literally the beginnings of heaven and earth. So and this is this is what's fun about doing this, because. So I'm not quite sure about Peugeot's take on this little thing, but it certainly prompt. It certainly pointed me in a different direction and got me got got me thinking along other lines. And it wasn't necessarily something that I saw a lot of discussion in. This is what happens when you start working on Bible study and I start pulling books off the shelf and I start checking how others have done this. So I just grabbed I just grabbed Robert Alter off the shelf and shoot. Now, where were we? Oh, yeah. So so Robert Alter has his translation. You know, the heavens and the earth were completed and all their vast array and God completed the seventh day, the task he had done. And he ceased on the seventh day with all the task he had done. And God blessed the seventh day and how it it for on it. He ceased from all the tasks that he had created to do. This is the tale of the heavens and the earth when they were created. Now, of course, he's he's translated Toledote as tail. And there's some reasons for that. And it's important to note that he has there's a huge amount of debate in terms of how to divide verse four. And so it's very common that people have verse four a and verse four B. And so then the question is, does that Toledote section refer is does it summarize that which came above or does it summarize or does it lead into that which goes below or is it a transition? Now, I tend to think it goes with that which goes below because that's usually how that word seems to function for all of these because it leads off a genealogy, a Genesis, a generation. And so that what's that sort of leads me against Robert Alter. But you got a guy like Robert Alter and it's like, you know, do I do I do I imagine I can read the text better than Robert Alter? His footnote, as many modern commentators have noted, the first creation account concludes with the summary phrase in the first half of the verse. This is the tale literally. These are the beginnings of the heaven and the earth when they were created. These two paired terms, heaven and earth, taking us back to an envelope structure in the paired terms on the very first verse of the creation story. Now, after the grand choreography of resonant parallel utterances of cosmogony, the style changes sharply instead of symmetry of parataxis. Hypotaxis is initially prominent. And so, again, from there and this again, this is what happens when you start working on the Bible. All right. This stuff gets really complicated. I'm just going to keep reading because I can spend all day in this. And I meant this to be basically an hour sitting here. So in the verse above, Adam is described as the descendant or offspring of heaven and earth. I'm not sure that's true. Now, Adam, it's a really creative thought. I'm going to have to think about it a lot more. Adam is also described as the mediator or bridge that provides the necessary communication between heaven and earth. Again, I think that's it's a really creative thought. And I think it's right. And let's keep going. No herb of the field had sprung up from God for God had not yet made it rain. Upon the earth and there was no human to work the ground. Offspring of heaven and earth mediator of heaven and earth. And again, Adam formed of the dust of the earth with the breath of God in him is yes, heaven and earth. Adam's mediation between heaven and earth involves lowering meaning and raising matter. Now, I don't know if. This gets hard so fast. I don't know if the Bible has a sense of matter. Certainly not in the sense that we have. There's the stuff of earth. There's the dirt, the dust of the ground, the dust that Adam was made out of. And again, I really like the idea. And I think it's I think it works lowering meaning and raising matter. This cosmic process is symbolized in the variety of ways in the context of the Bible. For example, Adam's first job in the Garden of Eden is to name the animals. Which is the clear case of lowering heaven into earth. It's it's giving it's giving logos to a non logic arena. Let's say in the scenario, heaven's wind becomes Adam's breath and serves as a vehicle to communicate between spiritual and corporeal realities. With it, Adam is able to assign a spiritual identity to the animals of the world. This naming business is is a very big deal and writers will go into extensively. It became an enormous deal because Adam names Eve. That gets into a real big fight. Adam names the animals. Adam, God formed from the ground every beast of the field and bird of the air. He brought them to the human to see what he would call them. Whatever I don't know why Peugeot switches. I got to check. OK, I'm just going to I'm just going to put it up in front of you. Just going to look at this translation because it's handy. These are the generations of heaven and earth. We got lots of footnotes, which is. Let's just see if it's logos doing its thing or sky. Earth when they were created in the day that that Yahweh God made earth and heaven before any plant of the field was on earth and before any plant of the field had sprung up because the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth and there was no human being to cultivate the ground. Now you do have the heaven and earth symmetry there because the Lord brings rain down and the human cultivates. So again, I really like what he's doing here, but technically there are issues. But a steam would rise from the earth and the water and water the face of the ground. And so again, what what what Peugeot was giving me is a sensitivity. And I remember when I when I first read the Book of Jonah in Hebrew, there's all this up and down in the Book of in the Book of Jonah, which is which is quite clear in the Hebrew text. And these things don't translate well in English. When when the Lord God formed the man of dust from the ground, he blew into his nostrils the breath of life and the man became a living nephesh. And the Lord God planted a garden in Edom in the east and there he put the man who he had formed and the Lord God caused to grow from the ground every tree that was pleasing to the site and good for food. And the tree of life was in the midst of the garden, along with the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Let's not get too far ahead of ourselves here. Well, we're already at the naming. Language is what separates humans from animals in this cosmology. Adam is the only earthly creature capable of uniting spiritual principles and corporeal facts with language through his spirit breath. Who makes the winds his messenger messengers makes the winds his messengers and the flaming fire his ministers angels host feed name eat as illustrated above humanity's role in the cause as cosmic mediator can be summed up as naming animals and hosting angels. In biblical cosmology angels are messengers that transmit higher meaning and guidance to humanity. On the other hand, beasts can potentially receive guidance and instructions from humans naming the animals is the ultimate proof of Adam's God given authority because it makes him the very source of their identity. As will be detailed in the following chapter, the role of Adam towards the angels is to host them and feed them and his role towards animals is to name them and eat from them. Except he's not going to get to eat them until Noah. That being said, it is now important to understand that eating and naming are closely related in biblical cosmology. They are both examples of putting matter under the influence of your spiritual authority, thus naming eating and taming the animals is connected in meaning and so are hosting feeding and following angels. That's really interesting. Another important way to symbolize the relationships is through the interaction of rider and mount the rider inform you get the rider and the elephant, the rider informs the mount with direction and purpose and the mount expresses that purpose with power and support. The rider extends that the mount extends the riders body by increasing the power of his legs, and the rider extends the mount spirit by increasing its wisdom. That's really interesting. The relationship between rider and the mount is perfectly analogous to the relationship between Adam's own mind and body. or breath and body. In this case, the body is the animal component and the mind is the spiritual component. Thus, Adam's impetus in the universe may also be described as raising the animal and lowering the spiritual both in himself and the world around him. Example, Abraham is mediator, the Lord appeared to him Abraham by the oaks of memory, and three men stood before him I was when he was making that point I was thinking about this exactly. I'm trying to think of other instances, and when angels are fed. I think about Elijah. Fed. The example provided in this chapter is rather clear account of humanity's role as mediator between heaven and earth. It describes. Jacob doesn't feed the angels at Bethel. Interesting ideas. It describes Adam and Sarah as they host and feed messengers or angels from God. The reader may refer to Genesis 18 one through 10 or the full text of the narrative paraphrased below. The Lord appeared to Abraham by the oaks of of of Mamre, and Abraham lifted his eyes and looked three men stood before him and he ran to meet them and bowed down to the earth. Abraham please do not move on I will fetch a morsel of bread and sustain your heart. And that's, that's definitely the Near Eastern culture of hospitality you'll find that throughout the Bible, this is what a holy man does. Abraham said to Sarah in the tent take three measures of fine meal and need it and then have some cakes Abraham went to the herd and chose a calf, and then he gave it to the gave it to the youth who hurried to prepare it he took cream and milk and the calf he prepared and offered it to them under the tree. Then he said where is where is your wife where is Sarah your wife Abraham said below in the tent. The Lord said I will return to you at this time next year and Sarah your wife will have a son. The tree represents the spatial axis which is briefly mentioned in the first section of the commentary and will be full fully discussed in segments four through five. That's very interesting. The story is one of many examples in the biblical of a transaction between heaven and earth in this case, Abraham receives heavenly information from angels and exchange for earthly food from animals. In other words, this transaction is an example of seed for flesh, like the descending manna and ascending quails from chapter 16. I will return to you at this time next year and Sarah your wife shall have a son. The information transmitted to Abraham by the messengers came in the form of a simple promise. This promise is a clear example of a seed because it contains great implications with the very with very little basis and material reality. Also, the promise informs Abraham of a future son, which makes it a perfect example of a seed. What is a seed but the promise of future offspring? The illustration in the following diagram, Abraham finds himself at the center of a cosmic transaction between heaven and earth. This is a typical example of trading flesh for seed to acquire knowledge. On one side, Abraham asks a youth to prepare the flesh. On the other, he asks Sarah to make bread as discussed in chapter 16. Making bread from flour is a process of materialization, whereas preparing meat from an animal is a process of refinement. Abraham went to the herd and chose a calf and he gave it to the youth who hurried to prepare it. Now what's interesting here is that there are not extra words in the Bible. They all mean something. And so when we read something, you know you listen to how many times Peugeot talked to Peterson about attention. When we read things, we do the same thing as we do in regular life. We pay attention to some things and we glide over other things. And so what's helpful here is where, okay, why the little bit about the herd and the calf and gave it to the youth? A clear example of trading flesh for seed can also be found in the story of Jack and the Beanstalk when Jack trades a cow for magic beans. Boy, that's interesting. The image of raising livestock in the story is significant because it points to the role of humanity as raising the animal to lower the spiritual. There's definitely something about that in sacrifice. And particularly the act of choosing a calf, emphasized on choosing, indicates the process of refinement and separating the cream from the common. Moreover, the flesh of the animal must then be cooked to become the body of these heavenly messengers. Of course, this is a process of refinement. But again, you know, I can't help but jump ahead to think about sacrifice because I never I never would have introduced the implicit idea of sacrifice into that story of Genesis 18. Abraham said to Sarah in the tent, take three measures of fine meal and need it and then make some cakes. The image of making bread in this story indicates a process of vulgarization. It means that something to find flour has been materialized into something more tangible bread. Importantly, the bread prepared by Sarah in this story is not even eaten by the angels. Now I gotta check the story. Not that I don't trust him, but that's this is the process. So we'll jump over to. And the Lord appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre. And he was sitting in the doorway of the tent at the heat of the day, and he lifted up his eyes and saw. And behold, three men were standing nearby him. And he saw and he saw and ran from the doorway to the tent to meet them. And he bowed down to the ground. And again, none of that is incidental. It is, in fact, cultural, but it is not. We don't want to dismiss it as simply cultural because the cultural has its formation in the same stuff as the text. He said, My Lord, if I found favor in your eyes, do not pass do not pass by your servant. Let a little water be brought and wash your feet and rest under the tree. And let me bring a piece of bread and then refresh yourselves. Afterwards, you can pass on once you have passed by with your son. Pass on once you have passed by with your servant. And they said to him, do as you have said. Then Abraham hastened to the tent to Sarah and said, quick, take three sias of fine flour for kneading and make bread cakes. And Abraham ran to the cattle and took a calf, tender and good, and gave it to the servant. And he made haste to prepare it. Then he took curds and milk and the calf, which he prepared and set it before them. And they said to him, where is your wife, Sarah? And they said here in the tent. And she said, I will. And they said, I will certainly return to you the spring. That interchange. The men set out. OK, then he took curds and milk and the calf he had prepared. And said it before them. He's also serving them a calf and milk. Hmm. He was standing by them under the tree while they ate. So no record of her setting the bread cakes before them. The ascending side of the transaction, the flesh must be consumed by the angels. OK, he set the curds and the milk and the calf before them and they ate. While the descending side, the bread remains intact. That's very interesting. These are simply the two sides of a single coin. One side feeds and the other side hosts. As strange as these cosmic transactions may appear in modern interpretations, they are no different from what any individual performs on a daily basis. Humans refine matter into food to be integrated by the head into the body. And the body is then able to host and support the human spirit, which is thereby able to manifest itself concretely in the world. Thus matter is refined. Again, matter. But what other word are you going to use? Matter is refined so that spirit can be materialized and vice versa. The only difference here is that the transaction is performed at the cosmic level with Abraham playing the role of mediator between spirit and matter. Sexuality is microcosm. Adam's reproduction. God created the human in his image in the image God created it. Male, heaven and female earth, he created them. The sexual revolution has been so devastating to spiritual worldviews as the Copernican revolution. Therefore, if we wish to understand certain notions in the Bible, we must adopt a traditional perspective and forget about things like test to babies and gender reassignments. Instead, we must simply recognize the duality of male and female as the basis of procreation. Only from this natural position does sexuality become a microcosm unit of heaven and earth. In biblical literature, the word is used to describe the nature of the human being. In biblical cosmology, heaven and earth is a secondary cause of all manifestation. It is also the basic pattern from which all reality is modeled, including the male and female duality in the context of procreation. Only the symbolism of male and female as principles of reproduction are discussed here. A more complete picture will be in chapter 71 and 72. Teaser. As illustrated in the previous page, Adam is the higher principle of the source of gender division. Therefore, like the creator of the universe, Adam can reproduce a miniature image of himself, a child, through the reunion of that polarity. Thus, in order to create Adam in his image, God made Adam a creator or reproducer of his own image. Only then was the microcosm truly complete. When the image contained its own image within itself, God said, it is not good that the human is alone. I will make him a help as his opposite. There's another. These verses have been so worked over in the fight over women in office in the Christian informed church and how many other places. To truly grasp the significance of gender in the Bible, it's important to understand that Adam is the union of heaven and earth at the cosmic level and that this union translates into sexual union at the human level. Therefore, the male and the female sides each represent one half of the equation. Male. See, when I move this, I lose my place sometimes. Therefore, the male and the female, one half of the equation. Male is responsible for materializing meaning into seed, and female is responsible for refining matter into food. Boy, that's interesting. The name Adam actually means human and refers to both male and female halves. God created Adam in the image of God. He created them male and female, blessed them, and called their name Adam. This is traditionally a strong connection between digestion and gestation because the womb is associated with the belly. Therefore, the seed apparently develops where the mother's own food is being stored. On one side of the equation, the father produces the seed that implicitly contains the essence of humanity. Therefore, the role of the male is directly connected to heaven and language. On the other side of the equation, like the earth itself, the mother provides sustenance in the form of food. In particular, she raises body from her own body. She raises food from her own body, first in the womb and then in the breast. At the moment of the union, the seeds meaning because sperm seed. Yeah. And again, the the thinking was that, in fact, it's seed. Seed in the earth because no seed and no worth and you'll get that then in the curses. The seed consumes the food, which is turns returns into the body that hosts its meaning. In general, eating food is a human version of informing matter, while hosting seed is a human version of supporting and expressing meaning. These are two sides of a single coin, which means the male and female roles are equally important in its cosmology. Father lower seed consumes food, child host seed raise food. This cannot be easily reconciled with the scientific explanation of how things work at the molecular level. In this case, males and females contribute the same amount of information DNA, while only females express it with matter. Hence, the male role is greatly diminished in the materialist worldview. Huh. Very interesting. So that was chapters 17, 17, 18 and 19. Yeah. A lot to think about. Anyway, there's this video. Let me know what you think.