https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ul1Z8NTMCE8

 Hi, my name is Paul VanderKlay. I'm the pastor of Living Stones Christian Reformed Church in Sacramento, California. There's been a joke going around how watching Synod on the livestream would be more fun if we had commentators like at football or hockey games. And so in the spirit of that, I thought I'd give my Synod 2017 post-game show. My title for this Synod is Tectonic Fault Lines and Culture Tear at Western Civilization. The CRC rather unselfconsciously goes along for the ride. Why do I think that? Well, again, I live in California and California, you know, all about the Ring of Fire because this is the area that is supposed to expose, in a sense, to us these tectonic plates. And along the places that they rub and press against each other, you'll find volcanoes and earthquakes and tsunamis. And part of the way that you, here in California we have these, it's rather California, Oregon, Washington, up in B.C., you have some rather beautiful mountains that are actually volcanoes. And sometimes these volcanoes erupt. And if you want to kind of understand what's going on beneath the surface in the Christian Reformed Church in North America, it's important to look at what we fight about. I think the volcanoes we saw at Synod 2017 were, emerged along certain areas. The Do Justice blog, the conversation about that. The Day of Justice, the conversation about that. The Bell Heart, something that has come through repeatedly for us. And then the decision in 2016, which kind of looked at it, and then 2017 came full to full life, understanding contemporary testimony as a category rather than a subtitle of our world belongs to God. I think Synod had its Donald Trump moment when the advisory committee for came in and assumed that, yeah, the overture from Minn Kota, this is the kind of thing that they always complain about. And so we're going to talk about it. We're going to see the points that they make. But for the most part, business should go on as usual. It's kind of like here in the United States where people thought, yeah, Hillary's way ahead in the polls and we'll have the election. And so friends, you see this nice group of white friends from the SNL squit that's a David Chappelle skit. Very funny, it's worth watching. I'll imagine that, well, here at Synod we're going to talk about this and Minn Kota's going to make a lot of noise and then we're going to vote it down and go on as business as usual. And then Synod adopted some of the recommendations from Committee 4 and then the first recommendation that Synod not accede to the overture was defeated. And then suddenly it's like, oh my, what happened? Minn Kota's supposed to be this fringe out here that nobody's paying attention to and a majority of delegates saw enough in the overture that they said stop. There's your Donald Trump moment where everyone says, well, I thought things were just supposed to keep on going like they always have. Well, there are some pretty significant fault lines going on in Western civilization right now. We see this in politics in the United States, we see it in politics in Europe. And I think part of a good way to understand it is through two books that I've read recently. David Brooks' book On the Road to Character in many ways really contrasts kind of the old dominant regime that fought the Second World War with the new ascending regime. Yuval Harari in Homu Deus understands the 20th century I think in a rather helpful way where he says really what happened in the West in the 20th century is that three different forms of humanism battled. There's the form that got its expression in Nazism and that was defeated by kind of by the combined forces of the Soviet Union and then the Western powers. And then the Cold War then was the war between kind of this evolutionary understanding of class warfare versus capitalist free democracies. And in the end the free democracies won. And then that old school was very much embodied by the old mainline churches, the neo-orthodox churches in North America. Their brand of humanism, their brand of classical liberalism kind of reached its ascendancy. Well that brand is now under fire and you can see that in some of the things going on at Berkeley, at Evergreen University in Washington, in Yale, in the Black Lives Matter movement, in the LGBT movement. I think there's an ascending rise of really a new orthodoxy. I tend to call it a liberationist progressivism. Those are the terms that are, this is what human life is for, individual liberation to be free to do, to have safe spaces and all of this. Now the mainline churches are cratering as an institution but their ideas of the new mainline, of the new ascendant, which I really think is basically a new civil religion that is replacing the old civil religion that won the Cold War. And the new mainline creating a new secular theocracy with church or God not required. This gets into some of the stuff that Jonathan Haight has been writing about how a lot of the discussions about free speech are really discussions about blasphemy. That kind of a moralism has taken on a new religiosity and right now that's behind a lot of the things battling in our culture. James Bratt, towards the end of the 20th century, wrote his book about Dutch Calvinists in modern America and he had this matrix that you may not be able to see very well on the video kind of between the seceders and the pietists and the infralapsarians, between the neo-Calvinists, the Khyperians and the superlapsarians. There's something of that going on that continues in our struggles in the Christian Reformed Church. Most people when they watch these struggles will say there's progressives and conservatives. So Minn Kota is kind of the conservative and the Grand Rapids East Camp, they're the progressives. And so you have some of these traditional things happening. But I think one of the most important things that I've read over the last number of years about to understand CRC history was James Scops, what about a bicentennial Mr. and Mrs. CRC? And the main point that he's making is that conditions in the United States continue, in the United States and Canada, and all of Western civilization really, continue to evolve. And what that means is that our fights are no longer our own. Prior to World War II, the Christian Reformed Church was rather isolated. Technological advances in radio and television and now obviously the internet, technological disruptions have very much made the Christian Reformed Church just another one of these immigrant denominations that increasingly fights along the broader lines of conflict and factions in American Christianity. My read of the major factions right now in the Christian Reformed Church is this. You have the CRC confessionalists and Minn Kota has kind of become the standard bearer of the confessionalists. We see churches that are against women in office going over to Minn Kota, assimilating in that group, and they produce pretty much every year a steady stream of overtures. They are engaging the Christian Reformed Church in its traditional way of looking at leadership and understanding sin as kind of the key to power. Now they're confessionalists and they've been waving the banner of confessions for years now until of course the bellharr came where groups that weren't terribly interested in confessions suddenly got a taste for them. Again, looking at the long term story of the Christian Reformed Church, that's an important thing to watch. So you have the CRC confessionalists and their standard bears right now are kind of classist Minn Kota, but they are not alone and we saw that in the Donald Trump moment. We have the CRC evangelicals. They really came into their own after World War II and I think were especially present in the rise of Christian Reformed home missions when they really got in touch with church planting, the seeker movement, Willow Creek, Saddleback. Now this group culturally again kind of reached their pinnacle in the 80s but are by no means gone. They in fact have weathered the storm better than the main lines and they kind of in the Christian Reformed Church found their heyday in the old sunshine church that grew into one of the CRC late 20th century's most important mega churches. You heard some of their voice when we had the conversation at Synod about numerical decline and you heard a number of points being made at Synod about well we can help the poor and we can do all these things but what really matters for eternity is that we bring people to Christ and they have a saving relationship. That's very much evangelical language and now you can find a lot of commonality between the confessionalists and the evangelicals there but that really sets up a lot of the conflict with the third camp who are the CRC progressives. Now again that camp has been around a long time. They and the confessionalists have really been doing battle for a long time but the progressives have also been deeply influenced by the changes in western civilization in the 20th century and what confessionalists and evangelicals who are really on the conservative end of the culture war are seeing in the language and the behavior of the progressives are what they're seeing in the broader culture war. A few months ago I didn't write a blog post but I was going to a little bit of advice to the social justice camp about if you keep triggering the reflexes that we're developing in the broader culture wars within the CRC we're going to continue to see factional division and factional strike within the CRC and because of the way these factions line up you're going to start losing a lot of those fights and again that's what we saw in this Donald Trump moment I think actually when Synod said no we're not going to go along with the first recommendation from advisory committee for this was a sign this was probably the most important moment in this Synod. So others are reading CRC progressives in a particular light. Now there's another faction which doesn't get much press but which I think people need to be watching in the CRC and that are the CRC emerging sacramentalists and these are a lot of people who are reading Jamie Smith and listening to what he's saying about cultural liturgies and getting in touch with church fathers and reading Calvin in the light of the church fathers and exploring Augustine. This is an emerging and an ascending faction in the CRC that is going to be vitally important for the future. While in the Midwest now if you have a church planted they'll for the most part use seeker methodology out here on the west coast you get a church planted a lot of them are going to be using more sacramentalist things they're going to have communion every week. They're going to be having liturgies. Church of the Servant was again kind of a vanguard church for this but if you know some of the politics around this group they're very much going to shake up kind of the political factions in the CRC. They're very much going to be a swing vote that decides whether the coalition between the confessionalists and the evangelicals kind of try to subvert the institutional advantages that the CRC often Grand Rapids based and now really the Canadian church coming online strongly in this faction. So you're going to see a lot of the interplay between these factions in the CRC for years to come. In the CRC a lot of what we've often done to try to understand ourselves and the factors that are pushing on us is look at the RCA. Now the RCA is a very different church than the CRC is. We saw at the senate a big discussion. What's our relationship going to be with the RCA? I really want to give kudos to the CRC staff people who made following our senate very accessible. The banner staff, the denominational staff putting it up on live stream and then quickly posting it on YouTube made it very easy for those of us who live out west to continue to follow the CRC. Tried to follow the RCA. The RCA is having they're having the kinds of conflicts that threaten their unity in existence and it'd be probably to nobody's surprise that within very few years you watch significant break up or remorhing of the RCA. One of the most important things that came over in the RCA was an overture from the synod of the of the far west to affirm that the Heidelberg Catechism question 108 and 109 categorically states that God condemns all unchastity which includes same-sex sexual activity and that faithful adherence to the RCA standards therefore entail the affirmation that marriage is between one man and one woman. The RCA right now is going through really an existential conflict. You kind of have the old RCA east that is much more mainline. That group numerically has been declining. The part of the RCA that is growing through church planting tend to be the young restless and reformed and evangelicals in the far west and also in the midwest which tends to be most like the CRC that tend to be conservative on these issues. This won pretty significantly at the RCA senate and this is just another step in this multi-year battle which probably will result in the pushing out of the RCA east. That's very much going to change their denomination and this is really important to keep watching if we're going to be talking about what does it mean for us to collaborate or even this new creation idea. I'd love for us to have some very interesting conversations about that. Once this passed though it was followed by Fred Harrell who is the pastor of the Christ Church San Francisco, a church that was PCA, came into the RCA to afford women an office and just a couple of years ago made some moves to join the room for all affirming LGBT community in San Francisco. This is really a hot button area. Fred Harrell then makes a motion from the floor that General Synod affirms that the Heidelberg Catechism in question and answer 74 categorically states that infants as well as adults are included in God's covenant people and therefore infants should be incorporated into the Christian Church through baptism. Right there you begin to see how the sacramentalist faction is going to play in some very different ways against the old factional alliances that the CRC has seen. We're going to continue to see this in the CRC and it's really important that we continue to watch what happens in the RCA as these things happen. Progressivists tend to assume that well this line of progress which has women in office and same sex marriage and all of these things as time goes by this progress will continue. I think what we're going to see is that if you watch the decline of the main line institutionally we will probably see churches swinging back in a conservative way. This is why I really don't think we're going to see the Christian Reformed Church take a big swing towards affirming same sex marriage. I don't think at least within my lifetime and I don't know if ever. Those are much longer bigger questions. So I want to make three points at the end of this video. The subtitle becoming a category is probably a good thing. When the CRC was gifted the Belhar it became kind of like our three ecumenical confessions. Things we can't really tinker with because they impact the relationships we have with other churches. When now that we've made the Belhar a contemporary testimony we've kind of defined this new category we now have a chance to actually have what I call confessional conversations. We actually have a chance to look at the Belhar and say huh what in this do we like? What in this do we have questions about? There are a number of delegates that said well the Belhar expresses liberation theology. Now we're getting in touch with the bigger conversations that are going on in all of western civilization. That brings me to my second point that we have the theological resources to critique and engage these larger shifts. The column old school post World War II CRC progressives very much had a mission where they wanted to impact the larger conversations in North American culture. I think the Christian Reformed Church can continue to play that role. We have the theological resources. We have the institutions. We are not using them in the church and we're not doing our best work in terms of engaging these things. We have to figure out how to use them. Part of the difficulty is the technological disruption that's happened. We're seeing this in the conversation about the Do Justice blog. What is a blog? How do we have conversations? How do we use YouTube? How do we use blogs? How do we do Twitter? Now this gets into my third point which is we haven't figured out the relationship between leadership and our institutions. We changed from having a general secretary as such to an executive director but I think as a denomination we haven't really talked about how leadership is exerted in the denomination and what this looks like. Part of the difficulty is that we have factions and so part of what denominations want and you see this in the RCA is that denominations want institutional unity and so leadership of institutions tend to be referees. They want to make sure that process is complied with and that people play fair and that nobody leaves the fold. That's a natural inclination for institutional leadership. What that doesn't help us do is work out the kind of ways that the broader tectonic shifts are impacting and changing our factions and help us to be actually helpful to one another and helpful beyond ourselves. What we really haven't figured out is how should leadership work in the CRC? If you look at the early part of the 20th century the Christian Forum looked to seminary professors as leaders. Towards the mid to late 20th century the CRC kind of looked at banner editors as leaders. The banner is not what it has been partly because magazines have been disrupted. The CRC is not what it used to be because technology has changed how we feel, how we sit within the broader conversation of American culture. What we've not really figured out how to do as a denomination is how does leadership work with our institutions? How can we with all of these technologies have what I call again confessional conversations? How can we process what's in the bell heart? How can we take our theological and institutional resources and leverage them productively so that when these shifts happen we as a denomination don't just rather unselfconsciously repeat the kind of battles that are happening let's say between Jim Wallace and the Southern Baptists or the other conversations going but how we as a denomination can use the gifts that we have inherited and say how can we apply these to our situation and how can we be helpful not only to our own people but to the world beyond and how in the process can we in fact understand our identity and our existence as a Christian Reformed Church. So that's my Synod 2017 post game show. I'm going to be posting this in all the various ways I post things. Please engage me in this conversation. You can leave a blog, a comment in my blogs as I post them on Facebook, on YouTube, on Twitter. I'll be in all those places so please let's have the conversation.