https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Jb9t_MOOcPI

 Hi, this is Paul. I got an email this morning from our Sam about a New York Times piece that he thought I would be interested in, and he was very right. This is partly the benefit of building a community, because what you do is you train all the people around you to be interested in the same salience hierarchies that you have, and we actually, as a community, to then begin to work on similar things. So this article in the New York Times, the empty religions of Instagram, how influencers become our moral authorities, and this is religions that aren't a religion. Now, I've been spending a lot of time thinking about religions and institutions. The article on how, basically how the civil rights movement, at least in the white version, for white mainliners, disrupted the mainline church, and so we've seen it basically bust out of the walls of the church. Now, Leigh Stein is the author of the article. On Instagram, I follow 700 people, mostly women. 100 of these women follow Glennon Doyle, whose memoir Untamed has been on the Times bestseller list for 51 weeks. Fans of Ms. Doyle's gospel and accessible combination of self-care, activism, and tongue-in-cheek Christianity, Jesus loves me, this I know, for he gave me Lexapro. I don't even know what Lexapro is. Can worship at any time or day or night at the electric church of her Instagram feed. By replacing the rigid dogma of religion with confessional lingua franca of social media, Ms. Doyle has become a charismatic preacher for women like me who aren't even religious. Okay, so right there we have, once again, the question of the definition of religion. And again, religion in the post-celebrity atheist, new atheist sphere is something that involves supernatural things. It's the modernist sphere. 22% of millennials are now non-affiliated with specific religions. They are known as the religious nuns, N-O-N-E-S. The Pew Research Center found the number of nuns in the population as a whole increased 9%—9 percentage points from 2009 to 2019. The main reason that nuns are unaffiliated are that they question religious teaching or they don't like church's stance on social issues. And any pastor that is dealing with, usually, pastor from a traditional church that is dealing with urban areas, so in other words, if there's sort of a, if you are a religious minority in your community with respect to any of your social issues, this is going to be a real issue, especially because a lot of these conservative churches are evangelistic, which means that the stuff they're selling, the community has pre-rejected. Okay. But are we truly non-religious or are our belief systems too bespoke to appear on a list of major religions in a Pew phone survey? Many millennials who have turned their backs on religious traditions because it isn't sufficiently diverse or inclusive have found alternative scriptures online. Our new belief system is a blend of left-wing political orthodoxy, intersectional femininity, self-optimization, therapy, wellness, astrology, and Dolly Parton. And we found a different kind of clergy. Personal growth influences women like Ms. Doyle, who offers nuns like us permission, validation, and community on demand at a time when it's nearly impossible to take communion in person. We don't even have to put down our phones. In February, Ms. Doyle posted a virtual sermon to her followers on Instagram, encouraging them to embrace quitting as a spiritual practice. Apparently not quitting Instagram. More than a hundred thousand people of her congregation liked it. Followers responded with prayer-raised emojis, God bless yous, and hallelujah, sister. I spoke to Kimberly Shiano, a 31-year-old health practitioner on Long Island who found Glennon Doyle via her discovery feed. Ms. Shiano has followed a spiritual path that often may sound familiar to other nuns. She grew up Roman Catholic, but she became alienated from her faith, but what she saw is the church's hypocrisy. In her 20s, she studied yoga and Eastern philosophy. During a year when she lost a job, a 10-year relationship, and her grandmother, the message she absorbed from Ms. Doyle helped sustain her. It's okay not to be okay. Ms. Doyle and other quasi-spiritual influencers are the latest iteration of an American institution that has been around since the second half of the 20th century, the televangelist. And then she goes into some of that history. Then she talks about the pandemic. I was once one of those millennials who made politics her religion. I lasted three years as a feminist activist and organizer before I burned out in 2017. That's when I began noticing how many wellness programs and programs were marked marketed to women in pain and how the social media industry relies on keeping us outraged and engaged. It's no wonder we're seeking relief. I have survived the pandemic so far by performing the role of tough cookie and shielding myself from cynicism. The only times I cried have been with, not from cynicism, with cynicism. Excuse me, big difference. The only times I cried have been when religion has punctured the bubble. Religion has punctured the, how do we, what do we notice as being religious? I cried when Reverend Raphael Warnock spoke at John Lewis's funeral. I cried when Garth Brooks sang Amazing Grace acapella at the Biden inauguration. I've hardly prayed to God since I was a teenager, but the pandemic has cracked open inside me a profound yearning for reverence, humility, and awe. I have an overdraft of my outrage. I have an overdraft on my outrage account. I want moral authority from someone who isn't shilling a memoir or calling out her enemies on social media for clout. Left-wing secular millennials may follow politics devoutly, but the women we've chosen as our moral leaders aren't challenging us to ask fundamental questions that leaders of faith have been wrestling with for thousands of years. Why are we here? Why do we suffer? What should we believe in beyond the limits of our puny selfhood? The whole economy of Instagram is based on thinking, on thinking about ourselves, posting about ourselves, and working on ourselves. My mom is an influencer in the old school sense. At 72, she still works as a full-time psychotherapist. She's a lay minister at her church, probably a mainline church, but I don't know. And she fills her time with volunteer work. Her sermons are a combination of therapeutic tips, references to current events, and lessons from scripture about having compassion for the other even during times of intense polarization. I preach about that. I told her that I find myself craving role models at my age who are not only righteous crusaders, but also humble and merciful, and that I'm not finding them where I live online. Referring to the influencers who have filled the void religious faith has left for people like me, she said, they might inspire you to live your best life, but not make your best, but not make the best use of your life. I thought of Ms. Chiano, who was following Ms. Doyle for solace during the dark period. Even though Ms. Chiano doesn't see Ms. Doyle as a neo-religious leader, I was struck by the vulnerable comment she left on one of Ms. Doyle's Instagram posts in which she unloaded the litany of hardships she'd experienced last year. I noticed it went unanswered. A confession without a confessor. Liability of any internet guru. There's a chasm between the vast scope of our needs and what influencers can provide. We're looking for guidance in the wrong places. Instead of helping us to engage with our most important questions, our screens might be distracting us from them. Maybe we actually need to go to something like church. Contrary to what you might have seen on Instagram, our purpose is not to optimize one wild and precious life. It's time to search for meaning beyond the electric church that helps keep us addicted to our phones and alienated from our closest kin. Wow. So of course, I'm a digger. And where am I going to dig? But YouTube. Has she done a video? Why, yes she has. Where? Bloggingheads.tv. You know, I think I'm on a collision course with Robert Wright because I remember when I started making videos, I noted, well, two of my go-to guys, Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter, they're on Bloggingheads.tv. I've watched a number of videos with Robert Wright, who also has Meaning of Life TV online. Now, I think mostly because of Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter, Bloggingheads, which used to be around maybe 10,000 subs, has peaked up to 43,000 subs. But interesting that they're here in this space. Well, let's have a listen. Hi, I'm Kat Rosenfield. And I'm Phoebe Maltzbo. And of course, anybody who's been around certain Buddhist-y, yogi-y, these kinds of things, what's that little bell that they start with? And we are Feminine Chaos. Here today with Lee Stein, the author. I'm gonna have to adjust that sound, hang on. Self-care. It comes out on, I think, June 30th. Is that correct? Yep. And also the recent author of an extremely viral medium essay called The End of the Girl Boss is here. Needless to say, all of these are topics. So of course, I had to look up The End of the Girl Boss, too, which is on Medium, and I'll put all these links below. Very interesting piece. And I'm gonna have to read it. She leaned in with Sheryl Sandberg, and they talk about this in the conversation. Basically, Hillary Clinton was sort of peak, but then of course, George Floyd came along, and right away you're dealing with a hierarchy. Because are you going to be anti-racist, or are you going to be anti-patriarchy? There can only be one thing at the top of the hierarchy, and this of course to me always swings back to Jordan Peterson's comment in the first biblical series. Part of what Christianity does is put something above the hierarchy. It's got to be outside the age of decay, very similar to what Victor Frankl notes in terms of his reflections from the concentration camp. It's always got to be above, and this is a natural weakness in a secularist perspective. That's very relevant to our PBs and my interests and the Feminine Chaos audience's interests. So Lee, welcome, and why don't you tell us a little bit more about your book and your background? Sure, thanks for having me on. As Kat mentioned, my book is called Self Care. It comes out June 30th, and it is a satire of the wellness industry and Girlboss feminism. So for three years, I ran a feminist nonprofit organization called Out of the Binders, which was a joke on Mitt Romney's gaff that he had binders full of us, so we were out of the binders, and I ran a conference called BinderCon for Women Writers, and I totally burned out on this feminist organizing experience, and that's what led me to start writing this novel. So I'm really interested in internet culture and internet drama and women using feminism as part of their brand, and so that's what led me to write this book, and the book is about two women who start a company called Ritual, R-I-C-H-U-A-L. That's kind of like if Goop and Instagram had a baby. It's like a social network, but drama ensues. That is so good. Ritual. That is so good. And the two women at the helm of the company are forced to ask themselves, you know, should we be good people or should we try to make some money? It's so good, and it just anticipates this moment. It's so funny and and timeless in that regard, but it also just, it's like, it's playing, this is playing out now. I mean, if Ritual were real, I would be completely reading it constantly because I would, but it's just all of these like apology statements from the sort of the devins and the marons of the world are just, they keep coming, and it's like, ah! I don't know half the references in this video, but I'm sure some of you do. It's theirs. It's very, it's funny rereading your novel now because it's like, it's happening. It's on. I got really lucky with the timing, I think, like with everything happening with The Wing and Man Repeller and Refund. I didn't know any of these, so I had to look some of those up too. Finery 29, all these women held media companies that have kind of used social justice as branding are being held to account now. So Lee, are you actually a time traveler from the future? Very important to know. Did you go forward and then come back to write about everything that was going to happen, or you just have your finger so thoroughly on the pulse of all of this stuff that you were able to see the writing on the wall before it all unfolded? That's funny. Like the book is set in February 2017, so I set the book one month after Trump was inaugurated, and I picked a very defined time window because I thought like, I don't know what's going to happen with this guy. Like, I don't know what's going to happen to our country, so I'm just going to pick up like a few week time period. But even then, there was so much drama around the Women's March, and what I've been thinking a lot about lately is like when I was running this Facebook group, which had 40,000 members, I would like go into the trenches of this Facebook group every day, and then I would emerge, and then I would tell my partner what had happened on the internet that day. But what I'm finding today is that it's not happening in these tiny bubbles. It's actually happening in this like grander sphere of public discourse that everyone, including like my 71-year-old mom, like she's aware of these online controversies. So the bubble- It reminds me of Benjamin Boyce. We're all living in evergreen now. ...has expanded, so I thought I was writing about kind of a subculture or a smaller internet community, but I think we're all living it now at large. Yeah, I think that's really, really true. I mean, I think a lot of us who have been kind of interested in these topics, yeah, we were told for so long like, oh, this is niche, this is only, you know, for the people who are online, and then I- It's pretty amazing that none of these women have gotten better microphones. I think partly also, yeah, with the pandemic and, you know, everyone being at home, everyone who can be online is that much more online, and there's like dividing things between online life and real life starts to seem- Yeah. ...little- The internet is more real at this point, like at least, you know, we can all see each other's faces instead of wearing masks. Right, is this real- Is this more real life than when we go out in public wearing masks? It might be at this point. You get home, you take your mask off, and you log on, and then you also take your like mask off, and you stop being polite and start getting real. Right, absolutely. Oh boy. This is the least interesting part of the conversation. So we wanted to talk about, I mean, basically like your entire book, which just, you know, inject it directly into my veins. It's so good. Exactly. There were some lines, okay, you should- oh, I'm sorry, but just the thing about- okay, sorry, can I just say the very intense post by Maren Gelb sponsored by Lunar Milk, that got me, that really got me, and then, sorry, sorry, I just need to like explain the- okay, this line, there were layers of a fence to unearth here, and everyone was on an archaeological dig. Oh my god, that's the internet, that's what's happening. That's really good. I'm gonna have to buy this book. That's so beautiful. Sorry. I think I learned that from a Freddie DeBoer piece about a fence archaeology or something. Oh yeah, Planet of Cops, which we mentioned on our podcast all the time. Yes. Yeah, but it does seem like dig- I gotta dig up that one too now. Hadn't heard of this either. Freddie DeBoer, of course, is a blogger that's been around a while. He's a real Marxist, as opposed to the ones who only play them on TV for profit, or maybe he does play it for profit, I don't know. Conservatives have always been cops, obviously, I mean literal cops, the professionals who tend to have a reactionary bent right, but the people flooding the FCC with complaints about Janet Jackson's nipple, they're cops. William Burroughs, summarizing the whole social conservative movement perfectly as decent church-going women with their mean, pinched, bitter, evil faces. People who narc on their navels are cops. People who want to scour test scores to get teachers fired are cops. And people who want to keep an eye on trans people when they go to the bathrooms are cops, obviously. Drug test people on food stamps. Strip search Muslims at the airport. Let me see your papers please. Conservatives were born cops. They've always been. They always will. Milo Yiannopoulos, he's a cop too. Yada yada yada yada yada. But who wanted a career as cops? Well, morning, noon, and night. The woke world is full of snitches, informants, rats. Go on any space concerned with social justice and you will find endless surveillance. Everyone is judged. Everyone is under surveillance. Everyone you can, everything you say can be scoured, picked over, analyzed for any possible offense. I read about the the power button PWRBTTN accusations. They're disturbing. I take them seriously, but these guys have had their careers erased overnight and the idea that they have any responsibility to give them a chance to defend themselves is treated like you took part in their alleged crimes. You simply cannot say in polite society, basic fairness requires us to avoid or rush to judgment and to give people the right to respond to accusations. To do so gets you lumped in with the criminals. Like a friend of mine said, the only acceptable reaction to an accusation is enthusiastic and unqualified acceptance. Those of you following my sermons will know that Kenneth Bailey, New Testament scholar who lived through the Lebanese Civil War basically wrote these things word for word in terms of his commentary on the Gospel of Luke. I've been reading them to my church and it's been really interesting seeing what people get upset about. Like a friend of mine once said, the only acceptable reaction to accusation is enthusiastic and unqualified acceptance. You don't know how people can simultaneously talk about prison abolition and restoring the idea of forgiveness to literal criminal justice system and at the same time turn the entire social world into a kangaroo court system. Like I once wrote, we can't simultaneously be a movement based on rehabilitation and restorative justice and a vicious judgmental moral aristocracy. You don't know who thinks everyone's guilty until proven innocent, cops. You know who thinks people don't deserve the right to defend themselves, cops. And you know who says who defends basic fairness and due process are as bad as the criminals, cops. And very interesting, very interesting article. I'll have to put the link in here too. Again, 2017. Digging through the layers, you know, maybe you don't know why it's offensive at first, but if you keep looking, you'll find reasons. Yes, you'll find something. Yeah, there's that opportunism aspect of it. So, you know, I want to return to talking about self-care, you know, in a little bit, but also want to talk about your extremely viral medium essay about the fall of the girl boss, which you somehow managed to basically predict, you know, three years before it happened. And so there was, I'm just going to just grab a quote here. So you were talking about lean-in feminism, which Phoebe also wrote a piece about the death of recently. And this one sentence really kind of got to it for me. It was, Sandberg allowed women to feel like they were activists whenever they advocated for themselves. And I have been thinking a lot about this and how it basically for a very, very brief time. Activists allowed them to feel like activists. Well, that's meaning, right? I mean, meaning is this little gyroscope inside of us. It's how we're connected to the bigger world. Of course, that's that's what for Vervet is talking about and how I can, when I advocate for myself, I'm an activist. When I use a particular product, when I use Apple, I'm an activist. And so activism has sort of become this portal, this gateway to the religious world. Time period leveraged this sense that, you know, the sense of anxiety and insecurity that a lot of young millennial women suffer from into self-advocacy where suddenly like you yourself were the good cause. And so lean-in was to push against sexism. So you were doing something noble, noble, excuse me, by advocating for yourself. Why didn't that last? What changed? Oh, did it change? This idea of like self-empowerment feminism, I think it, it, it, anger can be so activating. It can feel so good to be angry and to have an object to be angry at. And when I was, and again, this gets into Vervet key stuff. What is meaning? Well, meaning is you're in the agent arena relationship. And so the bigger you can connect without there and connect it with you, the more powerful this is going to be. And especially when it's going to align without, you know, any actual cross-bearing. I mean, my cross-bearing is, you know, I might have to cut my nails short so I can be really fast on Twitter or Instagram. Is writing the book, you know, writing that book in 2017 and on the heels of the women's march, just the anger at Donald Trump being our president, but feeling powerless to do anything. So you look for other targets. Now, what's really funny is when I listen to this, and I think about a lot of my audience, you might look at, you know, you'll make look at Lay Stein and think, oh, she's, she's so IDW cause she's so down with us now because she wrote this book and she's calling it out, yada, yada, yada, but she's like, do you hear the whole interview? I don't know if I'm going to have time because some people are stopping by to meet me, but let's keep going. And so if whatever you can do, I don't know, there was, there's, it's self-empowerment, but it's also like, you feel part of a community with other women who feel the same way you do. And I think that's a really powerful feeling too. So you feel like an activist when you're speaking up for women and then you can also justify things to yourself. Like, well, I'm doing this because of inequality, so that gives me permission to do X thing. It's also interesting just in terms of the whole, like in terms of self-care and the very literal sense of like putting on a face cream and so forth, how it seems like there's been this real sort of reclaiming of all of that, like having a skincare routine and stuff as not just okay by feminist standards, but like the ultimate feminist act is like doing something coded as feminine that's been denigrated by society and all of this. And I'm just, I'm really struck by, sorry to keep returning to your novel, but how Devin, her internal monologue is, it's an into the glass top shelf. Like it's just, but I mean a satire of it was just amazing. And it really, this notion that the more, like all of the, Kat and I were talking about this recently in terms of Sephora having, this was in the, when there were still stores, having ads that sort of make you think you're doing something noble and sort of gender challenging by buying makeup. There just seems to be some way that this, it's not just that like anything you do for yourself is activism, but it's also anything you do that's gendered, feminine sort of is somehow, anything you used to feel like a bad feminist for doing is suddenly now good. Right, right, right. So I think there's like a lot of guilt and shame because we were told, we were told by the beauty industry, we were told one thing, like when I was growing up reading whatever, I was reading Seventeen magazine or the messages I got about beauty and skincare and diet and losing weight and that has all changed. But if we want to groom ourselves, I think the brands are aware that we also want to feel like we're activists at the same time. So like I'm getting Instagram ads for a lip gloss that donates 10% to like an LGBTQIA organization so that I can feel like I'm supporting gay people whenever I use this lip gloss. So it's getting very complicated. But I think it is to assuage our guilt that we, and it's so complicated. Am I buying into the patriarchy by putting on makeup to come on this podcast? I mean, I'm very confused. I'm very confused as a woman and from that place of confusion I wrote this book. It's so funny. Ah, so good. So good. Well now it's interesting because you're talking about, we've segued from sort of encouraging women to like literally look into the mirror and do your skincare routine and it's an act of radical feminism and radical activism to spend 10 minutes literally staring at yourself, putting stuff on your face. But now- I swear I can't make this video better. I can't make this video better. Now the notion of self-improvement or self-care is kind of pivoted to like working on your, I mean mostly at this point your racism. So we're back to look into the mirror, like spend all this time interrogating yourself. But it's less about looking at what's on the surface and more about aiming your gaze right into your own navel and maybe never relieving it, never getting it out. Yeah, like to circle back to Lean In, Lean In was a lot of that book is like, what are your own personality defects? Are you too much of a people pleaser? Have you been conditioned to do that by the patriarchy? How can you stop doing that? So it's like work on your personality. Then we get like glossier, so the beauty trend that it's no longer about wearing a lot of makeup, it's about having perfect skin and then lightly putting makeup on top of your perfect skin. So like then we had to master that. And now we have, I was working in this op-ed but it didn't find a home, so I'll just tell the joke here. But like I had a joke in this op-ed, like it's like the life-changing magic of tidying up your whiteness. It's like another- It needs a home. I wanted to have a home. It's like- Again, I can't make a commentary on this video because it's just too there. How, oh, makeup, makeup is so, what are you doing? And then no makeup, oh, but then the beautiful skin under the- You use makeup because your skin is bad. Well, now we're going to have, now you have the demand of having perfect skin and tidying up your whiteness is deadly humor. Like another self-improvement trend. You worked on your home, you worked on your skin care, you worked on your personality. Now you need to work on your implicit bias because you're secretly much more racist than you ever dreamed you were. For a Calvinist, it's the coming of the kingdom. I don't even have to preach. They're preaching to themselves. Oh, I'm so glad you guys have- You gals have put this together. Yeah, yeah, you guys, gals. Because like I wrote about this years ago in terms of like privileged awareness and all of that, but I never had thought about it in terms of like fitting in with other types of self-improvement, but it totally, I mean only in terms of like college admissions where you're sort of like promoting yourself in a very specific way, but like, but it is, what's also interesting about is like it's a way of sort of addressing like this binary either women as women are the most oppressed people in the world or white privileged women in the West slash in the States are the most privileged in the world and the true oppressors. This is a kind of way of, I don't know if it's bridging the gap or if it's just kind of switching things back to women as victims, but turning it like this, the whole self-improvement, self-flagellation thing that's currently underway on all of these platforms is just like, I wonder is anybody really going to like, is this a case where women are like women CEOs are self-sabotaging in a way that male CEOs wouldn't or is this just part of their branding and they'll be just fine? That's, I guess some of this time will tell, but. It's really interesting when she talked about the college entrance stuff. Dallas Willard came up, oh was it in the Friday question and answer, and you know this reminds me of the beginning of his, I think it's best book, The Divine Conspiracy. Dallas Willard of course was a philosophy professor at University of Southern California and he's writing in this book about, well, the suspicion now has come to force of unspoken dogmen, the highest centers of Western learning. Of course one has to assume in practice there's a right side up just to get on with life, but it is equally assumed that right side up is not a subject of knowledge. And so, oh in a college admissions, well you want to emphasize what your SAT scores, but notice now to get into the most elite colleges you have to demonstrate, well I started this club, well I started this, I'm an activist, it's not that I'm, it's not, I can't just be a scholar, being a scholar alone won't get me into the upper reaches of higher education. I need to be an activist and a scholar, and again as someone who has lived most of his life in religious institutions and Calvinist institutions, this has long been the case, you know, to get into Calvin College in the 80s, which everybody gets into Calvin College, it's just true, but needed a letter from my pastor, a letter of reference from my pastor to get it, because it's a religious institution. They didn't just want academics, there's an academic support program, in fact they took people in as a calling, and so that in some ways was sort of divorced, well that's all this religious stuff, but you watch it just coming up. Derek Bach is president of Harvard University for many years, in his president's report of 1986 to 1987 he referred to some well-known moral failures in financial circles in the political life of the nation. He wondered out loud what universities might do to strengthen moral character of their graduates. Religious institutions, he continued, no longer seem as able as they once were to impart basic values to the young. In these circumstances, universities, including Harvard, needed to think hard about what they can do in the face of many perceived as widespread decline in ethical standards, but again this is written by Dallas Willard, this came out, what year did this come out, maybe 2000, something like that, 2005 perhaps, but now the ethical standards are, well, are you sufficiently anti-racist, because you're going to have to show your anti-racist bona fides, but you're not going to get a letter from your pastor, because there is no institution that's in charge of this. Bach points out that in other days the instructor's aim was to foster a belief in common accepted moral values. Now all is changed. Again, he's written in the 80s. Today's course in applied ethics does not seek to convey a set of moral truths, but tries to encourage the student to think carefully about complex moral issues. One sense that governing assumptions of the discussion is that these two objectives are mutually exclusive. The principal aim of the course, Bach continues, is not to impart right answers. Well, see that was sort of a transitional phase. Now they're imparting right answers, and these women are sort of trying to figure out, well, what are the right answers, and that's the whole point of of of Lace Stein here, in that religious organizations have been doing this, and we sort of threw them out, and now we're trying to make this stuff up, and thinking, well, what do we have to do, and so, you know, John Vervache and Jordan Peterson, they're right there in the university. The principal aim of this course is not to impart right answers, but to make students more perceptive in detecting ethical problems when they arise, better acquainted with the best moral thought that has accumulated through the ages, and more equipped to reason about ethical issues that they face. Now the church, well, we wouldn't want to talk to them, because again, if you read George Marsden's book about the, basically a survey of how the Harvard and all these other institutions founded by none other than the likes of the cohort around Jonathan Edwards, you know, what happened? Where'd they all go? Finally, coming to the conclusion of his report, President Bach remarks, despite the importance of moral development to the individual student and society, one cannot say that higher education has demonstrated a deep concern for the problem. Well, that has sure changed, especially in larger universities. The subject is not treated as serious responsibility worthy of sustained discussion and determined action by the faculty and administration. Well, that has sure changed, and he goes on a little bit later. But if indeed there's now no body of moral knowledge of our culture, then a number of things highly positioned people express surprise about are not surprising at all. Robert Coles, professor of psychiatry and medical humanities at Harvard and a well-known researcher and commenter on matters social and moral published a piece in the Chronicle of Higher Education on the disparity between the intellect and the character. See if this will point of view 1995. All right. Oh, this happens with this happens with this happens with Kindle books, such a pain in the neck. Can I get there? Now I gotta pause. The piece is about the task of connecting the intellect to character. This task, he added, is daunting. Really? His essay was occasioned by an encounter with one of his students over moral insensitivity. It is hard for him to say immoral. Is it hard for him to say immoral behavior? Not anymore. And what's interesting yet is you can just watch over the decades this transition. And if you look over to a wider period, well, everyone in the 1880s sort of assumed they knew what was right and wrong. The church told them the Bible told them that over time, you're going to push those things away. And now, well, we're going to have to make this up. And well, his essay was occasioned by an encounter of one of his students over moral insensitivity. It is hard for him to say immoral behavior of other students, some of the best and brightest at Harvard. This student was a young woman of a Midwestern working class background where, as is well known, things like right answers and ideology remain strong. Notice what happened to ideology. She cleaned students' room to help pay her way through the university. Again and again, she reported to Coles, people who were in her classes with her treated her ungraciously because of her lower economic position. Without simple courtesy and respect, and often were rude and sometimes crude to her. She was repeatedly propositioned for sex by one student in particular, as she went about her work. He was a man with whom she had two moral reasoning courses in which he excelled and received the highest of grades. The pattern of treatment led her to quit her job and leave the school and to something like an exit interview with Coles. After going over not only the behavior of her fellow students but also the long list of highly educated people who had perpetrated the atrocities for which the 20th century is famous, she concluded by saying to him, I've been taking all these philosophy courses and we talk about what's true and what's important, what's good. Well, how do you treat people to be good? And she added, what's the point of knowing good if you don't try to keep becoming a good person? Professor Coles proceeds to comment on how ineffectual his efforts to respond to this young woman were. He genuinely, he seemed genuinely conscience stricken that he shrugged in response to her disappointment. But he never confronts the fact that he certainly did not tell the students in his course that they should not treat someone doing menial work with disdain or that they should not proposition a classmate or anyone else who is cleaning their rooms. Well, we've certainly remedied that, but will it actually mean anything? Because all of these just moral indictments and moral have to sit on something quite a bit deeper and firmer and larger. And if you take all of that out, then suddenly people go looking to try and, well, we have to figure all of this stuff out for ourselves. I mean, that's a good question, right? Is it fair for us to hold women to a different standard than what we hold men to? Is it fair that we have to say women have to be perfect, impeccable feminists while they succeed and men are just men? Right. And what's so interesting is that fairness is always sort of this on the spot little, it's something you can pull out of your pocket and say, well, is this fair? And because of the complexities of the situation, a lot of what's happened is that we're going to throw that out and we're going to say instead of before the enemy was the double standard, now, well, we're just going to enforce a new double standard in order to remedy old double standards and we're going to call that fair. But everybody has that little fairness calculator in their pocket and say, hey, wait a minute. And what you actually wind up building up is resentment. And in all of this anti-patriarchy, anti-racism stuff, if your remedies build resentment in any of your groups, you are likely going to fuel misogyny and racism because most of that or a lot of that is simply built on in individual people, not carried on intergenerationally, but in individual people, resentment. In other words, in order to try to address the ancient crops of misogyny and racism, you just see new ones. And that's what I see happening. Right. I mean, and there's like the, I mean, this is an interesting segue because this additional burden, right, that women are, I mean, I think kind of undeniably subjected to was this expectation that you are going to work against your own interests if it's in service of like the cause that we've decided is the most important thing. Now this is in some ways just simply lay down your, you know, take up your cross and follow me. If you don't take up your cross, you're not worthy of me. This again is just simply a retreading in more ambiguous, generic language from what you have in Christianity. And I, I feel like we've seen this a lot lately on a small scale where you have individual writers who are getting like chastised for accepting assignments, doing certain work because they're taking up space that should have gone to someone else. And like the New Yorker swimsuit with head scarf. This one's with head scarf. Oh, I forgot about that. Right. There was, there was the Rihanna Vogue interview, which these are things that we discussed in previous episodes, but also even more recently, like Maris Kreisman wrote a good piece for the LA Times about how you could improve diversity in publishing by paying your entry-level employees a living wage, which, you know, another thing that we've discussed here, like yes, you know, feminine chaos endorses this as, you know, not the only, but maybe one time of a possible solution. So, you know, Maris Kreisman wrote this piece for the LA Times and immediately got like excoriated for, you know, for writing it when she should have apparently passed the assignment along to a more deserving writer, you know, a writer of color. And, you know, it was, I think- There will always be a more deserving person. Again, I listen to this stuff and I think it's like you sort of took the Bible and took all of the people out of it and turned it into principles, and then you just go back to George Marsden's book and realize, oh, that's sort of what they did in modernism in the end of the 19th century with the Bibles. We're going to turn this all into principles. Okay. I think that the thing about this, and it kind of drives me crazy to see it because, I mean, most of the women who are doing this, they're just freelancers, you know, it's not like they have institutional support. They all already suffer from crazy imposter syndrome anyway. So, you know, it's incredibly effective to take this approach. You know, say you're taking up space, like get out of here. And so instead of lean in, it's bench yourself. Oh, absolutely. This whole taking up space thing is- Instead of lean in, it's bench. Do you want to be anti-racist? Bench yourself. Don't talk. Don't contribute. It's amazing to me. So fascinating because, and I guess this does get the whole sort of girl boss lean in backlash thing again, because it really, like the whole thing had been you're entitled to take up space as a woman. Don't apologize. You know, that is feminism. That's noble and beautiful and all of that. And now it's like, but don't take up space if you are a woman who's privileged in whichever way. I recently, on a forum I take part in, but only as a worker on Facebook, a different forum, but saw a whole sort of meltdown thing that could totally have been satire, but sort of tragically wasn't. And the woman being piled on was a non-black person of color, and it just, but she was privileged within a very specific context, like very highly specific context. And it's like, she's the privileged party and therefore, you know, that's that, you know, and it sparked another post as a whole thing. Yeah, it's just basically any woman who can be considered privileged in any sort of specific context is suddenly the oppressor and shouldn't be taking up space. And then I guess it's just, it's very confusing what's supposed to be done, I guess, like what's actually helpful and what's just kind of seeding the ground to the same men who were in power already. Right, and I think, like my book is set on the internet now, which is where we all live now, but I think the internet has a way of really flattening our identities and also encouraging us to create these personal brands based on our identities. Oh my goodness, I'm obsessed with a line from your book about, okay, this is in a forum, okay, what if every ritual user put their identity markers in their profile so we wouldn't, we all wouldn't have to make assumptions from their pick, like black, capitalized, okay, white, not capitalized, Jewish, Palestinian, cis, trans, envy, straight, bi, queer, vegan, gluten-free, Pisces, INFJ, I don't know this one, etc. What is You don't know the Myers-Briggs. You don't know, I'm an INFJ. Oh, it's the Myers-Briggs thing. Oh, okay. I'm a dreaded TJ, by the way. Okay, okay. Okay, just as an aside, there is a sphere of Twitter where people do put that in their bios. It's, and it demarked so much in the way that And of course, Carl Jung is behind the Myers-Briggs. Pronouns in the bio, not so much anymore, but used to demarcate a certain type of online entity. The presence of your Myers-Briggs personality type also denotes a certain type of online entity, and because I don't want all of the E-T-F-Js coming after me and burning my house down, I'm not going to say anything. No, the Fs are nice, because the Fs, I'm an F, it's about feelings. You want to make the other person feel okay when you're giving feedback. Oh, right, it's the T's. It's the T's you should be afraid of. It's the T, the TJs. The TJs. The TJs. That's right. That's right. I will Google this later. I have never, I mean, I've heard of Myers-Briggs, but I've never heard of putting this in a bio. Wow. Another thing, oh sorry, just about the whole... I had seen it on Twitter. I thought, why are they putting their Myers-Briggs things on Twitter? I had no idea. ...the online world, though, and the women, all of this, and I say this for obvious personal reasons, obvious to Kat and to perhaps our listeners. So, child care basically disappeared during this pandemic with no particular end in sight. School is kind of a questionable thing. Panic. We have to deal with our own progeny. And there's just something kind of weird that I'm trying to, I don't know if this is a very vague thought I have at the moment, but there's something kind of weird about the end, the true death of empowerment, feminism coinciding with the time when just for logistical reasons, mothers of young or even not so young children are basically being kicked out of the workforce. Yes. In droves. Oh, it's that darn biology again. And I don't know. I don't know where that thought goes, but it's just something that I've seen both written about a lot and been living. And you know, it's quite interesting because I live in a fairly male world in some ways. Church is fairly feminine. And most of the people I deal with in church are women. Many of those women, in fact, probably most of those women are African American women. And, but in my male world, it's so, but my wife, so I have an older male world. My wife's world tends to be, my wife teaches in a school that is very popular among young, well-educated, you know, this is a very popular school. And so she deals in that world. So when I listen to these women talk, it's like, I hear a lot of the stuff my wife tells me about and it's fascinating. And yeah, it just, it seems, it seems like there are pluses and minuses, I think, to the end of that sort of feminism. Like obviously Sheryl Sandberg, I do not identify on a personal level at all with Sheryl Sandberg. I wish I had that sort of drive or. Reach. What's interesting about this is, and now pay attention to, when we make stuff up as we go along, it's, think about this in sort of a Peter Sonian, Darwinian frame. If in fact, what we inherit from our religious traditions, from our script, our bit, our, the biblical text from, from the religious texts are in fact, years of accumulated wisdom that have been through pandemics. It's all time tested. It's sort of the difference between a, an ideology made up by someone quickly and that which has survived the ages. And so then you listen to this stuff with that frame in mind, you begin to realize, oh, oh, we're, we're learning what other people have known. Well, why didn't we, again, the sign of a healthy culture is it affords wisdom to those who have not had enough experiential or biological time to gain that wisdom themselves. And this is what makes human beings so powerful because we can in fact, accumulate wisdom and encode it and pass it down and represent it in institutions and all of that. It's of course, the same thing that you look at and say, well, racism has gotten into there. Misogyny has gotten into there. All kinds of other evils have gotten into there. Well, maybe you have to figure that out, but that's the power of human beings. And sort of when we, we cut ourselves off from the past, that then we're, that then we have no wisdom. You know, ability to think about money, but, but yeah, well, I guess what I'm asking is what's lost maybe if anything, or is it just good riddance to girl boss feminism? Is there anything, does it have anything in its favor? Like, will it be sad if it's gone? I want to say something about you. I think it's so valid that you bring up this issue of childcare, because I think that was one of the original critiques of lean in is that it's fine and well to lean into your ambition and like go girl, but like who's watching your kids? Like Sheryl Sandberg has very good. Cause we sure don't want to watch them. You know, those crazy homeschoolers. Child care. And so I think we are. You know, in a, in a, in a pandemic, all pastors are televangelists and all moms are homeschoolers. There we are. Or having. To your ambition and like go girl, but like who's watching your kids? Like Sheryl Sandberg has very good childcare. And so I think we are having a moment now where we're like, how long can this go on for people who do have children? And, and I think it's so, it's so easy to get into this offense archeology on social media and avoid the bigger problems because the bigger problems are so impossible to solve. How do we get Mitch McConnell out of running the country? I don't, I don't have a good idea, but like he's a much bigger. I know she just triggered a whole bunch of you. These are the bigger problems. They're the political problems because that's the largest frame you have. The political problems are the largest frame you have. And if that's the largest frame you have, your frame isn't big enough. Politics is now religion is always. Your problem, then like a bad word in a tweet. And of course this was June of 2020, I believe. So that was right in sort of the heat of the election. But let's not be too hard on her because again, one of my little mantras, everybody gets to have a political opinion. Everybody gets to have a religious opinion. Everybody gets to have an opinion. Okay. She's got one. She got to share it. Good. Don't beat her up. Don't, you know, hold, you know, hold, hold, keep yourself together. Don't be one giant button of reactivity. If you wear your buttons, people are going to push them. So, I mean, that's a good point. The difference between, you know, what seems intractable. And I, I wrote about the sort of self-help brand of like feminist social justice for tablet, which is the piece is not out, unfortunately, but I was going to be like, I can't wait to. It's going to, it's going to be on a Tuesday. What is the 26th? I can't, this is Tuesday will be the 30th, the 30th. Oh, also will come out and Kat's piece will come out. Right. Obviously one of these things is more important. Oh, it looks like real clear politics picked up her piece. I'm a digger. I got to dig why social justice feels like self-help privilege for women. Come on. Where's the link? Where's the link? Where's the link? Why can't I get to the link? This book inspired me to continue on the journey of personal growth that I've been on and gave me fresh new perspectives to consider. It is a resource and a guide, like having a learned teacher with you in the intimacy of your own home, as you confront some of the most troubling and critical truths about yourself. It wants you to meet your full potential, but you have to do the work. Obviously not very Calvinist. The journey is hard, but I assure you it is worth it. It is worth it. Half of these lines come from a five star reviews of contemporary self-help books, titles like Girl, Wash Your Face by Rachel Hollis and an early Aughts Law of Attraction Phenom, The Secret. The other half comes from reviews of anti-racist handbooks, all of which rocketed to the top of the bestseller list this month amid the nationwide movement sparked by the May 26th murder of George Floyd by Minneapolis police. Titles include Leah Saad's Me and White Supremacy and of course Robin D'Angelo's White Fragility. The similarities are eerie but unsurprising. Rachel Hollis's guide to self-help through face hygiene and Robin D'Angelo's manual for the white and fragile provoked the same sort of star-eyed praise using the same highly specific vocabulary. The word journey turns up with remarkable frequency and it's been in the church for a long time. Because of the fundamental similarities in what they're selling and more importantly because the same people are lining up to buy them. Self-help has always been a woman's game. Not that men don't well we've got Jordan Peterson on our side. Not that men don't also need to improve themselves. Hey who you saying needs to improve themselves? Improve thyself doctor. But the books targeted to them tend to assume an existing state of self-confidence. You're great as you are. You could just be a little better or maybe actually they're higher in negativity. Big five personality. Neuroticism. Men learn optimization. Life hacks. The power of thinking without thinking. Four-hour work weeks and other highly effective habits that are meant to help them build upon their innate perfection like a software upgrade. Women on the other hand have faulty wiring that needs ripping out. Our most beloved self-help books are all about fixing something that came broken. Delving into the psyche and excavating everything what's wrong with you. Women are exhorted to work on themselves the way weekend warriors might work on a vintage trans-am tinkering endlessly. Replacing parts. Fixing one flaw only to find that the engine still won't turn over. The real problem still buried somewhere under the hood that you might actually get behind the wheel and drive out of the garage someday is a possibility so distant that it's hardly worth thinking about. Of course only the most elite women can afford the luxury of so much wallowing in their imperfections. A fact that feminist writers have readily critiqued in other contexts. A New York Times article by Jessica Noll noted accurately that the trillion dollar wellness business is a largely white privileged enterprise catering to largely white privileged already thin and able-bodied women promoting exercise only they have the time to do and tuscan kale only they have the resources to buy. But if that's true wellness in our late capitalist movement it's equally true of wokeness. Diversity an eight billion dollar enterprise back in 2003 exploded in the wake of Donald Trump's election into one of the nation's fastest growing industries and that's you know it's sort of like gun sales boomed when Barack Obama took office. Donald Trump you know was was the best thing that ever happened to the diversity industry. Colleges funneled millions of dollars into diversity exclusionary effort and exclusion efforts in 2019. A survey found 63 percent working diversity trainers have been hired in the last three years and it's not just a corporate strategy that's up for up for sale. You can buy diversity in the form of books movies merchandise and $2,500 dinner parties where white women pay to confess their racial racial complicity. Robin D'Angelo's white fragility seminars at which attendees are overwhelmingly white female and highly educated cost as much as $165 per person. Her keynote speaking fee is forty thousand dollars smoking dogs man. Whatever is being sold it'll be a jade whatever's being sold be it a jade vagina egg or a ticket to an anti-racist workshop. There's a great deal of money to be made off guilt anxiety and insecurity of financially secure white women who are probably high in trait neuroticism. But for those whose activism begins and ends with hashtags and book clubs the narcissism is undeniable and arguably even part of the appeal. What Folcher's Lauren Michelle Jackson calls vanity project where the goal is no longer to learn about race power and capitalism but to spring closer to the enlightened order of anti-racist and yet where one to actually to read many of these books Jackson notes one might reach the conclusion that there is no anti-racist status within reach of a lifetime and that's exactly the point that many of these people have made. Self-help social justice doesn't just offer privileged white women the comfort of a permanent passion project it fuels the pleasant ego driven delusion that nothing is more important to the cause to any cause than the innermost minutia of our own thoughts attitudes and feelings. Well it's an interesting day for diggers. Which is which is Lee's book and also I think that the recycling may have to go out here you know. I don't care I don't know. Are you obliquely threatening to put Lee's book? No! No certainly not. That seemed like a mental aggression. Oh no no it was a it was a self-deprecating remark about that I have nothing going on the 30th. Particularly. Maybe you should maybe you should reread self-care or you know or any one of these other tomes that are that are being recommended to us. I will just I will I think memorize white fragility so as to recite it. But one of the things that I kind of you know wanted to sort of think my way around in this piece is the idea that you know the the self-help brand of social justice is so inherently disempowering. I mean we have you know the the women who kind of buy into this is very highly educated elite privileged mostly white but more importantly just you know very successful women who are like if if they organize they're one of the most powerful voting blocs out there. I mean there's a reason why everyone wants to speak to like I mean I guess back in 2008 or whatever it was soccer moms but it's always that same that same group. And this brings in some really interesting places because a lot of their money comes from men. Not all of it by any means but the thing about mobilizing women is you usually get their husbands too and churches have known this for a very long time. Attract the children then the moms come and the moms look around and say oh there's some things that need to be done here. Honey get at it and at the same time we see sort of the undermining of what I call the generational handshake where well what about divorce what about not marriage and a little bit later what about children. I mean children are going to come up a number of times in this and what do we do with children as if none of us in this conversation have ever been one. Who's sort of who's sort of sought after because they do actually hold enormous power if they leave their homes and coalesce and act you know do activism like as a bloc. Well this was I don't remember if you guys talked about the Jed Magpies about Karen's but she makes this point I can't remember the writer's name but she talks about how we flipped the house in 2018 because of suburban white women voters. Yeah exactly and these books are like Karen save the nation. No you don't get to do activism you have to work on yourself go inside sit on your hands unpack your shit like work and work and work on yourself for how long forever you know probably forever. I literally saw a tweet that was somebody saying that anti-racism shouldn't be something accessible to somebody who's a soccer mom like literally said soccer mom trying to do it in her spare time and it's like you should do it full time. Well it just seemed like it needs to be more difficult than that it's no joke it's no laughing matter and it's like so basically if you aren't a 19 year old college student you can't be anti-racist because if you have other obligations well then you're just racist for having them. And what's so insane is that like I mean you know for most of us who like aren't 19 year old college students oh if only those were such good skin days but you know you do have a job and a family. College was good skin days. And adult obligations and you know political engagement is inherently something that is probably not your full-time job but that makes it all the more important to you know do it in the spare minutes even if it's like. And again you have the well there's the institutional shift away from religious institutions now because it's it's homeless and so it migrates over into political institutions and it all becomes politics. And I mean this is the thing that drives me crazy about this kind of breed of of you know act it's like it's like slacktivism basically it's you know it keeps you passively turning pages and thinking about yourself instead of you know anything that could change the world. Is it like a neoliberal thing of like that's actually the whole point of this and that the whole point of it is to kind of maintain the status quo and I mean that had been my thinking in terms of like privilege awareness that the whole point of privilege awareness is that it refocuses energies on not always intentionally but on awareness rather than on doing anything about it so like the end goal of privilege awareness is being aware of your privilege and being polite about it and having the right etiquette. But if anything that may just reinforce whichever hierarchies and there's no implication that you're actually even interested in changing things you may want to maintain your privilege but you just are being nicer about it or something. So I almost wonder if that's the same dynamic with the like activism as self-improvement that if you're home reading you know 40 books about you know like the the reading list that keeps growing about how to be woke today. There's an interesting similarity to late antiquity where a part of the reason they looked for a monotheism was because it was just too much darn work keeping up keeping all the gods happy and so you have one god that you can work with instead of as Augustine sort of taunts in the city of god the god of the doorknob and the god of the door hinges and the god of the door frame and the god of the door wood and you you just have all of these different things you have to do so if you have one system that has good and bad bring it all into one thing you put the you put the you put the goal above the hierarchy and you can actually have a working system but in this way you can't actually accomplish anything in life because you're just always doing the inner work. Yeah you're probably not doing anything else and I wonder like whether there are sort of forces at work encouraging that for that reason if that makes sense. This is indicative of the bubble that I live in but I wouldn't say that the women I know reading white fragility are not already activists because I do know a lot of activists from my own organizing work with binder con but what I... Again activist is now basically the new monk. I am noticing in my bubble is that the women I know we reading white fragility are women with masters degrees they have very far left politics they are explicitly anti-racist these would be you know the women that I would count as the most openly intersectional feminist anti-racist activists and they're the ones reading white fragility so I'm not seeing this book like changing hearts and minds I'm seeing white women who already feel bad that they're white reading this book and an interesting critique that I've heard of white fragility is that it's a distraction from the conversation about class that we aren't really talking about class and capitalism when we're talking about old Marxism versus new Marxism and the surge of anti-racism it's a way for these capitalism to continue and have us all fight about microaggressions while Nike still makes a bajillion million dollars. Darn Nike. That makes sense and kind of goes back to even like the dawn of this approach like I'm thinking of the Peggy McIntosh privilege checklist where so many of the things that she mentions as being her privileges as a white person are her privileges as a privileged white person and how so much of what people discuss as white privilege is the privilege of white and wealthy people or you know white and well-educated people and it just these things all matter but yeah to just try to find only one thing that's the thing that really matters yeah obviously ends up erasing quite a bit that's going on. McIntosh herself was like a one-percenter right she's she came from an extremely wealthy family. I think I learned that in Colette but yeah what I had known is that she had taught at a very posh private school in Manhattan but which seemed just like a fascinating origin point for all of this. Yeah I think that she also came from family wealth it's it's phenomenal to imagine somebody writing that essay and never pausing to think about class you know the the invisible knapsack essay. I mean you know I guess it's I wonder how much is intentional I wonder how much is I'm happy to be able to do your knapsack you know this is this is something that actually has come up in Canada where I am I'm not Canadian but I do live in Canada with and I wonder I wonder if she's legal a friend of mine has tweeted about this and frequently reminds everybody about because it's amazing Justin Trudeau our prime minister very good-looking son of another prime minister has apologized for his I guess like his white privilege his white male privilege I don't know which I'm sure he has he also has son of a prime minister privilege which you would think would be maybe the more salient thing in his own case and I almost wonder if in cases like this this is somebody when certain people mention their white privilege it's a way of sort of distracting from the privilege privilege that they have an even more obvious so their economic privilege economic and cultural I mean like his connections as the son of a prime minister would be different from you know those of like a random white Canadian who would have certain privileges in society in terms of certainly interactions with law enforcement among other issues but would not have his connections and so forth I think that's a good point I did no argument with this well I can make a connection to my novel because like there's three main characters of my novel Marin and Devin who are the white co-founders and Khadija who's like their star number one employee Khadija is a black woman she is frequently put in charge of things like listicles for black history month pose for this photograph so that everyone knows we have a diverse company but I think all three of my characters all harbor resentments and all think that the other ones have it better than them and I think this kind of jockeying is reinforced and encouraged by the internet where you're constantly comparing yourself to other people and trying to calculate how much the the internet doesn't make us compare ourselves to other people it just facilitates it advantage or how much disadvantage do other people have and react accordingly and it's it's not a healthy way to engage with other people in my opinion no and it's something the internet really because of its way of flattening you know who everybody is encourages it both like both where you don't know who people are online and the whole all you have are just a few details and it's much like I just can't imagine in real life in whatever in offline life interacting with somebody via each identity marker you know in that way but online it's almost like you're a bad person if you don't do that like do you not like wait there was some story about this recently and I'm forgetting again the good person bad person thing is like the okay consciousness is monofocal and that creates binaries because we have to switch right so good and bad person it's like the bottom the bottom line for this in terms of I'm not saying he's a bad person but where you're a bad wasn't some advice column or something where it was like you're a bad person oh was this the slate one where the one yeah wrote in saying yes my kids my kids have a diverse group of friends right right they say that they don't care about race and I think dreaded color blindness but not the not the physical kind this letter was probably trolling because she was like as I understand it not caring about race is as bad as being actively racist or almost and the vice columnist well it was like well you're trolling me but actually it is you know go do some reading not caring about races as bad as being the worst racist but yeah off the whole go do some reading thing there is I'm still obsessed with um some article we talked about on the podcast a while back about the anti-racist reading list and just the the notion that at this particular time people have the time to even read quite that much um is its own question or the focus and who reads books that's the thing I mean I got into youtube partly because I looked around my congregation and said you know what nobody reads so who is reading well it's just a little segment of the of the population is reading a lot of books I'm worried about like I'm worried about everyone getting so self-conscious that we just go back to living in a segregated society and I know some place is still are segregated I understand that but but you know gotta say that gotta cover my you know what where I would be afraid I would be so afraid of screwing up that I wouldn't have black friends and and that I would just only hang out with other white people because I have to be of my kind I just yesterday I just listened to the block and reported podcast episode I was just about to mention this who went through a year of white fragility anti-racism training and she talked about how part of the training was separating into what was called white affinity groups so the people of color had their group and then the white affinity group could work on their racism with other white people without putting the burden on people of color which I understand conceptually but the I don't just like let's let's get a bunch of white people together in a room and encourage them to strongly identify as white while we treat them like a persecuted minority what could possibly fall is it connor friedersdorf who's I think written about like that that's you know the sort of you you it's like the horseshoe theory thing you know like white offense you like is it good for white people to reinforce their right identity I guess is it good but but I would even like push further and say like is it good but also is it does it naturally follow that if you put a bunch of white people together and have them think about whiteness that they will then naturally want to shed the advantages of whiteness or will they become that much more attached to them and I think that comes up with all forms of privilege that you know making people aware even more aware of the significance of all of their advantages that they didn't earn it doesn't naturally follow that somebody wouldn't want their honor and this earning that we do where does that come from I mean our our our our drive our motivation genetics I mean it's just insane earned advantages and especially once you start talking about people who are not again 19 year old sorry to beat up on 19 year old college students it's just yeah they won't be 19 years old more than a year anyway so it's just in jealousy here as well but yeah it's just you know life is difficult and everybody has idiosyncratic setbacks in their life and I think people do kind of cling to when they're not you know thinking in the abstract people do cling to their unearned advantages and yeah I just don't think this no people cling to any advantage remember we see opportunities and threats that's what we see that we see that before we react to it our brains react to it before we even see the physical elements of it that's how we work we know this of course people are going to cling to any advantage they have and in fact you know sloughing off advantages are usually trade-offs for other advantages and so then you have something like Christianity where in a sense you're trading down all of the physical sociological advantages in order to trade up to spiritual advantages and of course once you have a generation of people saying ah those spiritual advantages they're just fictitious well guess what people are going to cling to you you slough off all of the potential upside for what they can get and at least you don't have heaven to look forward to so why am I going to get rid of these and and pretty much the only the only the the the economy in which this works is pride we will consider you a better person if you what go sit on a pole that's been tried if you sell all you have and give to the poor where did I get that quote from why did it just roll off my tongue like nothing you would imagine I would have been schooled in the bible since the time I was before I can remember notion that becoming aware that you've had an easier time of it in one way I don't think it's implied in that that you would feel so bad about it that you would do anything more than performatively I guess reject it yeah well I think it's so interesting because if you look at on one hand Jordan Peterson says I don't think he's right you know your actions express your two true beliefs but now we have the entrance of the performative where well what's the performative we're performing these for the eyes of men oh my goodness we're back into Matthew six we don't get away from any of this stuff I think that there the insofar as this stuff has been studied at all what they found was that kind of hammering on white privilege it didn't lead people to improve their attitudes towards people of color but it did make them much much much less sympathetic towards white people who live in poverty that was like the most measurable impact anti-racism makes you a classist of that approach that makes sense intuitively and also fits with the whole way that white privilege gets used to refer to privileges not shared by all white people but rather shared by the wealthiest right talking about the blocked and reported interview with this woman who went through the race training and you know I gotta I gotta find that all right so it's a podcast that I have to listen to now so well it's gonna be interesting a little bit derailed but you were talking about that because it did have an impact on her right oh I think I just I think I just brought it up because I was just thinking of that white affinity I was just thinking of this idea of segregation of whether we should all be separate right I mean it made her incredibly anxious about her friendships with you know her her black co-workers and she found herself shying away from interactions with them yeah because you know it was it was exhausting and terrifying having to interrogate herself after every single one to be like wait but was I racist so we we begin to see this pattern that the new anti-racism measures are actually increasing in society the the things they are trying to go against yeah yeah oh go ahead baby oh oh no I was just going to say that this seems to be like in the writing world in general something that um many writers of color will in journals of color will object to and rightly so that they will then be sort of brought on solely to sort of explain diversity and even if they're paid for their work even if it isn't some sort of unpaid labor of you know educating people you know just because you have experience of being black doesn't mean that's the only thing you would know about it doesn't make any sense and then you know writers get pigeonholed and are only allowed to write you know novels where diversity is specifically or oppression specifically at the center of it so I think it's not just that it forces that this approach forces white people to walk on eggshells but it also just kind of it also leaves a space so that almost that that white people are the only ones who can write about whatever yeah yeah this is so important and segues into what I want to just talk about which is like one of the one of the critiques of my girl boss piece has been like easy to critique this but like what's the solution like where do we go from here and you know because we have to figure it out right now because we're smart enough to do this and we've basically erased all of history we don't want to look at what any we only use history to dig up resentment and and and and outrage but we're not going to learn anything from it because that was all bad but we today are going to and you think about you know Jordan Peterson's new first rule in his new book you know if I'm going to critique you know white fragility self-improvement work what's what's my answer and I can just speak from my experience as a feminist organizer when I had my conference binder con we were we were very strategic in how we did our panels and workshops and we we wanted to have diversity but we also didn't want to just have the black writers talk on a panel about being black writers so we did panels about sports writing and reproductive justice and writing as a mom balancing work-life balance that were diverse where we didn't expect women to only talk about their identity and the other example I wanted to give is that there's this non-profit called Vita that was counting bylines by gender in major publications and in 2014 when I started my conference Harper's magazine was one of the worst in terms of gendered bylines so they were publishing way more men than women and so we thought why is that is is it because it doesn't matter what's in the magazine we're just looking at you know were you judging by their names as they aren't getting enough pitches by women or like it's two notes it's very hard to know why but we put together an event at the conference called speed pitch where writers could sign up to pitch editors and I went to harper's magazine and I said these are your numbers will you send a female editor to your to our conference because it was a women-only conference they didn't have any female editors they could send oh no so I said so I said like who else can you send and so they sent one of their top male editors to our conference and I thought that was great so he was the only man that came to our conference but he was there to take pictures pictures from women so like looking for for things that I can do myself not just how I can reflect on my whiteness but like thinking of things I can actually do in the professional space where I work is how I don't self-flagellate all day long that's such a brilliant tactic too and so what was the outcome of of your bringing that guy in did a lot of people place pieces with him I don't know if anyone placed a piece with him but um just like I don't but then well we had a range of different editors but he was and good on harper's for sending him I think like you know that was now there's three kinds of racism at least motivational racism propositional racism outcome racism let's say there's three kinds of uh bias or bigotry with respect with respect to sex let's say motivational propositive most of motivation would be I just I hate women I can't stand them I don't I don't want to be around him proposition would be women are dumber than men and then outcomes in that well there's harpers has fewer fewer pieces and so we're going to do something to address this and they never bothered to measure if their actions actually addressed it's based on again outcome sexism it's based on outcome sexism but it's performative wow this is a great idea we we he was here we feel really good about this effort did it ever result in addressing the thing you were trying to address the outcome did did you ever know but we look less sexist because of it we look more moral and again if you look at Matthew six it's about the religious show and these issues are just deeply within you know it's within christianity jesus deals with these issues again and again and again don't do this for the religious show do not perform your your righteousness to be applauded by the marketplace or by the people that you want to get applause from you know turn your heads away from the clapping gods but you know and again for for for for for lee lay lee i don't know lee stein you know she addresses this in the new york times piece which is which is i thought i thought excellent because okay so he had a guy there thanks for coming glad you heard pitches but nothing really changed so what do we think about that was a way for them to show that they were paying attention to so um on the subject of binders um it did ultimately end up melting down a little bit yeah like there was surrounding binder con you know i don't want to get too too deeply into we can get into it um but the you know there yes um you know and you mentioned this in i think in your gen piece um that there was a certain amount of drama um that resulted in you eventually deciding to step away um you know deciding to step away um that it just got exhausting and we've talked about this before on on another podcast episode about how women's faces seem especially prone to unraveling in this particular way why do you think that is uh it's it's poignant to me i recently became a member of the freelance community study hall where you have to pay to be a member and so they pay moderators to moderate it and this is something that we tried to do with binders and we could never figure out a way to monetize it but we always thought it would be it would be a healthier space if you had some financial stake in it if you had to pay five dollars a month for these resources so that we could compensate the moderators because i was one of the moderators it's exhausting work it's every holiday weekend everyone would be on facebook and there would be a new conflict for me to be tagged into to moderate um so why is it women i i don't know but i can say like the one of the final straws was a big conflict about whether we should have babies and children at the conference or not um women were very divided on this and i am a libra i'm an i'm a i n fj and a libra so you get rid of religion and astrology comes right back but um i really listened and i really tried to find a compromise i listened to both sides i listened to arguments for babies i listened to arguments against babies the women on my staff who had children didn't want the babies um so it wasn't just uh if you have a baby you believe this or not um it was really complicated and i think this is one of these sticky problems of contemporary feminism i still to this day don't know what the right answer is i'll give you an answer because i've seen this all my life why was it in college that all of the meltdowns happened in the women's dorms much less so than the guys storms it didn't mean that guys didn't have conflict guys men address each other physically and it's really easy to draw a line around violence because i can you know it violence is very easy to track as soon as i shove or hit or anything like that a line has been crossed and we can all recognize the line the line is fairly easy to police we can deal with that women fight reputationally and there's near infinite ways to fight reputationally and it is so hard to know the motivation or anything like that it's just you're just going to be far harder in terms of dealing with this and so i i as a pastor i am regular a regular part of being a pastor is to address conflict between church members the vast majority of that conflict has been in my experience between women and it's far harder to deal with between men men have conflict too but it doesn't seem to go like that and so it's not like it goes with women it's been my experience i don't know that i should have done anything differently but it feels like i failed because i couldn't i couldn't find the perfect feminist compromise meanwhile if there were a if there were a man at a conference holding a baby that would go viral for look at the good father look at the good father you're right it would but i think it's interesting that i mean there's even this expectation that you you lee stein we're going to find the perfect feminist compromise the perfect woman's compromise like what is it about you don't get that in religious systems because you have to a certain degree the humility and the mystery built into the religious system already now without that we've got to fix it right now oh do you think we can color me skeptical women that there's this expectation and i mean you see this not just you know when people are like battling about what the rules are going to be at a convention but also in terms of what we expect um like influencers or brands or knitting bloggers right to do to do for us you know there's this expectation that women are going to you know to so once you're outside once sort of the religious thing has broken out of the religious container the religion religious institution now everybody needs to be an expert on building the perfect thing um always step in and always listen and always nurture everybody's you know hurt feelings basically um and you know i just i just wonder you know is it is it just that like people want these brands to be their mom basically that like there's you know it's like like an expectation of caregiving yeah well not just caregiving but these brands are supposed to save us just watch what we do in commercials you know these brands your life is great everything should be wonderful except this one thing if you only have an apple computer instead of that lousy windows machine oh heaven and earth open and and here we are and the angels come down and sing yes exactly oh wow i am a former babysitter as well so that's also part of my identity oh i mean i i too used to sit i think i'm out of time anyway the whole thing was a great video um hope the commentary was helpful very very interesting stuff