https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7FmS1PLZVYU

 Hi, this is Paul and I want to do a follow-up video on my video about Peugeot, Peterson, Patterns, God, and Resurrection. And I want to bring in John Verbecky, who is another lecturer at University of Toronto. And we're going to talk about patterns and life and logos. Now this was, it's always important to read the comments. I wish I could get to all of them all the time. But this comment on this video that I did is a late coming comment by Flavius Bellisarius, six hours ago. That's maybe, I don't know, so I looked at this maybe four hours ago, so it's maybe ten hours ago. I feel annoyed that nobody in any single theology debate or IDW debate has locked in on John Huxley's observation that life represents a localized field or envelope of anti-entropy. When I read that, it was like, bang! Oh wow, because that connected up with a conversation, a debate I was having during the meetup last Sunday night. To continue with the comment, I feel this is unspeakably profound and since it would apply especially to humans, this has a huge impact on presuppositional philosophy and egocentric or subjectivist viewpoints. And then I cut off the rest of the comment, which says maybe I'll have to make a video about that. So Flavius Bellisarius, please do. I'll watch it. And make sure you let me know when you do so that I can see it. I should subscribe to his YouTube channel. If only there was a way to find out if someone makes a new video about something. Can't imagine how that works. Anyway, as I mentioned, that happened at my meetup on Sunday night. There's a lot of smart people in my meetup. There are some folks with PhDs and some folks that are really smart and love debating. We've got a graduate student from UC Davis. He and another guy were holding up the materialist end of the debate as we were talking about patterns and Peugeot and all of that. Neither of those guys had listened to any Jonathan Peugeot. But one of the things that had cropped into my mind, and again, I am not an expert in biology at all. The last biology class I had was 10th grade at Eastern Christian in New Jersey. So it's been a long time, so I'm really open to influence when it comes to the comments section and what you have to say. But my question is, what is the difference between living and not alive without a judging, evaluating agent? Most of us would agree that someone said I should do product placements in my little illustrations. What is the difference between this little cell phone stand and me in terms of category? We're both made up of matter. We both are composed of something. In fact, there's a certain order that has been instilled on this so that if you were to walk along the beach at a deserted island and you found this, you would say this comes from a human being. This is not made from a non-human animal that we have any awareness of. This is not naturally found in nature. We would all know that, and I think we would be correct, and it would be a very reasonable assumption to say that this is not from that. But yet, what is the difference between me and this? And one of the answers could be entropy. And as this very excellent comment noted, life represents a localized field or envelope of anti-entropy. Well, what do we mean by that? So I had to look up Julian Huxley, who I didn't know anything about. And so of course I'm dependent on Wikipedia to some degree, and there's a pretty significant article on him, much of which I read. Very interesting guy. But it didn't really answer my question about this entropy business. So then I did a little bit more Googling, and then I came across this. Oh no! And for all of you out there who believe in free speech, this is part of the importance of free speech. Should we be banishing creation scientists and sending them to Siberia? No, let creation scientists do their work. Because it's...oh, everyone with the lobster. Bucko wanted to make an appearance in the video. But he always falls down. A little bit of entropy happening there. Well, and so then I found this, and I found a really interesting section. And this is again why, don't kill the outliers. Keep them alive. Let them do their science. Because almost everything that we hold today as orthodoxy was held at some point as heresy. So keep at it, you creation scientists. Let's see what they have to say about... Well, there's the article, but I actually took the article out. So, thus evolution encompasses all reality. This is the assertion, of course. Particles evolve into atoms, atoms into molecules, molecules into worlds and stars and galaxies. Inorganic molecules evolve into living materials. And again, look up James Tour, who is one of the world's most eminent... I think he's a biochemist, and he makes the assertion in a video that I played before that. We have no idea how the inorganic becomes the organic. We have zero idea of that. And to imagine that this just happened by elongating time and opportunities, especially since the Big Bang, a constrained time frame, a lot of people are skeptical about. This is part of their reason for asserting that evolution does not get rid of a God, or the need for a God, or the need of a living being. We're going to get into that in a minute. So, this is the story of evolution. Evolution encompasses all reality. It's the big show. It's as C.S. Lewis calls it in his book, Miracles. Particles evolve into atoms, atoms into molecules, molecules into worlds and stars and galaxies. Inorganic compounds evolve into living materials, and these into more and more complex plants and animals, and finally into man, who now presumably can intelligently control all future evolution. That's the assertion. The second law of thermodynamics is also known as the law of increasing entropy. The outstanding Princeton biochemist Harold Blum describes the law in the following way. The second law of thermodynamics has one of its consequences that all real processes go irreversibly. Any given process in this universe is accompanied by a change in magnitude of quantity called entropy. All real processes go with an increase in entropy. The entropy also measures the randomness or lack of orderliness of a system. The greater the randomness, the greater the entropy. Thus, according to Huxley, this is the Huxley, Julian Huxley that we referred to, thus according to Huxley, evolution is a universal law requiring that all processes, or processes if you live in Canada, lead irreversibly toward an increase of order. According to Blum, the entropy principle is a universal law requiring that all processes lead irreversibly towards a decrease in order. Each is exactly the converse of the other. It seems obvious, therefore, that one of them must be wrong, or both of them. Since the second law of thermodynamics is universally accepted as a basic principle, governing all processes has been verified experimentally a thousand, thousands of times and is consistent with all experience, then can, there can be no doubt whatsoever that if there is any such thing as a scientific law at all, this is it. Evolution, on the other hand, is simply a belief. No one knows how it works, or has ever been seen, has ever seen it take place. And some of you are going to quibble with that in the comment section, which is fine, go for it. It is not even a good scientific hypothesis since there is no way to subject it to a scientific test. This is probably why they call it a theory. It is certainly not a scientific law as is the second law of thermodynamics, which it contradicts. Creationists, therefore, insist that evolutionary philosophy must simply be wrong. Evolutionists point to two possible ways out of the difficulty. One is denying the universality of the entropy principle. Since man is quite limited in knowledge and since he is able to make observations on only a very small part of the vast universe, he cannot be certain that the second law applies everywhere in time and space. Empirical measurements can neither establish universal certainty. This stricture is philosophically valid, of course. However, wherever and whenever the entropy principle has been subjected to scientific tests, it has always worked, with no exceptions. Though we cannot be absolutely sure that the total entropy of the whole universe is increasing, we can say, wherever it can be scientifically tested, that entropy in any given position of the universe is increasing. Universal evolution, on the other hand, requires that the degree of order of at least most portions of the universe be increasing, or at least increased in the past, but no scientific experiments have given any qualitative confirmation to this at all. And then the article continues, and you can read that it talks about exceptions and so on and so forth. I'm not here to evaluate it, but the observation, the question that I brought to this was, okay, how do we define life? And in a sense, we look at it, we say, well, we kind of know what life is, we won't know what living things are. Well, living things, as this commenter said, is an exception to entropy, because living things create order, and we create order in ourselves, we reproduce in ways that rocks don't, plants reproduce, animals reproduce. This thing is sterile, it will not reproduce. So living things seem to be an exception to entropy, and that's really interesting, because again, if you go back to my definition of that which is most real is that which governs, or that which colonizes. And we, as the exception to entropy, in fact, colonize the stuff that makes up this little cell phone stand, and have shaped it and colonized it to obey and serve us to the degree that I can take out my cell phone, and I can place it right here in my little stand, and of course the cell phone itself is a colonization of this whole process. I'll place my cell phone stand right there. Same goes for my hat. Ooh, that could be product placement. Those are the River Cats. River Cats, you're going to sponsor my videos, Sacramento River Cats? So what about that? Is that a good definition of life? I'd like to hear from you. It's as good a definition that I can think of right now, but then we get into this question of order and colonization, and as I brought up in the other video but only referred to and only left a link to, this gets very much into Aristotle and causes. Now, Aristotle has his four causes, and again I have to thank Struan for his constantly pestering me, which it's okay, Struan, it's okay to pester me, because he's always feeding me good things, and Struan, who doesn't want me to talk about him because he's shy, but he said it's okay, so I will a little bit, because I think he's a brilliant guy and he should get his stuff out there more, but that's a conversation between me and him. I'm probably the only thing he has that's even approximating a pastor. So this idea about, well, what are these causes that Aristotle comes up with? And it was actually Struan who pointed me towards this for Verkeke series of lectures, and I'm going to play a significant portion of Lecture 3 in this video, because he really nicely walks through Aristotle and the formal cause and how this gets put together in Aristotle's world and how it becomes this theory of everything, and then after the place that I won't play, he then goes into Plotinus, and of course Plotinus leads to Augustine, and so on and so forth, but let's keep going. So let's talk about Verkeke, I guess that's how to say his name, and let's play the video. Oops, that's not the video. Here's the video. Now the sound in these videos is terrible, and that's a real shame, because there's a lot of really good content in these videos. So let's, and I will pause it and interrupt it as I usually do, because I'm obnoxious and a pain. If you want to watch the whole video uninterrupted, watch the whole video. I won't be there to interrupt you there. Okay, so our idea of knowledge is usually a representational idea of knowledge. We think we know something if we can create a representation, and I would extend that a little bit, if we can create a working representation, or as we might say, a model. That's when we think we know something, when we can model it, and then we run our experiments with that model. Now for Aristotle, there's a different understanding of that. So let me show you this, and this is actually work, some of you know this if you've done Psych with me, or if you've done College 250 with me. This is a bit of work from the nature of concepts. People have two different things, you have to keep them distinguished. They have sort of an implicit theory of what they think concepts are, and then there's how concepts actually work. So when you ask people to tell you what a bird is, for example, they'll say, you know, it has flies, it has feathers, it has wings, right, and maybe they'll say it has a beak. So what they'll give you is they'll give you this feature list, some descriptions. And the problem is, and we know that this is what people think, this is what a bird is. Look, I know those, I have a bird. Now of course you don't. This is a feature list. If I pile a bunch of feathers here, a beak, right, a couple of wings, throw it into the air so it has flying, I don't think any of you would go, look at the beautiful bird. Most of you would go, what's wrong with Rene K. Thurman? He's doing some sort of Cromanberg thing. Now, what's missing, and I think this is something that Plato put a lot of emphasis on, and Aristotle not enough, because it's intended to be different, although it's in Aristotle, what's missing is a structural functional organization, a structure for how all those things fit together and work together so that they function in a way that makes a bird. And we don't have an English word for this. Okay, we don't have an English word for that, but he's going to give us some Greek and a German word for it, but a structural functional organization that would define what a bird is. Now again, as he said, you could take feathers, wings, beak, mash it all up, throw it up in the air and say it's flying, and you would say that's not a bird. Now part of what's in our, I was going to say gestalt, part of what's in our gestalt about bird is a living thing, and again, living things colonize the inorganic. Birds will manipulate their environment to build nests. Birds will use their environment to seek prey. Living things, they not just move, we see often in antiquity some definitions of life were about movement, and we still kind of understand that's a fairly rough definition, but I would say that living things colonize their environment, and there's a relationship with that to reason, and that's reason that C.S. Lewis talks about in Miracles. You do have something sort of at the chemical level that's close to it, the idea of a chemical formula. You have to think of the formula not just as the string, but as one of those models that gives you the structure that helps to indicate how the molecule functions. The Germans have a great word for this. It's called gestalt. This structural functional organization so that things work together well. Now it's important to recognize that what he said earlier in terms of our culture, if we have a mental representation or a model of it, we think we know it, and that's still functioning here as we're watching this because what we are doing in the process of this classroom lecture is we are ourselves trying to formulate a structural functional organizational representation of this thing, this gestalt. That's what we're trying to do, and so it's important to remember that we're still kind of watching. We're getting a vision. I'm going to talk about a monarchical vision as this being what, in a sense, objectivist scientism imagines we can do. Well, this is a vision, so we're getting a vision of a gestalt here. The Greeks had a good word for this. Plato talks about, and Plotinus, we'll talk about later, talks about the logos. Okay, then obviously for a number of you it's like, ding, logos! It's important to remember that logos comes into the biblical conversation through the prologue to the Gospel of John. And, you know, in a sense, his use of that prologue sets the world on fire, and Jordan Peterson takes that and applies it all the way back to Genesis 1 and builds up his system from there. Now, there's a lot of debate about the Gospel of John. Where does the Gospel of John come from? What community? What time? What's the author? All of this, but what's clear is that the author is, through using logos, the author, in a sense, sets the Bible into the broader Greek philosophical conversation where you have Plato and Plotinus and others talking about this logos. Okay, so logos, order and chaos, right here, this gestalt. So Peterson is talking about logos bringing order out of chaos. The three creators, at some point, are going to have this conversation about Jordan Peterson's logos. In my last video, we talked about pattern. We talked about how DNA isn't really the chemicals, it's the pattern that's colonizing the chemicals. And there's a big debate as to, again, if you listen to the likes of, let's say, Rupert Sheldrake, there's a big debate as to, to what degree is it actually just the pattern of those chemicals that is colonizing nature? That is the way of life colonizing nature, of life reversing entropy, and, in a sense, bringing more order into the system. We could, in fact, think about this as our image-bearing nature. And again, this is very close to Peterson on this, that the logos, God is the logos, okay, and God brings order into chaos, and we are image-bearers, and there have been many, many, there's been a huge amount of discussion, theologically, into what exactly is image-bearing. We won't get, we won't get exclusivistic about it at this point, but one of the ideas that we're putting forward is that, in fact, we, we, like the logos, ourselves, bring order into chaos, and now living things produce more order. We have children, and, and, you know, part of one of, part of one of the ideas of, well, the marriage of male and female, while that's so important in image-bearing, he made them in his image, in his image he made them male and female, that the union of male and female, together they become one flesh, and in that one fleshness, they then produce more. They, they bring more order, and, and it's that sense in which, how did, how did, oh, where did he go? What a great comment. You see a great comment like this just, can just kind of send things off. An envelope, an envelope of anti-entropy, okay, that, that the logos, this, when, when male and female come together, you have this, this packet of anti-entropy, and it continues to colonize, colonize the world, and if you look at what human beings done in terms of this planet, that's exactly what we have done. We have colonized the inorganic. The inorganic obeys us, and as C.S. Lewis says, nature doesn't fully obey us, and we're always, in a sense, in competition with the inorganic, and death is, now I, I know people are going to say, well, life and death work together, and, and yeah, there's very much a sense that that's true, but in a sense, if you conceptualize the universe as a, as a form for entropy, human beings, more than any other creature we know, are the great enemy of entropy, because everything about us fights against entropy. Everything about us wants to preserve, wants to procreate, wants to colonize, wants to dominate. We, we, Brett Weinstein has a really good lecture out there on, on kind of these open spaces, and, and we as human beings like to find virgin territory where there are no other agents around that we respect, so we can colonize and dominate and terraform and make it in our image, and in fact, the entire history of the world is a history of that. And so we're these anti-entropy agents, and the, the union of, of, of male and female, the image of God is into male and female, it's kind of split, and in male and female they come together. This is the idea behind this complementary idea of male and female. They come together and that becomes this powerful anti-entropy engine that continues to colonize the world and brings order out of chaos in these amazing ways. They also use, Plato also uses another word, idos. Now, we've, we've translated this two ways. It is the basis of our word idea, which doesn't correspond to what I'm talking about anymore, so that translation won't do it. Another one is we use this word form. The problem for us is we almost all, when we hear this, when we hear the word form, we just think of shape. It's not just shape, it's a structural functional organization. So this is often called Plato's theories of the form, or it's called Aristotle's notion of formal cause. But it's not the shape of a thing, it's the way it's organized so that it functions in a way that makes it be what it is. Remember when we're talking about what makes something be what it is? If you'll allow me, this, the way in which these things are structurally, functionally organized, like this lobe, this kishtalk, is mostly what we mean by a bird, by the birdiness, so to speak, of a bird. And when I ask you what that structural functional organization is, you're very proud of it because very happy to put it into words. You know it. I know you know it because you can recognize words in flight and you can make lots of predictions about birds that you probably haven't even thought of to make. And here it's important because our capacity to recognize is distinct from our capacity to represent. And that's the point he's making here. We can recognize a bird, we can recognize living things, but to actually describe what a living thing is, well, that's more difficult. And I really like this idea of an anti-entropy agent. And in many ways, when we talk about a living god, that's what we're talking about, that someone who can bring order. And when, now again, I continue to push back against kind of the natural supernatural, the natural supernatural schema that is assumed by our current cultural moment. But a living god is one that continues to bring order, continues to colonize, continues to dominate, and in fact is author of the story, even as Frodo doesn't necessarily recognize the hand of Tolkien as the story of the rings unfolds in Middle Earth. And that's the point I'm trying to turn around the structural functional organization. Okay, so now here's how Aristotle, therefore, differs from us when he talks about knowing. So, right, for us, we do this, we give a list of descriptions. But Aristotle is much more interested in this idea, being at the core. So for Aristotle, to know something is to grasp this gestalt, to actually have it in your mind. To know something is to grasp this gestalt. You have to figure out what grasping is. Now he's about to give a really good illustration. I'm going to give you another sort of intuition to help get you back into the Earth's containing way of thinking. I'm going to give you two people. I'm going to ask you which one you think really knows something. This first person can give you a really good description of a chair. This person can make a chair, make a chair that you think is a really good chair. Who would you say better knows what a chair is? The first person or the second person? The person who gives a really good description, put up your hands. The person who can actually make a chair, put up your hands. Okay, so now you're Aristotle rather than Dikha. Now I'm going to bring in a little bit of, and he does deal with the Hebrews a bit too, if you look in the Old Testament you have this section of books called wisdom literature. And this idea in the Old Testament of Chachma or wisdom, now the person who is wise not only can see and talk, but the person who is wise is skilled and can act. So actually the Hebrew conception of wisdom, which has within it intelligence, which has within it recognition, also has within it action. So the wise person not only can see the truth, but acts on the truth and acts in the truth and in a sense colonizes and dominates and works skillfully, works effectively in this real world form, in the complete, not just this rather theoretical detached ethereal conception of I can see it, I can grasp it, I can have a mental picture, I can have a mental representation, but one that actually then comes into the world and can make. And in that sense the one who makes the chair knows the Gestalt more than the one, definitely the one that can identify a chair or even than the one who can describe the chair. And so in a sense you have these layers of knowing or mastery. And Ian McGillchrist in this one video that I played some of, which is on Vimeo, not YouTube, where he's lecturing at an educational thing, talks about the fact that so often we use this machine language in describing things. And part of the reason that we use machine language is because we in a sense know this thing, the engineers who designed this thing and the chemists and the manufacturers, they know this thing because they can put this together. And in fact our world is so fragmented that probably the areas of knowledge and the areas of mastery are separated and it took in fact a community to make something as simple as this. And it certainly took a community to make something far more complex than this. But it's that kind of mastery that we can actually, and this is where we very much get into our modern world, where we can reproduce things. But what's interesting is that one person often can't produce much of anything. It takes this community to reproduce things. See how I did that? Wasn't that magical? So what I mean by that is, you give up this idea and you say the core of knowledge is actually the ability to cause something to be. And the way you cause something to be is by putting a particular form, in this sense of the word form, putting a particular structural functional organization into it. And to know something is to actually possess that structural functional organization as a causal power in your mind. Now again, there are the layers of that. Because obviously to know it and then to do it, to know it or to envision it, but then to actually accomplish it and bring it forth out into the world to a degree independent from yourself, and we would all say that's a higher, that's a higher, oh boy all this language, that's a higher way of knowing it. Now suddenly we're getting platonic in that. But it's anti-platonic in a sense, that to know it would be to bring it out into the world in its existence. And so in that sense, what God does in creation is brings things into being. They are just an idea, it's an actual ability. But an idea that J. Cardinal and Aristotle could make up for it. Right, so you can't know a word as well as for Aristotle as you can know other things that you're capable of actually calling it to be. But you can come to know a lot, and this means also that other things are much harder for you to get knowledge of, like the stars and things like that, because your capacity to make them is very significant to the bridge. We can't even make a bird. So what is a bird? How would Aristotle answer that question? Well, Aristotle thinks that what he can do is give a nest, he thinks that what binds this together, this is going to be a little bit, I can't go into this very long, he thinks what binds this together are relations of necessity and sufficiency. What I have to do is tell you the necessary and sufficient conditions for these features hanging together. So he proposes the idea of an essence. Many people think, and I do too, that that's not probably the correct for a lot of things. There might not be an essence for many things that we know or understand. So I think for many things, it's that structural functional organization, it's a set of relations such that the parts are interdependent in a way that they function as a whole. And you want me to give you a name for that structural functional organization, the organization of a bird. Unfortunately, the best name for the structural functional organization of a bird is this word, bird, right, and that's not helpful to you. But what I mean is, you can recognize, I can give you things that lack that structural functional organization and you'll immediately know it's not a bird, and as that structural functional organization gets more and more realized in it, you'll more and more like to call it a bird. And as we said earlier in that conversation on how to prepare it, right, a lot of this is ineffable, it's very hard for you to put it into words. And so again, you can recognize it, you can put it into words, you can bring it into actuality. Now God obviously is he that can bring it into actuality. We recognize, some of us may be able to articulate, but this is these layers or levels of hawkishness of wisdom, of power, of skill, to the degree to which we colonize and govern and actually create reality. So I can't quite give you the answer you want, right, because one of the things we've discovered in popular science is that for very many, many of our concepts, the things we know, we can't really understand them. Again, we can recognize it, we can't even give a definition in some things, but we can recognize it. We certainly can't create it. Yes? It's going to be as you see the cornerstone of the risquitillium, and therefore whatever you see in the cornerstone, you can't even recognize it. So, you can't even recognize it. It's going to be as you see the cornerstone of the risquitillium, and therefore west neontology for a very long time. I'm cutting out some of the questions. Alright, so you heard Thomas mention, this is known as the conformity theory of knowing. It's the idea that the mind shares the same form, where we don't need shape, we need the gestalt, the logos, the structural functional organization. It's what the carpenter has in their head when they know how to make a chair. They don't know just how to create the shape, they know how to create the structural functional organization so that it will reliably behave like a good chair. So, when you know something, you share the same form, in that sense, in your mind. So, that's why it's called the conformity theory. It doesn't mean believing what everybody else believes or something like that. It means sharing the same structural functional organization. Con with Greek form, just to find that. So, conformity with form. It shares the form. Now, why is that really important? Because, and this is something that Charles Taylor, again, I remember he talked about the actual revolution of the greatness of that, this is something Charles Taylor has pointed out. He called epistemology the study of knowing, the philosophical study of knowing. He called this a contact epistemology. Now, what do I mean when he means by that? If you'll allow me to use shape as a metaphor for form. Form is not shape, but I'm going to use shape as a metaphor for form. Notice how, in order, my hand conforms to the can. So, the idea is, when the mind and the world share the same form, it's like they're in contact. There's this intimacy of connection. Notice the language. Now, let's hear that again, because that's really important. Because, where I'm going with this is, as I've been pondering the, the, as I've been pondering the, what really offends Sam Harris about Jordan Peterson? What really troubles materialists about religious people? It's this idea of the connection between the mind and the outer world. Christians worship. Christians pray. And they think things are going on. The apostle Paul says, do not be conformed to the patterns of this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind. So, there's something going on here between that which is in the mind and that which is out in the world. So, the idea is, when the mind and the world share the same form, it's like they're in contact. There's this intimacy of connection. Notice the language. There's an intimacy of connection, of mutual fittedness, of belonging together of the mind and the object. This is why metaphors of knowing as a kind of marriage or a sexual union are very prevalent. So, this is what it is to primarily know. Now, there's the other causes. There's the one you already know. Aristotle had the effect of causes where one event causes another event as it's effected. The one we're all familiar with, the billiard ball notion. He also had a material cause, which is to say when something's made out of. We sort of have that idea, but we think it's ultimately reducible to the billiard ball model. We don't have any more. This is one, though, in which there is a possibility of linking to the Israelite notion of marriage. So, the two that are really important to us, and they're deeply related for Aristotle together, is the formal cause, which is like what you grasp when you know something, and then another thing here is called Aristotle's notion of every final cause. Because Aristotle had the idea that everything was acting on purpose. Everything was acting in order to try and reach its fullest potential. Now, this is going to be key, because here's another separation of the world, especially of the Christian and materialist world. Not only the Christian, but almost all religions. Okay, so this is going to bring me into another aspect of Aristotle's theory. First of all, the word I just invoked was invented by Aristotle. The idea of potential was invented by Aristotle, because he was trying to account for how things developed. Unlike Plato, who was only interested in a static understanding, Aristotle was, his father was a physician, and the physicians of ancient Greece actually ran experiments, and Aristotle himself was like a biologist. He was very interested in the development of organisms. So, in order to account for that development, Aristotle developed a particular theory. We're going to also need to know this theory for getting at the normative order. Right now we're concentrating on the nomological order, but this is going to bridge. Okay, so notice how we talked about the carpenter making a chair out of wood. Now the thing is, you can make wood into other things. The carpenter could make the wood into a chair, could make the wood into a table, could make the wood into a ship, could make the wood into a house. None of you would like perplexed by this, I hope. Now, what Aristotle pointed out is, what that means is, the wood is potentially a chair, it's potentially a table, it's potentially a ship, or it's potentially a house. So, this is the potential to be many different things. Each one of these is actually a house. Why? Because it's wood that has been structurally, functionally organized so that it acts as a house. This one is actually a ship because it's wood that's structurally, functionally organized so that it acts like a ship. Now, notice in terms of our conversation, pattern has been applied to it. Form, the gestalt, has been applied to it by an actor, by an agent. And that's what transforms potentiality into actuality. And a little bit later in the video, he's going to make the point that wood, in Latin, is matter. And this becomes then the basis for this material idea that the world is filled with this stuff. And, well, here's the question. How does stuff become a cell phone holder or a cell phone itself? Well, some agent brings order to it, some anti-entropic agent brings order to it, and dominates it and imposes its will on it and imposes a form on it and here it is in actuality. And we see the root of this here. And this is what, again, will be called the formal cause. The same wood can be actualized in many different ways. So the contrast is between potential and actual. Notice how much science depends on this notion, for example. In order to do the conservation of energy, we need to talk about not only kinetic energy, but also potential energy. This ultimately comes from Aristotle. Please hang on with me because this takes a little bit of working, but we need it. Now Aristotle asks, what's the difference between this and this? What turns the wood into something that can act like a house? Well, the answer is the form, in the sense, again, that the gestalt, the structural functional organ... Well, the form and the agent. It's the agent that has dominance over the form, that governs the form, that turns it into the actual. Because you can sit there and think house all you want, but you're actually going to have to know how to do it. Also, logos, word. So development is to take what's potential, give it a structural functional organization, so that it starts to act in a particular way. Is that okay? So, we're going to come back to this. I need you to know this. I'm trying to show you how the idea of theory is being generated. And what that means is that everything is in the process of actualization. Okay, now everything is in the process of actualization. I would say living things, and this still squares with common assumptions, living things move towards actualization. We colonize, I mean, first we colonized forests by cutting them down and turning them into houses. Now we colonize forests by replanting them and managing them and harvesting them and having dominion over them. The irony of people's complaining about Genesis 1 in terms of having dominion, we, in a sense, have been going to greater levels of dominion. First we, the only dominion we could have over the forest was cutting it down. Now in many ways we have greater dominion over the forest because we are planting them and managing them and harvesting them and terraforming them. This is the dominion we are exerting. We are making things unnatural. Well, what do we mean by natural? Natural is in a sense that which is left to entropy. And we take our step in with our anti-entropic selves and we colonize it, but in the process we shape it. And this, again, getting back to C.S. Lewis's miracles, we are constantly in this fight with nature or we are constantly in this fight with entropy. And, I mean, the entire establishment of our medical system is anti-entropic. We want to, well, what does Kurzweil want to do? We want to stop aging. We want to stop entropy. We want to preserve it. A lot of what we did with foods was we put preservatives in the foods and then we discovered, oh my goodness, maybe our preservatives in the food are preserving the food but killing us. So now we are eating foods that don't have preservatives and we are in this constant war with entropy. And we are in this constant war to try to colonize and dominate and do all of this. And we have gotten to the point over in the last hundred years that we have gotten so dominant, unwisely so, that we, in fact, are putting ourselves at risk. This gets into, if you look at Tolkien and the kind of magic the elves do as opposed to the kind of magic that Sauron and later Saruman do. Well, what kinds of magic they do. They break nature in order to control it. The elves, in a sense, improved nature but also look at the elves. What was true of the elves? The elves didn't age. Well, why not? Well, again, this is Tolkien's world. But Tolkien had all of these, in a sense, gestalts built into his fiction. Everything is trying to develop to its fullest actuality. Now that's clearly that we still believe this. We still think Aristotle is right about living things. We think that's the case for living things. The living things take potential food, they put it into them, they put a structural functional organization on it, which ultimately comes from the genetic code, right? And that actualizes the food into a person and then that continues to self-actualize until you get all of the abilities you get. So for living things, this works well. The difference for Aristotle is he thought this applied to everything. And we don't. Or who do we mean by we? Well, this is where you have the divide. And in many ways that is the divide. That Sam Harris will say, there is no purpose in the world. Christians will say, this is my father's world and to my listening ear, all nature rings and round me sings the music of the spheres. Well, it's getting a little Aristotelian. So when he's talking in his own domain, biology, he's being brilliant. When he starts to step outside of his own particular science, he's not that brilliant. This is a lesson that current scientists should learn. Speaking outside of your relevant area of domain of expertise is often a very dangerous thing. You'd be very liable to foolish discussions. Oh, it's all about our pride now. Well, I'll tell you, YouTube is a place for people with little to lose, so call me a fool. Let's play. If I'm wrong, I'm wrong. And, you know, put it in the comments and let's have the conversation. They should not pronounce on philosophy unless they've got a philosophical education, any more than philosophers should pronounce on physics if they don't have a physics education. There is no universal thing that is the key to allowing you to pronounce on all fields of human endeavor and biology. Again, all of this, and there's a lot of wisdom in what he says. I'm not saying, no, that's all wrong, but there's so much packed into what he just said there in terms of history and the history of the university. And, you know, okay, why do we continue to call it a PhD? A PhD in biology, a PhD in gender studies, a PhD in physics, a PhD in history, a PhD in theology. Why do we keep calling it a PhD? So that itself is a big conversation that I don't want to derail that with. And it's a very important thing to say, but I want to qualify it. But what Aristotle thought, and it's not so stupid actually, right, he thought that everything was therefore acting on purpose. Everything was trying to develop to how it should most fully be. So that notion that Plato had that we should try and move towards our fulfillment is something that Aristotle thought applied to everything. Now, how does that work? Okay. How does that work? Well, let's build out from our theory of knowledge to incorporate this, this idea of final cause. The things are acting on purpose, where that means trying to come to completion, trying to finish the process of actualization. So, again, efficient cause, material cause, formal cause, final cause. The final cause is the big picture. It's the big purpose. You build the ship in order to win the war, or to travel over to the east in order to trade with the Chinese. That's the big purpose, alright? And he's going to get into a little bit of Aristotelian theory about purpose. Okay, let's go back to the conformity theory. The conformity theory says, when you know something, your mind has the same structural functional organization as the thing known. You conform to it, okay? And now, again, I think if we get into apprehension, we conform to it. That's a way of knowing, in order for me to, how can I know this little cell phone holder? Well, obviously I can put my hands around it, I can feel that it's cold, and I can smell it. It doesn't have much smell, but it's cold, and so I know a little bit about something intuitive about temperature and transmission, and it's metal, plastic. A plastic cell phone holder would not be as cold as this. This is quite cold. And if I were the engineer that drew this up, I might be able to pull up the design out of AutoCAD. And if I was the manufacturing engineer, I might have had a sense about the process by which I folded this metal. And if I was a machinist, I might have had a sense of how, in fact, I cut this little slot in so that the wire can go through if I'm charging my cell phone. And about the coating that I put on this metal. And then if I was a business person, how, in fact, I could market this. I mean, there's tons that go into this little thing, all right? But now what's the purpose of it? Now again, if I came along across this on a beach, let's say if I'd never known cell phones, I'd look at this and say, well, what's this for? Well, I can take a pen. Maybe it's a pen holder. Oh, but I can take my cell phone and look there. And if I had to plug my cell phone in, it would go in right there. Now I'm getting a sense of the final cause. Why was this thing made? Why did this community go through all of the trouble to make this? And there are more final causes in there. They wanted to feed their family, so they needed a job, and so on and so forth. So there's a lot of causality that's going into this. Now what that means, right? Now notice how I tried to build that with very plausible intuitions, because Aristotle is a genius. I'm not claiming I am, I'm just claiming I'm teaching you. Okay? What that means is, once you sort of do the test to make sure you have real knowledge, the structural functional organization of your mind and the structural functional organization of reality are the same. They're the same. The same. The same. Let's say they correlate. How do you make sure you have knowledge? You have three tests. The three tests. I'm going to try and show you again how Aristotle builds this out of very strong intuitions you still currently have. So your friend comes to you and says, So your friend comes to you and says, Susan loves you, and you're interested in Susan. So getting this, having to believe this is true would be a pivotal moment in your life, at least maybe. And so you go, well how do you know that? And the person says, well I heard Susan say it at the party last night. And your first response is, pfft, right? You were drunk. Come on. So the first thing you do is you make sure, you claim the organ for obtaining the form was malfunctioning. Right? And then your friend says, no, no, no. I heard this before I was drunk. I heard Susan say that, right? And she really liked you way before I was drunk. And she said it multiple times. So I know I'm remembering. And you go, come on. There's so much noise at that party. So the next thing you do is you make sure that the medium isn't distorting the information for them. And then your friend says, no, no, no. I was in the kitchen with Susan when she said, I wasn't in the main party. I could hear her clearly. And then you go, yeah, but you know, how do you know you're getting it right? And then your friend says, it wasn't just me, Tom and Julie. Agnes also heard her say it. And then you go, I think Susan really likes me. Because you did the three tests. You check to make sure the relevant organ for picking up the form isn't malfunctioning. You make sure that there's no distortion in how the information was flowing. The medium isn't distorting. And then you look for rational, intersubjective agreement. Now for Aristotle, that doesn't just mean everybody's opinion. It means after a lot of rational discussion and debate. When you do all those things, you then go, ah, that's real. That's why if somebody said, I saw a ghost. And you say, well, then, last night in the fog, you go, ehh. Or yesterday afternoon, when I had done a lot of magic mushrooms, you go, well. Okay, so, things like, so you do these three tests, which we still use. You do these three tests. And once those tests are passed, it means that the structure of your experience is the structure of reality. Now, how does reality seem to be structured to you? It seems that we are at the center. And that things are moving around us. And then for Aristotle, things are moving on purpose. Why are they moving on purpose? Because, right, there is a place where things belong. There are basically four elements. And Earth is at the center. So if something has a lot of Earth in it, it moves towards the center where the Earth is. Because in that way, it can fully actualize its Earthiness. Things are moving on purpose because of an internal drive to come to fulfillment. This is a living universe. Everything is acting on purpose. Everything is trying to come to fulfillment. So you have a geocentric world. The Earth is at the center, and then there is the various spheres. The planets and everything are moving around us. Earth is at the center, right, and then there is water and fire and air and things. That's why we do burn wood. The ash is at the center. And then there is the earth. And then there is the earth. And then there is the earth. So as we do burn wood, the ash, which is the earthiest part, falls down. The water spreads on the surface. The fire goes up, and the air goes even higher. Aristotle can explain a lot with this. Now notice how when I brought to these conclusions, we no longer agree with them because you have a scientific education. And I'm not asking you to believe Aristotle was right. I'm asking you to follow what we've done to realize how plausible and rational his model is. So everything is acting on purpose, trying to come to fulfillment. That has some connections, some similarity to the Israelite idea of things unfolding through time in a narrative story. It's not the same, but now there's similarity there. There's a potential point of connection. Now what you have is you have these two things. You have the conformity theory, right? That tells me my mind is so intimately connected to reality that I can directly sort of understand the structure of reality from my experience. Okay, there's consciousness in there too. And I'm not done thinking about that. I might not talk about it more. But because we're going to, you know, obviously what we got into was Peugeot. And so if you look at the turn in modernity that we made, well, there is no purpose outside of, well, human beings can have purpose. Well, even materialism begins to doubt that. That this experience of meaning and purpose that we have, well, that's an illusion. We don't actually have meaning and purpose. We're simply playing out. In a sense, what human beings are are false entropy, if you're a materialist. We're false entropy. We look like we're anti-entropic, but we're really false entropy. And that somehow in the process of the universe, life is this weird deviation of an entropy detour that we seem for the moment to be colonizing things and making stuff. Here's a nice track pad. Built by Logitech, a lovely trackball that I use for all of my videos. Logitech. In case you want to sponsor my videos. Screenomatic.com, that's what I do all my videos on, or at least most of them. And here's a Logitech track pad. And here's a Bic pen. And here's a Yeti mic. And of course we have my LG V30 cell phone, which is currently on AT&T. And don't forget the River Cats. Where was I? I distracted myself. It's a really bad thing. Okay, anti-entropy. That in a sense, what the materialists say is that life is a deviation from the norm. This little anti-entropic journey that life goes on will in fact lose the race against entropy and will go out of existence. Christianity says, no, actually what the universe is for, final cause, is life. Well, what's going on there? It's for life. In fact, this universe that is currently subject to decay, and this gets into the Christian story about rebellion, so creation, fall, creation, rebellion, oh, I can't think of the third. Restoration is the fourth, redemption. Creation, rebellion, redemption, restoration. That we're looking to the end of the age of decay. That we're looking to the point at which entropy will finally be defeated and the universe will continue to grow according to the universe, but humanity and God's vision for reality will continue to grow and grow. And this of course is represented by streets of gold, no more tears, no need for the sun, it's a sea of crystal, so on and so forth. So it really provides the justification for this. But this helps to explain how a lot of things work and predict the world, and that helps to provide evidence for this theory. These two theories, this is what a worldview is. It's a theory of the world and a theory of how you see the world, worldview, that interlock and mutually support each other. Brought to you by Canada Dry Softdrinks. Everything has a purpose. Everything is moving towards completion, and you can have a direct and intimate knowledge of that. Yes, Arne? Is this like the dynamical system's view of history? Pardon me? Is this like the dynamical system's view of history? Is this the dynamical system's view of which? Of history. I don't know. I don't know if Aristotle has anything like the Israelite notion of history. He has a Greek notion of development, but it doesn't seem to have what the Israelites would think of as an overarching beginning, middle, and narrative structure in which a universal problem is being solved. And I left that question in because it's a great question. Partly because this is why you get this interesting collision between the materialists who say it's accidental. Everything is accidental. And again, in a sense, life is this entropic detour that is accidental. Life, the fact that you're alive, simply a byproduct, and this is where you get to the antinatalists. It's in fact a lamentable byproduct. Now again, the platform upon which they can justify a value judgment, they don't breach that. They just simply take the assumed set of value judgments in the culture and say, this is what we do. Well, as others have said, well, you're saying you have to justify, we have to justify everything, but then you fail to be able to justify any of your value judgments. And this is what Peterson keeps poking at Sam Harris about. It just doesn't make any sense. It's just simply not consistent. And if in fact rationality is really a consistency tool, well then this assuming of this severely infused by Christianity value set that you are now laying back upon other people, just assuming that, it's about the most irrational thing you can do. Okay, so just one step. This lasts a thousand years, precisely because it's so meshes with our experience and it makes such good sense. And this is what I mean by the normal logical order. The normal logical order is how your worldview ultimately reveals the underlying principles of the mind, the underlying principles of reality, and how they are fitted together in a principled, mutually supportive fashion. Now in the past I've talked quite a bit about Thomas Nagel. And this I think is part of what Thomas Nagel is complaining about. Because in a sense what we've done is we divided the normal logical order, that mind and matter, we in a sense separated them in order to have dominion over matter. But once you exclude consciousness, well you're obviously excluding a big part of the entire equation, because it is in fact with consciousness that you are creating all of this stuff. And that's why in a sense Thomas Nagel and Jonathan Bajaux are sort of on the same page, because they're both saying you can't just get rid of consciousness and think you're actually going to be able to have a coherent worldview. It's too big of a piece to leave out. And someone says, yeah, but by setting aside consciousness, look at all the really neat stuff we were able to make. And my trackball, my Logitech trackball, works for everyone. And my, there's no brand on this, it's some Chinese company probably, that I, you know, this brandless phone holder, this is powerful, and especially powerful is my cell phone. That's really powerful. Well, but, and this is where you get into Peterson's Darwinian, you know, his pragmatic theory of truth. Yeah, but when you leave some of these consciousness truths out of producing this world, you get yourself into trouble, because you intentionally said we're not going to worry about these things. We're not going to, okay, so let's see if we can weaponize Ebola. It's a bad idea. Why? Because once you create that technology, well, what is the kind of technology that we're creating? Well, the kind of technology that we're creating is technology that anyone can use because you've stripped out consciousness from it. So anybody can create a hydrogen bomb. Now, this is where you begin to get into questions of Gnostic truth, because well, what kind of knowledge is, what kind of knowledge, well, you've got to keep it secret. It's no longer impersonal. You no longer strip consciousness out of it. But that's not the only kind, because, again, if we go back to Hockma and wisdom, wisdom is what, let's say, wisdom is an example of truth that is consciousness infused. All right? And that's why now we can try and learn from each other's wisdom, but we do that, in a sense, through this medium of consciousness and its whole bodied, and again, that's what, in a sense, the Hebrews talked about with respect to wisdom. How tightly connected everything is, how things stick together, how they have a purpose, a place, an interrelation they mutually support. Although in some deep senses this is false, I think you would agree with me, it's extremely beautiful. This makes everything really tightly connected to us in deep and profound ways. Now, if you go back through the story that I've told a number of times about the Reformation, the end of the Reformation, the searching and philosophy for an impersonal, a non-theological worldview from which we can stop killing each other over the wars of the Reformation, but also dominate the world and have power, well, suddenly economics comes to fore, and Voltaire is extremely excited about the prospect that Protestants and Catholics and Muslims, when it comes to money, all seem to be able to get along. They all want to make money. Okay, well, why do they all want to make money? Well, because money then gives them what? Gives them, well, money is like, money is the matter of will. Let's think about money in that way. Let's say that again, money is the matter of will, because via money I can turn that which I desire into actuality. Well, then you have to ask, well, what's the form? What forms are we using in order to do that? Well, and Augustine will come forward and say, you're going to have to watch out for those things, because you start imagining that's what you want, and very quickly you begin to see that's what wants you. And now we're back to Cain and Abel, and this sin is crouching at his door looking to devour you. We get into addictions and all of those conversations. Again, material, talk to Sam Harris, well, we don't act on purpose. We are a detour in the entropic sphere. We are an anti-entropic abnormality of the universe. That's what life is. And finally, entropy will win and life will lose. In the materialist sphere, we do not even act on purpose. We think we act on purpose, that's the great delusion, and again, go back to the art of will, and if you look at the art of will, what the art of will is, is the art of will. The art of will is the art of will, the art of will is the art of will. go back to the article that I talked about in the Weekly Standard that had Thomas Nagel, I posted that in a variety of my older videos where Thomas Nagel comes along and says, but you can't really work it that way. And everybody's like, nope, nope, nope, we want to see humanity as this anti-entropic abnormality in the long history of entropy. And CS Lewis and Thomas Nagel and a great many others say, yeah, but you don't really live that way because you're using money, aren't you? You're giving birth to these desires. Well, because I wanted to do this. Ultimately, why are you doing everything? Because I'm trying to be happy. I'm trying to come to fulfillment. I'm acting on purposes within purposes within. And we talked about that. But according to Aristotle, so is everything else. So you fit in. You belong in the world because you act on purposes and so is everything else. And of course, that is also the Hebrew conception that there is in fact consciousness from which all of this has been derived. And there is a meaning and a purpose into the world. And there is a shorter Westminster catechism. What is the chief end of man? To know God and love him forever. Love is the purpose of the world. Now, you'll find a lot of people who will say love is the meaning of life, but they're not going to connect it to their whole world. They're not going to connect it to my Logitech track ball. Now, Augustine and I would say Calvin who follows him do in fact try to connect these things. And a lot of people have asked, well, what's your definition of Calvinism? And you say, well, Calvinism is this determinism. I say, no, that's not really Calvinism. Calvinism is the idea that it all connects into love of God. And Calvin in a sense elevates Augustine over a lot of the other church fathers. Jonathan knows a lot of the other church fathers best. And says, no, love is the heart of it. And I think we get this from Jesus. I'm not going to say anything about the other church fathers. But that's in a sense the path that we go. That all of this stuff fits together. This is from my old prolegoma, a text back in the 1980s at Calvin's seminary, a quote from B.B. Warfield. From each point of view alike the fundamental principle of Calvinism is seen to reside in its profound sense of God and its reference to everything to him. It all fits together. There's one purpose. And that purpose, the best word we have to put that purpose together is love. He who believes in God without reserve and is determined that God shall be God to him in all his thinking, feeling, doing throughout all his individual social religious relations as a Calvinist. What Calvinism really represents is logical, theocentric thinking, a world view, a religion, a soteriology in which the vision of God and his glory rules all and the one endeavor is to render to God his rights in every sphere of thought and action. Now, we'll see later, we'll come back to this, you're in a world view in which everything else doesn't act on purpose. That's where we are. That's exactly the place that Jordan Peterson drops in. We're in a world view that nothing acts on purpose. And in fact, if you listen to the materialists, they're saying even you don't act on purpose. There is no purpose to you. You are this anti-entropic detour of the universe that is an abnormality. If we look out into space, if you want to, let's say, let's evaluate the solar system based on mass, you are insignificant. You don't matter. There is no purpose for you. Aristotle said, well, there's purpose. They said, nah. The rest of the universe, non-living universe, is acting in a purely accidental fashion. People often mistakenly say acting randomly. That's not right. They mean accidentally. They mean it's not acting towards any purpose. So now, instead of you belonging into an ocean of purpose, you are an oasis, a diminutive, an insignificant oasis in a purposeless universe. That's a little bit different, right? That feels different. And yes, indeed, that feels different. And I'd say that's exactly where we find the offense of divide. And when Jordan Peterson talks about prayer, well, okay, so maybe you have the experience of purpose, but we can't really talk about purpose. Well, we can't really talk about purpose again is asserting the monarchical vision, this monarchical vision that we cannot actually have, that we cannot actually wield, because we can't see it without consciousness. We can't see it without subjectivity. And again, if you go through Peterson and Harris, Peterson keeps hammering at Harris, and Harris can't seem to see it, that you cannot obtain the monarchical vision, and when you assert it in order to leverage it against purpose and meaning in the universe, you cannot justify that move. You just can't do it. We might conceive of an objective universe reality as a space for objects, but once you mention it, it evaporates, because you have already contaminated it with your subjectivity. You cannot maintain that clean room and yield it, because any wielding of it contaminates it. And this is Peterson's point. Again, he spends the whole time with Sam Harris, trying to get Sam to see it, and I'm not convinced Sam in any way wanted to, was open to this. What's the nature of reality? Is there purpose, yes or no? And now again, if you listen to Ver, I keep forgetting how to say, Verkeke, I always want to say Verkeke, because that's a Dutch name, and these pathways get reinforced. See, my ability to say his name is contaminated by my past. So we want to divide the universe and say, well, there's people act with purpose, there isn't purpose in the rest of the universe. And in a sense, the materialists are continuing to push the point to say, there is no purpose in the universe. That's their point. And everybody else listens to them and says, but when you try to make the point, you betray the point. Because if there is no purpose in the universe, then there's no purpose in trying to make that point. And if in fact, to the degree that I can conceive of living in a purposeless universe, all I'm going to do is indulge in my passions. Now remember, money is the matter of the passions. And so then all that it's about is making money and morality that goes out the window. Sam says, no, no, no, we're not going to throw morality out the window. Why not? You can't tell me because it will be better. You cannot have better without purpose because better towards what end? You're still trying to hit a target. And this is the point that Peterson keeps making over and over and over again. And this is why Peterson again is raiding Sam Harris's house. When I think about that, I have in mind the story in the Gospels where Jesus says he is raiding the house of Satan. And the Pharisees want to say, no, it's Beelzebub raiding Satan. And Jesus says that makes no sense. Beelzebub doesn't rob his own house, but Jordan Peterson is robbing the house of Sam Harris. Because none of us want to believe we don't live on purpose. In fact, Peterson's will say we are biologically we are biologically tuned to live on purpose that we can live no other way. But that then forces Peterson to the question, OK, Jordan, is there a purpose in the universe? Now he's got a crisis because whereas Sam Harris is in denial about the way purpose works in the universe, Jordan Peterson is terribly afraid of crossing that line. Well, why? Because he doesn't think he can justify it. Because he's got this foundationalist schema that is part of our entire culture and understanding about talking about these things. Again, he might be good to have him read some Alvin Plantinga about belief in God is justifiably basic. I don't know if Alvin Plantinga is getting way up in years. And so I don't know if he's available or up to a lot of these conversations. But this is this is very much where Alvin Plantinga comes into the conversation. Is there any purpose? Yes or no? Can the future be negotiated relationally? I've been thinking a lot about, OK, where does the boundary really lie between the boundary of faith and the boundary of practice? Well, it's this idea of prayer where I close my eyes and I talk to God and materialists listen to look at that and say, that's exactly what needs to go. That's why the conversation with Sam Harris, when it got to this point of prayer, it got really hot. And this is why Peterson's point about sacrifice is so interesting, because in a sense with sacrifice, you invent the future. Sacrifice says the future can be negotiated with it. Peterson says sacrifice worked. We know that. And in fact, Peterson's bigger point is that this this whole history of of of Western civilization worked. And you say, well, we're just going to strip out all the religious parts of it and keep all the non-religious parts. And Peterson looks at that and says it isn't working. You know, Nietzsche saw that you can't just strip it out. You have to replace it with something. And Nietzsche's critique was devastating. But Nietzsche's answer was in some ways horrifying because, OK, Nietzsche brings purpose back in. But purpose is not purpose is not controlled by the all good author of the story. OK. And Verkeke is talking about Hebrew conceptions of narrative. We have narrative, you have the all good purpose of the story built into narrative is that, well, Tolkien is the god of Middle Earth. And and finally, you know, Tolkien will have his way. Yeah, but Tolkien is nested in the god of Roman Catholicism. And finally, the god of Christianity will have his way. So which story are you living in? I can take these out, not playing any more videos. And and and so then Peterson comes and says, you know, is it effect is it effective in an intentional or accidental way? And that's that's where he's at. He's saying, I can't argue with the fact that in Peterson's opinion, Western civilization has been dramatically effective. Dare we abandon its underpinnings with what justification? Now, Jordan doesn't go to church. And you might argue, Jordan, dare you abandon that without justification? It's the same argument. When it comes to worship and prayer, these are the strangest things that you do in church. You come in and you and you sing love songs to Jesus if you're an evangelical. You you you you you come to worship you. You bring gifts. You say prayers. You you pray. You you listen to God's word and the reformed conception of liturgy. There's this dialogic nature where if you look at it in an anthropological sense, the the people go to meet their lord. And if if you had if you were a serf and you had a landholder or a king, you would go to meet the king. And that's why so much Western European liturgy bears so many emblems of European monarchy. And that's why older forms of Christian liturgy, such as the Orthodox or Western liturgy, like the Roman Catholic, it's they're all going to meet their king because these stories stack up. And and these things are built in there. And of course, what happens in the Protestant Reformation is now in a sense, we go to meet the government. You know, these these these are all nested in context and and these contexts have been flowing. But at heart, what happens in church and at worship is you go and negotiate with the future. You go and negotiate with the universe and people say, well, I can do that at home. Yeah, but now we're starting to do it together and we're doing it as a body. And you say, well, all of this built into this amazing system that we have now inherited. And this is part of the reason Peterson kicks back so hard at dismissing the amazing world that we have as as just simply reducing it to white supremacy or reducing it to to to patriarchal tyranny. That's why he kicks back so hard at those things, because he looks at this and says the West has worked amazingly well. And in fact, if if the West is just white supremacist, why do very dark skinned Africans, why are they doing anything possible to make it across the Mediterranean or the Atlantic to get to one of these places when Africa has been, you know, Maybe contaminated a bit by whiteness, but the colonial powers have been gone. You know, so then you get into all these kinds of arguments, most of which I'm not interested in at all. But here you get to worship and prayer. Is there a watcher? Does God listen? Does prayer change God or does God change us or does prayer change us or both? What is this? And we don't know because we're not dominating it. And so partly what you do when you go to church is that you say, I'm not in charge of this relationship, but I am still opening myself up to it. I'm taking a risk and saying, OK, and this is where you get to Jordan Peterson, we're talking to Sam Harrison and prayer at the at the edge of the bed. And then we don't know what's happening about Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson agree to that. Well, there it is. Well, and now you have to decide what you're going to do. Now, Jordan decides not to go to church. I decide to go to church. I decide, in fact, to facilitate church. But this is the question. Is there purpose in the universe? And this is, in fact, why again Jordan Peterson is raiding Sam Harris's house. Life and entropy. Is life an accidental exception to entropy? And in fact, if you're a materialist, you'll say in a sense, life is a lying detour to entropy because all of us living things think, in fact, that we have purpose. You're all confused. You have no purpose. Well, how do you know? Is there purpose to life? Peterson is powerfully asserting that without meaning and purpose, there is no life. And I think this is part of the part of the reason why anti natalists come around, because Peterson is saying this is built into us. In other words, at the heart of life is a lie. And that lie is that there is purpose. And so actually, if you want to eliminate the lie for some strange morality that can't exist if you're really a materialist, then you should get rid of life. That's the logical conclusion. That's the reasonable outcome. Then, of course, you bring in Peugeot's assertion about consciousness. Well, what about consciousness? Well, what is that? Well, that, again, if you're a materialist, well, that's a spandrel. That's kind of this this thing that we developed in order to continue the lie and the rebellion against entropy. Well, maybe Christianity is the story about the rebellion against entropy. Or maybe as Christianity sits at entropy is the rebellion against God. And and what happens in it when the man and the woman take the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, they enter into that game and they in a sense become the agents of entropy in the world. Why is God so upset in Genesis five when he looks at the world and all people are doing are killing each other? Well, people have lined up on the side of entropy and God says, OK, I'll take the best man in the world and I'll drown the rest. I'll give entropy its day. But I'll do so with with Noah and his family. And but that doesn't go right. So then Abraham and Israel fails. And then Jesus and then Jesus comes. And why is it the resurrection that is the final death of entropy? Christian story. So there's my video. I've got to do my rough draft yet. I've got to visit people. So that's it for this. I'll probably post this today or tomorrow.