https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=O5TNSnKUB0E

 Looks like I'm live streaming. See if I can open up this doc. Can I see the chat? Can I see the chat? There's the chat. All right. Don't know if anybody's in here yet. This just dropped. Jordan Peterson announced his tour. We had little, little words of it before, but fascinating. The thumbnail really caught my eye right up here. Interesting, interesting image. But here's the tour announcement. Hey, Dad, what's your news? Well I'm announcing my tour for next year. He seems, you know, there's a lot of background, there's a lot of background noise. He seems to be in a lobby someplace and his daughter's doing it, so they're obviously together. Someday, I mean, he's big enough now that biographies will be written. Someday this stuff is going to be written up and I'm just glad I'm living through it because it's just so darn interesting. It just, it really is. Begins January 25th. We're going to do 40 cities in the US and then we'll hit Canada, Europe, Southeast Asia, including Australia, New Zealand. When he said 40 cities in the US, I thought, oh good, it's going to be reasonable. Then I kept listening. 150 cities or so in total, like the last tour. Oh gosh. I just don't know about this. Beyond order, 12 more rules for life. And if you're interested in attending, go to the ticket sale site and away we go. I don't, you know, we always, will I go? I didn't see Sacramento. Will I go? Will I go to the Bay Area if there's one there? I don't know. I'm not sure. Yeah, the format of this announcement is strange. I'm not sure if I'll go or if I'll not go. It's going to be interesting because, you know, will they have enough content on the channel to keep it going? What will he do doing these tours? Will he basically do like he did before? You know, so they recorded a bunch of them and then, you know, a lot during his convalescence, they were releasing some of them. I listened to some of them. I didn't listen to all of them. Yeah, it's just, it's just, it's just strange. I'm glad to see you there. Are you up for this? This is a pretty big tour. I'm glad Michaela asked the question because she's the one that had to go to, she's the one that had to go to Russia. So she's probably like, are you up for this, dad? I don't want to have to take you to Russia again. I think I'm up for it. It looks like it. I practiced in New York and in Cambridge and Oxford and it seemed to. And he was great in Cambridge. That was one of the best videos I've seen from him in a long, long time. So. It went well. So I'm thrilled to death to be able to do this again and hope everybody that attends is feeling the same way. So it looks like Michaela just did this on her phone. Yeah. You like the Santa beard? I told my wife, yeah, I'm going to have to, I'm going to have to keep it at least through Christmas. But wow. If there's authoritarian medical mandates in place. Yeah. So, so then, and look at this picture. You know, these things are not incidental. They've obviously got lots of pictures of Jordan and this is, this is the one that they pick. I mean, he looks anxious. It's not, you know, it's not angry, um, bust plinth looking down, you know, with a furled brow. This is, you know, it's, it's a direct, the book's kind of in the corner and his little emblem down below. I don't know. I don't know. What do you guys think? But COVID testing covers. Yeah. Yeah. So they're going to be COVID testing. Are we going to have to wear a mask? Am I going to accept that? Is Jordan going to be going on stage and all going to be sitting there in masks? Gosh. Gosh. And then the music, you know, I, I, I pay attention to this stuff partly because I make YouTube's and then the music. What, what, what, what, what? Grim Grizz live streamed his reaction too. And he has a Patreon. Um, Santa beard confirmed. That's right, Mark, Mark, Mark, you should grow a beard, Mark. I mean, you don't, you, I don't know whether you can grow hair on the top of your head. If you can, you shouldn't shave it because that kind of hair privilege should not go to waste because it doesn't last forever. Anyway, see, I look at the comments and they distract me. So, so again, back to the music. And now, okay, so here's the tour of the cities. Austin, Texas, where maybe he'll become a professor again. Houston, Texas, because what's their largest city in America? Big city, Jacksonville, St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg, not that big. I don't know. Miami. So one, so, you know, three, three in Florida, then back to Texas. Whoops. Bunch in Texas, New York, New York, Providence, Rhode Island. Maybe I'll go visit my mom and he'd seeing him in Providence. I see my buddy, Cal. Next time I go to, next time I go out, he see my buddy, Cal. And again, the music is supposed to, yeah, I know you just got this music from the, you have the rights to the music and yeah, yeah, I'm triggered. I'm triggered by book tour number two. Me too, Grizz. Definitely Michaela's doing, this little video was Michaela's doing, but I can't imagine Michaela pushed him into this because you would think she'd be triggered by the first one. It's like, I don't want to go to Russia again, dad, you know, stay healthy. Are you ready for this? Are you up to this? Are we going to have to cancel halfway through? I hope not. And I keep looking for Sacramento, of course, you know, Denver, Salt Lake, Kansas City, Des Moines, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Pensacola, Florida, back to Florida. Grand Rapids, Michigan. So, you know, all my buddies in Grand Rapids, they'll go get to see him. Santa Rosa, Santa Rosa. What's that? A little vacation stops. You can do an event in Santa Rosa. You know how small Santa Rosa is? San Francisco, Fresno, San Diego, Los Angeles, Sacramento, swipe over to Phoenix. You know, there's geography here. I know maybe to you Canadians, you think, you know, there's, you know, I know the Europeans, you know, is Texas. If I, if I visit Jeff in Texas, will everyone there be able to get to Dallas? No, Texas is big. So is California. And then Seattle and then, you know, Seattle, Washington, May 5, May 4, Stockholm. He's got a month there. So that's good. So he's got a month built in. You know, I didn't look at the timing of all of these. You know, I got to go over to the Eastern block and visit all the nurses and doctors. Warsaw, Estonia, Glasgow, Manchester. It's got a lot of European appointments. Okay. That, well, that's, well, let's, let's, let's take a look closer. Look at these dates again. So starting in January, you got a pretty good run. You got a little break between San Antonio, New York and Providence. Another little break. So it's, it's, it's not as, it's, it's a little bit more spread out. That's good. But still no Sacramento. What, what did, what did we do wrong? How did we disappoint? No. Yeah. Santa Rosa, the lost boys. You're right, Grim. I don't know if, I don't know if Omicron is going to cancel these events. Omicron could be really mild and it's like, you're tired and have a headache for a few days. So the disrespect. That's right. What about Sacramento? Huh? What about Sacramento? Boston, Nashville, Raleigh-Durham, Charlotte. At least he's got a few days between some of these, but, but knowing him, he's probably got media appearances. Cause when he goes to Los Angeles, no, now when he goes to, no wonder he starts in Austin, he's got us kick it off with Joe Rogan. That's why, where's Nashville? Cause there's Nashville. Cause of course his daughter's living in Nashville. Little time between Cedar Rapids, Iowa and Pensacola, Florida, March, a little spring break. This goes, this is, this is his year. So he gets some vacation in May and then June. You know, I look at this and I think, what, what, what is, what is this like as a life? Maybe you like living on the road. I don't know. a bus and like tour with the band. Omicron canceled stuff in California, not Florida or Texas. Yeah. What about Sacramento? I'm still a little, a little, a little upset with that. Well, we'll maybe, maybe if Omicron doesn't take us all out, then we'll, we'll finally around to having our Sacramento conference and Jordan can sign up for that. Then we'll get them to Sacramento. Let's see. Yeah. But this goes, this goes January through September. This is three quarters of the year. So we'll see what happens in terms of, oh, then we get all of them in one place in the small print. So anybody around Minneapolis? Yeah. You can start putting, putting your meetups together. Yeah. Change Santa Rosa for Sacramento. You know, it's gotta be some, something in Santa Rosa. Oh, so what do you guys think of it? Yeah. Maybe make it to Thunder Bay. Yeah. Thunder Bay. Hopefully, you know, I know the, the good people up in, up in Thunder Bay are, would I really love to do the conference with myself and Vervakey and Peugeot. So if Jordan comes, I'd say let him talk, but that's, that's up to him. If he funded, he will come here from alpha to omega. Yeah. Wait, wait for the omega variant. I mean, if, if that name isn't going to send shivers down your spine, there's a few Minneapolis people. There's twin, twin bridges. That's right. Meaning discord. That's right. So of course we've got Luke up there and Paul and Leitner and we got a lot of, we got a lot of peeps in, in Minneapolis. So I'll have an, a conversation coming up. We're doing a, doing an OG randos conversation next week with, with Luke and Job and Sam and Jeff and I that's coming up next week. And, uh, and Leitner put together a convo between an Leitner, myself and Vervakey that's coming up. So, yeah, yep. Oh, none in Canada. I wonder, well, what does this mean about the biblical series? I mean, are we ever going to get Exodus? I think he should actually integrate the biblical series with the book tour. I don't know if his handlers would agree with that, but that would be cool. Um, yeah, I doubt Peterson cares about funding. Grim is too cynical, Mark says. Well, there you go, Grim. You're, you're, you're too cynical. So, um, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't have any saving throws. Yeah, that's right. There's, there's no Canadian appearances. Probably because he figured Canada wouldn't allow it. COVID would be a nice excuse to not let Jordan Peterson come and address. But yeah, my question is what happened to the biblical series? Is he ever going to do Exodus? Maybe not. Canada is closing everything down like Europe is claiming, but won't. That's true. Yeah, they had enough Canada for a while. Yeah, that's right. Uh, planned restrictions in Austria are so barbaric. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Every, there's sort of the Omicron freak out right now, even before they know what it's going to do. And I can understand caution and taking some restrictions, but, um, you know, early indications that it's mild. We'll see. We don't know. We don't know. We really don't know. Um, well, Grim, Grim. How very Canadian phobic. Yeah. Distant Trudeau, the puppet boy. Oh my goodness. Exodus could be pretty boring in places. Oh, that's right, Nate. Um, everybody who, you know, wants to read the Bible, they start out in Genesis. Wow. What great stories and Exodus. Whoa, Moses. And then you hit like verse chapter 25 and you're into the furniture of the tabernacle. It's like, what's, what's, what's this in my Bible for? I was looking for inspiration. Yeah. To see Pete. Well, number I'd, I'd really love to see Peterson do Leviticus. Leviticus is a fascinating book and should be, I think you'd get most of it wrong, but it would be interesting. Um, Leviticus is it Leviticus? Well, if he did some research, there's a couple like Milgram's work on Leviticus. Uh, Mary has Mary Douglas, her work on Leviticus. Some of that, the anthropological work on Leviticus is really, yeah, what about China and North Korea? I mean, come on. Although, um, were there any Australia dates in there? Some of his Australia talks were the notable exceptions to the, um, and what about talking with, uh, you know, if you're healthy, do, do some of those, some of, do some of those interesting things. I wonder, I wonder how much money he makes on each appearance. It's gotta be pretty good because those tickets weren't cheap and then you do the VIP thing. I just, yeah, I don't know. I don't know. Judges would be really cool. It's true. Um, Leviticus is based in Red Pill, puts the num in numbers. Uh, interesting. All of our ideas about Omicron. Oh, I didn't know, um, Bob lives in Austria and I'm definitely against taxing mandates. Interesting. Yeah, Job. All right, so I just wanted to do a little reaction to this announcement video and if there's anything true of Jordan Peterson, just stuff happens around the dude. He's he's he's a lightning rod for stuff happening and now he's going to do a nine month book tour, 150 cities, not Canada. Um, will he have anything interesting to say in these places? I mean, I can hardly criticize him. I mean, I sort of, I haven't written a book, but I get on the internet and ramble and y'all kind of listen. So anyway, or just do the gospels. I would, the gospels, Esther O'Reilly mentioned that and I thought the gospels would be interesting. So all right. All right, so. BBK is old yet of live stream. All right, so I'm gonna, I'm gonna end this live stream unless someone has something they really want to say. Lightning has struck. Nice summary. Well, there you go. That is, that is pretty, pretty much it. Stuff happens around the dude is accurate. That's that's very true. He's looking spiffy and his three piece suit. I have three piece. The dude is just an interesting guy. He just, he just always is. So good for him. Good for him. Well, I don't know, Steve, if it'll be interesting. I don't know if we'll, I mean, part of the part of my complaint about the first book tour was it sort of became a black hole for the rest of us plebs out here in YouTube land. So maybe they're going to try and have enough content. That last conversation he did with the psychology of narrative. I can't make a commentary video on it. At least not yet. I don't know if I ever will, but I found that to be fascinating. Strahd had sent me a message said, you got to listen to this one because, and he was right. I listened to it last night. Austria is not a dystopian nightmare. I'm glad to hear that. Well, you're very welcome, Chris had two really good randos conversations. Both of them will come out on the channel. They were both really good. And so I think I'm excited to share those. I'm traveling a little bit this weekend for work. So I don't know if that'll impact video production, but yeah, don't kill them off by overworking. Yeah. And so again, back to this segment. It was about here. Go to the ticket sale site and attending or beyond order. I'm up for it. I think I'm up for it. Stay on him, Michaela. Don't let him overwork himself. You know, Tammy, you keep an eye on him too. And you know, someone's, someone's gotta, someone's gotta tell him no. Sometimes they Jordan eat your beef and go to bed and get a good night's sleep. Take care of yourself. Don't, don't. Hey, there's Luke. Are you going to go see Jordan, Peterson, Luke? The very, the best one is yet to come. Yeah. I mentioned Luke that we're, that, that we're doing an OG randos conversation and Luke will be there. So all you Luke fans, you will get, you will get more of Luke if you don't already get enough of him on the, on the randos United channel. All right. He's coming out as Christian. This video, that video looks like a deep fake. It does kind of, he, he's, he, he still looks a little fragile. Anyway, anyway. All right. So I'm going to end this foolishness and thanks for joining me and we'll see what happens with the tour.