https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6y7wm31nzNk

 Social media has given us the opportunity to let people speak their minds. A number of these things I hear fairly regularly about the Bible and Christianity. That in the Bible women were treated as property, not persons. That women were not free to express themselves, their desires, their needs or their rights. That women were treated as second class citizens and that women were only there to serve men. I hear these things quite often and I am quite adamant with people that the Bible does not teach these things. Yet at the same time, the Bible was not written to us, but for us. What that means is that in fact a lot of what we find in the Bible has cultural context and situations that are strange to us, alien to us, and don't necessarily fit our expectations and assumptions about full ranges of things. Part of the difficulty that we have is when we read the Bible and we don't find the Bible mirroring our cultural assumptions back to us, we get upset. The difficulty we have is that our assumptions are our own. That in fact there is a huge diversity of assumptions about gender and women all over the world today. There is a whole huge diversity of assumptions around the world today about how men and women should relate to each other and especially about the status of women. So we shouldn't expect the Bible to mirror our own cultural assumptions. The Bible has been speaking to vastly different cultures around the world today and around the world throughout time. I'd also like to say that injustice and discrimination stalk every culture and every relationship and that biases live in all of us. I was watching yet another college football player, yet another college football player, is on charges for striking a woman in a bar in Florida. There's a lot that could be said about the videotape, but what I saw was that she hit first. Now that doesn't mean he should have hit her, but it also means that she should not have hit him. Because in a sense, for her to say, I can hit you because I'm a woman and you can't hit me back because you're a man, is in fact appealing to an old standard. Whereas in fact most men would probably not pick a fight with a top shelf college football running back because they know they would be hit back and would probably lose the fight. But it's all these layers of conversations between men and women, between classes, between all these different levels and layers that we imagine ourselves being tangled with. And biases live in us all. The larger question I have is where have these suspicions about the Bible arisen? Why can I very easily on Facebook say something like, well in the Bible women were treated like property. I would have to say the Bible talks to cultures that have slavery and in slave cultures people are treated like property, but a woman who is a slave in the Bible who is not a slave is never treated as property because she's a woman. Why have these ideas kind of filtered into our conversations and our assumptions? Because I don't think that 50 years ago if someone said women were treated like property in the Bible, anyone would have listened to that statement. I think it's commonly suspected that the Bible is anti-women. And I think the church is increasingly seen as problematic on this front. I have coined a term that I've started to use and will probably continue to use because I think what has happened in our national conversation in that a lot like moralistic therapeutic deism which I've talked about in previous sermons, there are assumptions about what life is about that have creeped into our cultural conversation that has developed into what I would regard as kind of a stealthy civil religion. It's a stealthy non-theistic religion that is really ascending in our culture and many people have mistaken it for Christianity. You can hear it on the lips of politicians and celebrities at graduation ceremonies. And I think it is redefining our assumptions about what morality is. There's a lot of big words on that slide. So I'm going to read you a little bit of what David Brooks describes in his book, The Road to Character. If you were born at any time over the last 60 years, you were probably born into what the philosopher Charles Taylor has called the culture of authenticity. This mindset is based on the romantic idea that each of us has a golden figure in the core of our self. You can hear this idea in nearly every Disney movie. There is a hidden, good, true self which can be trusted, consulted, and gotten in touch with. Your personal feelings are the best guide for what is right and what is wrong. If you go to almost any graduation ceremony, you will hear a few things. You'll hear number one, follow your dreams. Number two, you can achieve anything you want if you believe in yourself. And number three, if you follow these things, life will be great. Now most of you who are older listen to that and just kind of smile because you think, well, my passions often steer me wrong. There's a whole lot getting in the way of what I want besides just believing in myself. And often when I try this, I find myself disappointed because the truth about the world is just because you show up and say, I believe in myself doesn't mean anyone's going to hand you anything. But that's speaking as an older person who has tried this. In this ethos, the self is to be trusted, not doubted. Your desires are the inner oracles for what is right and true. You know you are doing the right thing when you feel good inside. I remember songs in the 70s singing about it can't be wrong because it feels so right. And I thought, boy, a lot of what really feels right, a lot of people don't think it's really very right at all. The valid rules of life are those you make or accept for yourself and that feel right to you. Our moral salvation, Taylor writes, describing this culture, comes from recovering authentic moral contact with ourselves. It is impossible to stay true to that pure inner voice and not to follow the informities of a corrupting world. Now again, part of what exposes this idea is that this young man who went and killed those members of Emmanuel AME in Charleston, if you asked him, he'd probably say, well, I just feel that segregation is right. What will you say to him? What will you say to him if he says, it's my passion to do this? You will say, no, this is racism. But isn't he following his inner self, what he describes as his true self? And can't you say to him, no, that's wrong? It is important to stay true to that pure inner voice and not to follow the informities of a corrupting world. As Taylor put it, there is a certain way of being that is my way. I am called to live my life in this way and not an invitation of anyone else's. If I am not, I miss the point of my life. I miss what being human is for me. In one of his most famous speeches, Steve Jobs at Stanford University stands up in front of the students and says, don't follow anyone's dogma. Listen to your passions. Believe in yourself. Don't listen to authorities over you. And I just wonder, of all those smart graduates of Stanford, where none of that sitting there and saying, then why should I listen to you? And that's advice. From an older tradition of self-combat, we move to a self-liberation and self-expression. Moral authority is no longer found in some external objective good. It is found in each person's unique original self. Greater emphasis is put on personal feelings as a guide to what is right and wrong. I know I am doing right because I am feeling harmonious inside. Something is going wrong, on the other hand, when I feel my autonomy is being threatened and when I feel I am not being true to myself. In this ethos, sin is not found in your individual self. It is found in the external structures of society and racism and equality and oppression. To improve yourself, you have to be taught to love yourself, to be true to yourself, and to not doubt yourself and struggle against yourself. As one of the characters in one of the high school musical movies says, the answers are all inside of me. All I've got to do is believe. The difficulty with this is if you engage someone who is very much convinced of this and convinced of it innocently, which means it is not something they have ever chosen, it is something they simply absorbed by the culture and it sounded good, it sounded right, and everyone around them believes it, where does that lead you? See the doctrines or the dogmas, I have a friend who teaches at a school and I came to one of his classes once because I was lecturing later, and I remember him standing there in front of his students explaining to them that all dogmas are wrong, and I just wanted to raise my hand and say, haven't you just given us a dogma? Is this dogma wrong too? The fact that dogmas are our foundationally held beliefs and the dogmas of progressive liberationism are discovery of your true hidden self. Your greatest duty is to yourself, overthrow any constraints on yourself. Friends, society, government, church, job must not just affirm this self, but celebrate it. And history is moving this way, so get on the right side of history. So the idea is you must self-liberate, and this is a movement in history that is bringing us all along with this great self-liberation. Now you might wonder, pastor, do you just get up every week and talk to us about the ideas that you blogged about this week and write about on Facebook? And the answer is no. Every week we get up and as we move through the Bible. But this week we come to some interesting stories at the end of the book of Numbers that if you came to the Bible and said the Bible is anti-women, you've probably not read the book of Numbers, or you probably think you know it's in the book of Numbers, and have never read the story of the five daughters of, and get this name, Zalapahad. I've been practicing this name all week. Zalapahad. No one ever names their children Zalapahad anymore. I don't know why. This is the story of the five daughters of Zalapahad in Israel. The daughters of Zalapahad, son of Heber, the son of Gilead, the son of Macor, the son of Manasseh, belonged to the clans of Manasseh, son of Joseph. The names of the daughters were Mawah, Noah, Ogla, Milka, and Zirva. They came forward and stood before Moses, a liaison of priests, the leaders of the whole assembly at the entrance of the temple meeting, and said, Our father died in the wilderness. He was not among Tore's followers, who banded together against the Lord, but he died for his own sin and left no sons. Why should our father's name disappear from his clan, because he had no son? Give us property among our father's relatives. Now what was happening at this stage was Israel's ready to go into the promised land, and they're parceling out property to the tribes according to their size, and to the clans according to their size, and all the way down. And in the ancient world, property tended to follow the fathers and the firstborn sons. Here is a situation where this man had five daughters, none of them married, and as they're giving out land, what this meant was these women were going to be destitute. And what this meant was their father's name, through no fault of his own, would not be able to continue through the inheritance of the land. And so these women come to Moses and say, Wait a minute, is there no room in Israel for us? Now, if women were property, if women had no status, if women were not considered to be people, what would be the response of Moses? He would say, I'm sorry, bring a man. That's not what happens. Moses, however, is stuck. And so what the Lord had told Moses was, you are to have judges in the land, and you are to bring cases before judges, and if the cases are difficult, they go to Moses, and if the cases are very difficult, they go to God. And so Moses brought their case before the Lord, because Moses didn't know what to do. And the Lord said to him, What the law of the head's daughters are saying is right. You must certainly give them property as an inheritance among their father's relatives and give their fathers inheritance to them. Now, again, when we read this passage in our modern culture context, we say, duh, of course you give it to the daughters. But what we tend to be blind to is that we are a part of 2000 years of Christian history and even longer that of biblical history. And that, in fact, these understandings go all the way back to a story like this, a story that I dare bet hardly any of you ever remembered, even if you're doing your read your Bible in the process of it in the span of a year. I hadn't remembered these daughters of Salah. And here it is. And why is this story so important? First of all, some questions emerge from it. Could God see this coming when he made the original law? Isn't the fact that in fact these women had to bring the appeal, doesn't that say something about this blind side that the culture had at that time? Is God open to the influence of women? Now, again, even asking that question this way, you would say, what a stupid question. Because if you read the rest of the Bible, what you begin to discover is that God is listening to the prayers of women all of the time. In fact, what this passage teaches is a lot about Israel and a lot about how God works. If you pay almost any attention to the Old Testament, you'll recognize that in many key places throughout the Old Testament, when the men are really messing up badly, it's the women who say the story. Tamar, who gets neglected by her father-in-law Judah, not only rescues his line, of which Jesus will come, but in many ways turns Judas' character around in the Genesis story. The midwives in Egypt, if you read the beginning of the book of Exodus, all of the men are out there slaving away. No one will stand up to Pharaoh. The midwives are the only ones who will stand up to Pharaoh. You read about Hannah at the beginning of the book of 1 Samuel. Israel is in complete freefall. The tabernacle at Shiloh is a mess, and Deliah is corrupt and his sons are worse. And it's only the prayers of Hannah, who is childish, who prays for her son, and when she receives the son, what does she do? Does she grab her son and say, oh, he's mine, I'll never give him up? She takes her son and she delivers him to corrupt Eli and gives him over to the Lord, and it's through Samuel that Israel is saved. Read the book of Ruth, how this Moabite woman rescues Israel and becomes part of the line of David and of Jesus, and then the book of Esther. In fact, if you read the Old Testament, you find this all over the place, and you might say, well, why does the Bible get a reputation of being anti-women? And I would say, because we don't read the Bible. Even this 11th century French rabbi makes this comment on this text. Rashi noting that this episode immediately follows the mention of the 10th miracle's fives, construes it as a special argument on behalf of the role of women as opposed to men in the wilderness narrative. The men say, the number's 14, let us put up a head, or really, raise up a leader, choose a leader, and return to Egypt. And the women say to the Lord, give us a hold it, give us a stake. This was from an 11th century rabbi, not a 21st century rabbi. You see, part of the tension with what I call progressive liberationist thinking is that the conflict between equality and identity. We want to say two contradictory things, that women should be treated as men in terms of equality, but also that women should expressly be affirmed and recognized in their identity as a woman, which means diversity. To say a woman is a man is to destroy something of her created identity and therefore to do violence to her. And our contemporary conversations have this tension between them. Is a woman a man? No. Is a woman equal to a man? Well, let's talk about what equality means. You can't say, well, I think if women ran the world there'd be more peace, then you surely don't believe in equality. That might be true. So these conversations are difficult. In this story, the women rightly know the injustice being done to their family through the legal system, and they can appeal to God who affirms not only their rights, but also their identity as given to them through his creation of them. While the men are being all progressive liberationists, often at the expense of women and each other, the women's call for recognition of justice is affirmed and then given a place in law. Because don't forget what we talked about last week. If you remember last week's story, the men were prostituting themselves with the daughters of Nidia and Moab. And so the men were in a sense saying, what do I really need to be liberated from? I need to be liberated from my inconvenient one wife and maybe add another. I need to be liberated from staying and marrying within the covenant and going out and finding more women that are more exciting and probably younger. The men are doing the I need to express myself thing. And here in the next story, the women are saying, Lord, we want a state in you. Here is the difficulty. When we elected an African American president, did that make racism disappear? If we elect a woman president, will that make sexism disappear? Do we have any resources to really conquer the biases, discrimination and injustice between us at nearly every level? We try all of these different formulas. And what do we discover? We discover that we're selfish. We discover that we're biased. We discover that people naturally rig any system they develop for the well for the well being of themselves and the groups that they favor, usually at the expense of another. So can we in fact develop a system that will yield to us peace and goodness? We have conflicts between identity groups, gender, ethnicity, class, interest groups. This continues. And we wonder, where is God in all of this? What's interesting in the story is that the women were concerned about their family being cut off. Because in the words of the Bible, at least in the words of the Old Testament, that synonymous with hell. For all of your children to die is to be cut off. The New Testament changes the conversation. In the New Testament, Christ is raised from the dead. In the New Testament, not being cut off means something entirely different. Because the truth is, in the age of decay, we are all cut off. And what the story of Jesus means is that the rescue for us comes from the outside. It comes from Jesus. The rescue does not come from the law. The rescue does not come by getting our group together and forcing a political solution on our enemies. The rescue comes against the area that most binds us, which is not just outside of us, but is inside of us. We are promised resurrection, which is something beyond the wildest dreams of any progressive liberationist. Let's imagine now that you can sit down and say, okay, pastor, this is how I think all the laws of the land should be improved. We're going to legislate about this group, we're going to legislate about that group, we're going to legislate about that group, and I'm going to be engaged and decree that the nation do what I think. Let me ask you, how much of the world will you fix? As a pastor, I would know that however you redistribute the laws, most people are going to come to me with exactly the same frustrations and trials they come to me now with. They'll say, pastor, my spouse isn't doing what they should. They'll say, pastor, my child wants this. They'll say, pastor, I'm sick. They'll say, pastor, I'm worried about my parents. None of your laws are going to change any of this. And I'll continue to do humorous. Here's the question. Identity is received and fulfilled. That's a radical idea. Because here's the thing, however I decide to construct my identity, if my identity is standing on myself, it will die with me. But if my identity is received from the Lord, and it's an identity that in fact goes beyond the grave, I am being redeemed. Christ guarantees our rescue. In the resurrection, we have more than legal rights. We have an inheritance that will never corrupt our faith. And finally, the greatest freedom that we need is not freedom from the outside. If there's anything that's dramatic in the history of North America, it's the fact that Africans who were brought in change from Africa across the Atlantic Ocean were enslaved by a population of people that used the Bible to justify race-based slavery. And I'm sure that this group of people somehow picked up the Gospel from their slave masters who didn't even want them to read the Bible. That this group of people picked up the Gospel from their slave masters and that at this point, popular and demographically speaking, African Americans are the most Christian demographic in the nation today. If that isn't a miracle, I don't know what it is. Because what that means is that African Americans, even before they were liberated by the Emancipation Proclamation, learned an inner freedom that even slavery could not take away. If you imagine your salvation is involved in getting the laws of this government to somehow align with what you think they need to do, you're asking for a salvation that is too small. Because the beginning of our liberation does not start with how people treat me. It begins inside of my heart. At our 930 Sunday School class, we're going through the difficult book of 1 Corinthians. And one person this morning very honestly and sincerely confessed, a lot of this stuff that Paul teaches, I don't know, I'm trying to understand it. And I said, that's right, it's difficult for us to understand because the dominant narrative we hear from this country is, I am mine and I belong to myself and I will be the author of my own destiny. The Apostle Paul begins the conversation like this, if you belong to yourself, you are a slave to your passions and you will always be subject to a slavery that is within yourself. Paul changes the conversation and says, the way out of that slavery is by finding, not making yourself your own master, but finding a new master. And it is that embracing the only master who will die for you. Look around in this context, find your political hero and I ask you, will that hero die for you? Does that hero even know your name? The beginning of the heart of a catechism starts this way, what is your only comfort in life and in death? And the next phrase says this, that I am not my own. I belong body and soul and life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ who has only paid for all my sins with his precious blood. And what this means is that the greatest liberation we need to seek ultimately is a liberation from our own greedy selves. Some of you know this because some of you have walked the path of addiction and you knew that there was at least one passion inside of you that if you followed your passion, if you believed in yourself, if you gave your life to that passion, it would destroy you. Now other of us look at addiction and say, well they're different from regular folks, they're not like us. And I say, really? Because I know myself. And I might not be an addict in some of the classical ways, but if I look into my heart, I am an ardent advocate for me. And usually what that means is me before all of you, my well-being at the expense of anyone else's life that I can grab a hold of. And only when Christ shows me the end result of me being on the throne do I begin to realize I am a lousy God, even if I try to be my own God. And if I have myself as my own God, you know what I will do to my life and those that I love? I will destroy them. And the only way therefore to live is to come to the one true God and to recognize the love that this God has for me that would bring him to set his own sights. To lead me to say to him, I will no longer be in charge of me, but I will give myself to you that I am not my own and happily so. Let's pray. Lord, this is such a counter-cultural idea. We so deeply assume that I am the most trustworthy captain of my own life. And Lord, so often I only unlearn this when I realize what a lousy captain I've been. Help me, Lord, to recognize your Lordship. Help me, Lord, to submit my captainship to yours. Help me, Lord, to learn to live following you, giving myself to others rather than asserting myself and demanding that the world dance to my tune. Help me, Lord, to recognize that my passions are good signals but bad masters. And that you, in fact, chart my destiny and will give me far more of what I will in the long run find joy with than what I can ever grab. Hear my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Amen. Who do you stand?