https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7toDExJkBKA

 NPR carried the story of a young chaplain who went to Iraq. And in the Iraq war in 2003, he very much had a crisis of faith. This is what he wrote. The church was asking me to confess my sins when I felt like God had done far worse things than I've ever done, he said. By standing by and not really doing much for the world, that's full of war and conflict, despair and loss. I find this sentiment rings with a lot of people. And I find a lot of people say, I can't believe in the church or I can't believe in the God because of all of this. Last week we talked about the blue sky God. The God who everything he says, I agree with. Everything he does, I think is right. And we talked about God opening the heavens and the Holy Spirit coming down as a dove and ascending on Jesus and God saying before the crowd out meeting John the Baptist, you are my son. And everybody hearing and what this did and didn't accomplish. It wasn't the case that suddenly everyone just started to follow Jesus. John the Baptist in fact after he would be arrested would have serious doubts about Jesus, doubts about to send his disciples to ask, are you really the one? Because John had this set of expectations of what God would do through Jesus and Jesus didn't fulfill them. And that wasn't true of just John the Baptist, it was true of pretty much everyone Jesus would meet. And when Jesus, especially in the Gospel of John would say some very clear things about he was sent by God, people simply didn't believe him. Not because they didn't want a Messiah, but because the kinds of things Jesus did did not match up with their expectations about what God should do. And so this young army chaplain stands in company with nearly everyone else in Jesus' time who meets him and says, I was expecting something different. Now, right away in Jesus' ministry, this is the time of Epiphany, we have the question how would you roll out your big movement? Jesus, how would you make an impact in the world? Now, it's 2015 and the 2016 elections are not too far away and so already if you watch the political news you know that Republicans and Democrats are jockeying for position. And not George Bush, but Jeb Bush is thinking about running and everyone imagines Hillary is going to run and Mitt Romney might run a third time and Huckabee might be in the ring and people want Elizabeth Warren to run it, on and on it goes. But everyone will tell you the path to the White House right now is pretty clear. Solidify your financial base, a lot of people think that Jeb Bush threw his hat into the ring early so we can lock up donors and that's moving him to try and make some moves. Because to run for president to start a movement you need a political base. So get your base solidified, make deals with ubers and shakers and out yourself so that everybody can know that you're going to run and then do something to get you noticed. I've been reading the biography of Gandhi and Churchill, it's one biography of both people and how their paths met throughout their lives. And one other thing is clear, that if you want political office you have to do something that sets you apart from the past, some way that you stand out. And for both Gandhi and Churchill as they were young and trying to get into the political sphere they looked for ways that they could stand out because they knew amongst lots of people nobody's going to notice you. I've commented to Philip a number of times that if he ever wants to really get into politics he should change his last name to Kennedy or Bush or Clinton or something like that. Because if you just see it on the ballot that's why I was surprised Reggie wasn't elected to the school board because I thought fair was a great name for a politician. And Ernest and Fair was a wonderful name for an office. So anyway it's just obvious that these three things, this is what Jesus should do. Jesus should secure his financial base, he should make relationships with ubers and shakers and he should do something to get him noticed. This is actually exactly the advice that Satan gives Jesus in the Temptations. Turn stones to bread, show that you're not dependent on others for your finances. Bow down to Satan and he'll give you the world and cast yourself from the temple so that angels can, so that people can see you with angels and so everyone will follow you. That's the advice Satan gives to Jesus and Jesus rightly sees that advice as Temptations. So how will Jesus start his movement? We might imagine that he'd take a page from Herod the Great's book. Herod the Great was good friends with Julius Caesar. Herod the Great was friends with Mark Anthony. Herod the Great was a lover of Cleopatra. And Herod the Great even after he had backed Mark Anthony and Mark Anthony and Cleopatra lost, found his way to schmooze up to Octavius who became Augustus so he could maintain his power and his importance. So what Jesus should do is make the right friends. Instead what we find in the Gospel is that Jesus gathers neighbors. Next week you'll hear about fishers of men because I had to pick Ariana's text so she got that passage. But Jesus first disciples, it's very interesting because in John especially, Jesus is down by the Jordan and who does he bump into? Some disciples of John who are from the Galilee, not far from Nazareth, from Cana, from Capernaum. These were likely people that had known Jesus or knew about him, might even be cousins and relatives. But to start his movement, Jesus doesn't say I'm going to go down to Jerusalem to the best schools to find the most important Jews or the most important, maybe up to Tarshish, to find a young Saul of Tarshish who was known as a great scholar. Jesus doesn't do any of that. He starts with, of all people, his neighbors who are probably going to be carpenters and fishermen and one might stop and say, Jesus, why waste your time with these ordinary people? If Jesus were in Sacramento, he might think, well, if I really want to make a splash in Sacramento, I should become friends of the Sacramento Kings and know NBA players and NFL celebrities and maybe, because you know, if you're an NBA star, you might even become mayor of an important city someday, who knows? The next day, Jesus decided to leave for Galilee, finding Philip. He said to him, follow me. Philip, like Andrew and Peter, was from the town of Bethsaida. And Philip found Nathaniel and told him, we have found the one Moses wrote about in the law and about whom the prophets also wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. Nazareth? Can anything good come from there? Nathaniel asks. Come and see, says Philip. Nathaniel is a skeptic. Nathaniel is from Cana. Cana is not far from Nazareth. Nathaniel knows about Nazareth and thinks, can anything good come from Nazareth? We might substitute other cities in California that we don't think much of and I hope to not offend anyone. We might talk about Stockton or... I'm looking for anybody from... Who's from Stockton? Oh, I know I get someone. Can anything good come from Stockton? Pam says, yes, me! I think about a place further down the valley where a friend of mine planted a church. I think about Dalhite. I remember driving up and seeing Deli, Deli. And I was here, no, they call it Dalhite. Go down to Dalhite. There's nothing in Dalhite. Dalhite, they make most of their money making meth. I mean, can anything good come from there? See, Frayman knows where Dalhite is down near Fresno. And that's that reputation, doesn't it? Can anything good come from these places? Anthony, I could pick on Anthony and say, can anything good come from Meadowview? Anthony understands. Nathaniel hears that Andrew, Peter, and Philip say, the Messiah has come from Nazareth! And they're like, you've got to be kidding me. Nothing good can come from a place like that. What do Nazareth and our young chaplain have in common? We come in with expectations. Many people today assume the church has outdated thinking. The church embraces norms and morals that people object to. The church has difficult people. Many people would say, can anything good come out of the church? Can anything good come out of Christianity? I know a lot of people with that assumption and that bias. Many, in fact, would say there are better ways to spend your time, or better agendas to hook onto. And in fact, often when it comes to the church, many times people say, well, there's this church here, and I'd really love to mobilize the church for X. It's not uncommon to have a politician, well, pastor, can I come to your church on Sunday? I say, sure, anybody can come. But the understanding is, can I come and talk to your church on Sunday? Yeah, you can talk to my church afterwards in the lobby, you can talk to them. But pastor, you don't understand. No, I do understand. Because we want to make the church a tool in our political agenda. Or sometimes even just for the sake of the church, we want to make the church something more attractive or more fun, and then hopefully more people will come. But if you're coming for amusement and entertainment, as many of you know, you might be disappointed. You're all very kind and nice to listen to me preach, but it's not really that entertaining. So when Jesus saw Nathaniel approaching, he said to him, Here is truly an Israelite, and here there is no deceit. How do you know me? Nathaniel asked. Jesus answered, I saw you while you were still under the fig tree, before Philip called you. Jesus, it appears, very much wants Nathaniel in his circle. And at this moment, Jesus is not above doing a little trick with him to just open the window a little bit to him and say, Nathaniel, I know you have a bias against Nazareth. I don't want that bias limiting you. I have friends, and I, as a pastor, people will sometimes tell me stories like this about their conversion. Some people like myself grew up in the faith that I'll become a Christian is something that is not sociologically surprising. Other people had a turn in their life when God rescued them in a kind of dramatic way, but not necessarily supernatural way, and then they became a Christian. I do have other friends, however. I have one friend in particular who I remember hearing him tell me his story. He was dating a Christian girl, but he was not from a Christian family. He's from Europe, in fact. Now, Noah and his family was a Christian, and he was laying in bed one day, and suddenly he had this overwhelming sense of peace and beauty and power, and God basically told him, you're going to be a Christian now. And he's been ever since. And you might think, well, that's a surprise. And you're thinking, yeah, it's an unusual story, but it's not as unusual as you might think. There are times when God simply says, I want this person for this task, and I am going to take them out of their biases and make them think something. We see that, in fact, in the conversion of Saul, where Saul is persecuting the church. Jesus knocks him off his horse and says, from now on, Saul, you will follow me. Now, again, this raises all kinds of questions for us. Why does God do this for some and not for others? And this lends us back into the question of who God is and what He does, and that God does not ask us permission. He does not explain Himself to us. Now, this might annoy us and perturb us, but it is by no means inconsistent with who we say a God should be. Why should God ask us? For our trust. And so it seems that this moment Jesus just kind of opens a little window for Philip and says, or for Nathaniel and says, Nathaniel, I saw you sitting under that fig tree. Now, if you're around the Bible long enough in biblical studies, you know that references like this provoke lots of discussion amongst biblical scholars and students. What does it mean by the fig tree? You know, in the Garden of Eden, Adam and Eve covered themselves with fig leaves. Is this a statement about Nathaniel's sin? Is it a statement about Israelite idolatry? Because there's a lot of references in the Old Testament prophets about Israel doing things under fig trees. Is there a reference about rabbinic teaching? Maybe Nathaniel was a student of the Old Testament, because often rabbis would conduct their classes under fig trees. We don't know why, but what's critical here is that Jesus says to Nathaniel, I know who you are, really, all the way. I know your strengths. I know your sins. I know your story. I know you. In fact, we might even push it a little further and say, Nathaniel, truth be told, you belong to me. This, of course, very much grabs Nathaniel's attention, and he declares, Rabbi, you are the Son of God, the King of Israel. And we might think that's a wonderful thing. But as statements go, it recognizes the challenge that Jesus has. You see, Jesus is gathering these disciples who have all of their own expectations, again, like that young chaplain in the army. They think God should do this and not that. They think God should work here and not there. And they think God should fit into their expectations to do what they imagine God should do. And they're all deeply devoted to their expectations. Philip and Nathaniel are already quite certain, excited, and motivated by their imagination of what God's plans are. Jesus will surely, however, confuse and disappoint them. I've never heard that last song we sang, Marshall, that we played during the operatory. But that very much gets into this idea that you might at some point come to Jesus and say, Jesus, I'm thrilled about this God thing, this Jesus thing, and I want to follow. But probably a lot of what's filling your enthusiasm is yourself. And you imagine you know what God is going to do and what God should do and what God should do with your life. And when, in fact, God brings you to a point and says, I am sending you here and not there, and you don't want to go there, what will you do? Because that is actually the true test of a follower, to send you to where you do not want to go and to have you do what you do not want to do. I heard a preacher once give an illustration about his son. His son was young and his father told his son, I want you to do this. And his father kept saying, why? And the preacher said to him, if I explain to you why, and it sounds good to your own ears, you will be obeying me. I will just have convinced you that that too is a good idea. I want you to do this because I want you to obey me because I am your father. It is very un-American. That bothers us. And what that reveals is that very deeply in our hearts, we really want to be little centers of the universe and have history unfold as we think it should and must from our own perspective. And if you are really going to become a friend of God, that part of us has to die. Jesus' disciples will try to turn Jesus again and again from his mission to their own. Of course, there is a very famous passage where Jesus will say, who do you say that I am? Some say you are a prophet, some say you are Elijah. Jesus says, who do you say that I am? And Peter stands up and says, you are the son of God, you are the Messiah. And Jesus says, wonderful. And Jesus says, I am going down to Jerusalem, I am going to be turned over into the hands of Gentiles, I am going to be crucified and raised again. And Peter says, never! And Jesus says, get behind me Satan. Peter is filled with his own idea of what Jesus should do. He is not a follower. And the church is always in this mess, especially for pastors. Because pastors are the ones telling you what should and shouldn't happen most of the time. In God's name and from God's word. So pastors are most guilty of this kind of thing. But God himself is sovereign. But what will Jesus do with these followers? Can they somehow, through all of this stuff, believe him? Jesus said, you believe because I told you I saw you under a fig tree. Jesus knows what is going on and says, yeah, I played a little trick on you but now you are all... Nathaniel, I get this. But I am going to show you something you are not prepared to see. But he added, very truly I tell you, in this in John is Amen, Amen. And only John puts the two Amens, but it is a great intensifier. So Jesus is saying, pay very close attention to what I am about to say. You will see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man. Now those of you who are very familiar with your Bible will know that this sounds like Jacob's ladder. Jacob here had a dream in which he saw a stairway resting on the earth with its top reaching to the heavens and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it. Now what Jesus says here is that you will see the heavens open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man. Now you all hear that and you think, well what does that mean? Well if you were a Jew you would have understood, he is quoting from Daniel. Daniel, the monsters of empire rise up out of the sea. And in my vision at night I looked and there before me was one like the Son of Man coming with the clouds of heaven. He approached the ancient of days and was led to his presence. He was given authority, glory and sovereign power. All nations and people of every language worshiped him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that will never pass away and his kingdom is one that will never be destroyed. And this is the title that Jesus keeps taking for himself. You are the Son of God and I am the Son of Man. The Son of Man is relational, the Son of Man is dramatic. What Jesus is saying is far more than just, well you are going to unseat the Romans, no. Through him a kingdom will start that will never come to an end. Wow. And what is really shocking is that in the Gospel of John in particular, Son of Man always comes up within a particular context. John 3, no one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven, the Son of Man. Just as Moses was lifted up, lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up. That everyone who believes may have eternal life in heaven. The Son of Man lifted up like that snake on a pole in the book of Numbers. John 6, Jesus said to them very truly, again amen, amen, I tell you unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. This is strange. John 8, so Jesus said when you have lifted up the Son of Man, again they are lifting him up. What do they mean they are lifting him up? Then you will know that I am he and that I do nothing of my own but speak just what the Father has taught me. The one who sent me is with me. He has not left me alone for I always do what pleases him. This lifted up Son of Man. Again John 13, when he was gone Jesus said now is the time for the Son of Man is glorified and God is glorified in him. And in John 13 that means we are heading to the cross. How could Jesus explain this in a three minute elevator pitch? Couldn't. Because later when Jesus folds it all out after they have been with him for three years, Peter still stands up and says I want no part of this business. And then when it actually happens, when Jesus is crucified, they abandon him and they are just shocked. They are just shocked. Did we follow the wrong guide? Same questions John the Baptist asks. Now it is kind of fun that this morning we have quite a few empty seats because the last few weeks sometimes people come up to me and say things like, well pastor don't you worry that. You know we are a small church and are we going to be able to survive? Maybe we should do some things that will bring in more people. I am all in favor of doing things that bring in more people. I would like us to take a look at what Jesus did. Because the truth is that many of you in this church came into this church because someone brought you and most of the time someone was willing to leverage their relational collateral and invite you to church. There is one dear saint, Dottie, who can no longer be with us because of her health. But a number of people came to this church. Well Dottie told me one day, Dottie came into this church the first time for Nianus Mother's funeral. And she came into this church and then she said, she said, she said, pastor I invite my friends to church. I bug them until they come once and then I leave them alone. If they stick, they stick. If they don't, they don't. But I invite them. And that said a lot. It said that she had found something here that she appreciated. And she knew not everyone would stick. I mean this is a strange little church. There are lots of churches with big sound and with big shows and with wonderful programs and a lot of people stick with there. But why do you stick with this little church? Ask yourself that question. There might be some weeks that you say, I don't know, maybe if we get another pastor it would be better. But most churches follow two dominant methods. You either play to consumer demand, religious consumers, or you take a reactive sense against the consumer. That's in fact what's going on with Islamic fundamentalism today. But if you look at Jesus, he doesn't do a bait switch. He doesn't manipulate people. He has integrity about who he is and what he's doing. He doesn't appeal to them as consumers. But he starts where they're at. There's a young man who actually lives in Stockton who I've been in conversation with for a while. He's not a Christian. He's kind of interested in Christianity. He kind of wants to become one but isn't sure. A lot of complicated things going on. It was very interesting this week because I always read stuff on the internet. Those of you who are my friends on Facebook see that I post lots of things. I don't usually read the CRC stuff too often, but I found this piece on the disabilities page where it tells about a woman whose husband was in a bicycle accident and suffered severe traumatic brain injury. And so now she cares for him. And he's difficult to care for because he doesn't realize that she's his wife. And he doesn't understand that his children are his children and yet she stays married to him. And it was interesting that this friend of mine picked up on this and said, why does she stay married to him? Certainly she could have an excuse to leave him. And I explained, well this is part of what being a Christian is. And right there you see the difference between this woman's perspective and the crisis of faith that that young chaplain had to endure. Why be a Christian when things just don't pan out as you expect them to? But it was also very interesting how many people via Facebook read this and thought, isn't this a vision of how I want to be treated? If something happened to me and I was no longer worth what other people can receive from me, it doesn't love mean caring and enduring and sacrificing for the other, which will again be exactly what Jesus does. You see, Andrew and Peter and Philip and Nathaniel all come to Jesus and imagine, we're going to get something out of him. And I would imagine Jesus could say, you have absolutely no idea what you need, and no idea what I will give you, and no idea what it will cost you. And the path to this will be the kind of thing that you cannot even imagine. It will be in your regard perhaps even a nightmare. But this is how I will draw you. The truth is we can't save ourselves. This is what the revelation of the Son of Man is about. A book doesn't fall from heaven and say, these are your guides to saving yourself. No, because you can't. We need to be saved by someone, and the miseries of our life, our failed expectations, the painful paths we endure for months, even years, maybe even decades at a time, begin to teach in our heart we are helpless and need a Savior, someone to rescue us. And what we see when the Son of Man is lifted up is what it costs Jesus to do it. Many people will say, I think God should love everyone. And you might ask that person, what does it cost your God to love you? And what did it cost your God to have you? And then we ask, how do we live that out? Well, this woman was living it out by caring for her husband, who was not easy to care for. Why? Because she believed she did not just have one life. She believed, in fact, she could honor her God and say thank you to her Savior by loving her husband even when it cost her plenty and she didn't get much out of it. How do we live like the Son of Man in this world? We live like him, and we will reign with him, and we will enjoy him forever. So if you want others to know what it means to follow him, let them see how you love those that this world does not value, and they might catch a glimpse. Let's pray. Lord, we are by nature selfish, and we are constantly evaluating people by what we can get out of them versus what it costs us to commit to the relationship. This is how we are. Lord, if this is how you were, you would not have bothered to send yourself. And he certainly would not have sacrificed himself the way he did. He would have taken the devil's advice and been just another agenda or political movement that is washed away by the sands of history. But it's our good pleasure that he emptied himself of everything and did not consider equality with God as something to be exploited, but gave himself, making himself a slave on our behalf. May that story grip us deeply. May it challenge a lot of the efficient and power-based ways that we approach this world. And may we live it out with our friends and neighbors who in the eyes of this world are nobody, but whom we love, and may we share it with them. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand?