https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=q-MondSzwwI

 Oh, that picks me, anyway. This is our little monitor up here. one day, Roger and I will figure out how to do that with a new computer. One of the things I recognize as I talk to people, people in Sacramento, people in Northern California, people on the internet, is that in many ways, kind of the three options that I see most Americans dealing with are kind of all God, no God, which God? All God, there are many people for whom everything is God and God is in everyone and everything and you almost can't step out on the sidewalk or into some dog poop and not meet God. And not even meeting God, but God is just in everything and of everything and you know, of course the old word for that is pantheism. And so God is everywhere and I almost played a little commercial for you a few years ago where some woman walks in front of a rising store and says, Universe, are you telling me to get this smartphone? And something, and by the way, how do I look today, Universe? So all God. And then also for many people there is no God and I can't believe there were anything more than material beings and science and technology seemed to be the most proven way by which we can take control of our world. So there's all God and there's no God and there's which God? And often folks will say, well you know, there's Christianity and Judaism and Hinduism and Buddhism and I think all of these gods kind of, there's all one God but we're all just kind of feeling a piece of this God. And so sometimes tell me the story of the elephant and the blind man where some say God is like a hose or God is like a rope or God is like a pillar. And I found one time on the internet that said, well why doesn't the elephant cure all the blind men so they can see as an elephant? So all God, no God, rich God. We're going to be looking for the next number of weeks until we're at the Ten Commandments. A recent survey on what Americans know of the Ten Commandments. Most, more Americans know what's at least back when Tupoleon, Maddie Special, sauce lettuce, cheese, pickles, onions, and a SBC Fund was being advertised. More Americans knew what was in the Big Mac and could name all the Ten Commandments. Many Americans didn't know that honor the Sabbath day and keep it holy was a commandment. And many Americans believed that the golden rule, do what your mothers and you would have them do to you, was one of the Ten Commandments. And I would have meant this survey was done in about 2005 or 2006 and I would think that probably most Americans even know fewer of the Commandments. But many will say, you know, the Commandments are for the most part good and in fact Commandments 6 through 9 many of us can agree upon. And all except the really ardent freedom from religion tribe will say, we should all be able to agree on, you shall not murder, you shall not steal, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. Certainly all of the religions have this and we can even deduce that this is important for us. And in fact Commandments 4, 5, and 10 can be seen as good advice if we don't get too legalistic about them. Honor your father and mother, that's a good thing. Well keep the Sabbath if you understand it as day to day off, that's good advice. You shall not commit adultery, understand, don't obsess over what your neighbor has, that's good advice too. But the truly troublesome Commandments are 1 through 3. You shall have no other gods before me, you shall not make for yourself a graven image, you shall not take the name of the Lord your God in vain. These seem a little particular and probably not as important for helping us get along with each other. And God spoke all these words saying, I am Yahweh, and he grew up like me in a Christian Reformed Church every Sunday morning. We recited the Ten Commandments together, and I can close my eyes and be back at Versailles Chapel in Patterson, New Jersey and standing there thinking, God speaks all these words saying, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Montage. You shall have no other gods before me. Of course when it says I am the Lord in your English translation, it's using the name of God, I am Yahweh. I have sometimes, and you'll notice on this slide, sometimes I don't capitalize G in God, I intentionally do that sometimes because I want us to recognize that sometimes we use the word God as a name, in which it should be capitalized, but sometimes we use God as a noun, which we don't generally capitalize. Because the name of God is Yahweh. I am Yahweh your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slaves. There shall be for you no other gods before me. Now, I'm going to talk about this book a little bit more next week. David Bentley Hart is an orthodox philosopher who's recently written a very interesting book, The Experience of God, in which he says many atheists aren't really being fair about what most atheists believe in terms of who and what God is. God is not just another object in our universe. God, in fact, is behind the universe and the author of the universe. So it's not just finding God is like finding a chair. We'll talk about that next week with respect to the great and ennish demand. But what you very much see in the first commandment is that this God Yahweh has a name. And this God Yahweh establishes himself in relationship to the people of Israel that he has just brought out of Egypt. He connects himself to a story. And in the next commandment we'll see that this God has an attitude. He tells us something about himself. He says, I the Lord your God am a jealous God. So he has a name and a story and an attitude. And he's very specific in many ways leading himself open to a lot of the critics that say, well, I don't know if I can deal with a God like this. If a God is kind of fuzzy like the force in Star Wars or in energy or kind of the same in all the universe, that's easier for me to take than a God who gets particular. A God who begins to make choices between people. A God who is involved in our story. This kind of God I'm not so easy with. Because what if this God decides to make decisions and get involved in my life in the ways I don't want him to? I've been listening to a lot of audiobooks yet. I almost have this really strange, I'm dyslexic, and I have, and some of you might find this surprising, in grade school I had difficulty learning to read. And because my B's and my B's were back or were all mixed out, the left hand and right hand I couldn't handle. And so, and the way that's kind of manifested in my adult life is that I can read theology and philosophy quite quickly. I had a terrible time reading fiction. Because if I just read it slowly and I get frustrated, it takes me forever to finish a book. So lately I've been playing with audiobooks and a new movie came out, 47 Ronin, based on what I've learned is a classic Japanese story. And I saw that the book and the audiobook were dirt cheap on Amazon, so I picked them up. And so I read this story, it's a fascinating story. In fact, from the 18th century, this story has never been out of repertoire in Japan. It is one of the most foundational stories of Japanese culture. And it's a story about a feudal lord named Asano who attacks a court official. And he doesn't kill him, he just attacks him. But because he attacks him in the castle of the shogun, which is against the law, he has to commit ceremonial suicide because he's violated the law. And his retainers, who are sure that he somehow was driven to this by this court official, plot their revenge against him. And in fact, if you Google this story, Shushigura, I'm probably going to do terrible things to the Japanese language today, so I'll beg the forgiveness of any of you who know Japanese a lot more than I do. So the shogun, the loyal samurai led by Oishi, the chief retainer, seeks to avenge the death of this lord. And I picked up the audiobook because it was cheap and I decided to play it, but I felt the story beautiful and engaging. And I was very quickly hooked by it. It was about shame and honor and dignity. And I was amazed at the lengths to which this retainer, Oishi, would go to serve his master. And as I was listening to it, I thought, this is a very different story than we would have in our culture. This is a very different time when honor and nobility and sacrifice govern people's lives. Things that my atheist friends would say, well, it's just kind of faith in our minds. But for the medieval Japanese, these things were very rich and very serious. In fact, they're so serious that at the end of the book, because finally getting their revenge against Kira, the minister that had led to the execution of their lord, Oishi is arrested and all of his 47 hominids are arrested. And then the sentence comes down as death. Lord Senguuko immediately notified Oishi that even the advent of Uro had felt powerless to do other than to let the law take its course. And they, accordingly, were sentenced to death. Oishi died. This was what he had expected all along. But he was due for a surprise when Lord Senguuko told him the manner in which they were to die. Although lordless men, hence not legally entitled to such treatment, they were to be allowed to be disemboweled themselves in the noble ceremony of seppuku. Oishi could hardly believe his ears and fell forward in a deep bow of gratitude to lord Senguuko. Then he hastened to tell his men the good news. And I thought, this would not happen in America. Here's what the news you're expecting. You're sentenced to death. The good news is you get to kill yourself. Wonderful! And he goes and tells all his friends the good news. And I'm thinking, what is this? They live in a very different world than we do in America. One of the things that we can see is the culturallessness. But you know, we Urbane, pluralistic Californians would want to say, well, we don't judge other cultures. But really we do. We think this is weird. And in fact, as I was listening to the book, there are elements in that culture that are strange and even offensive to us. How the women were treated, how people didn't have any decisions about their lives, how if a servant or a slave wasn't fulfilling their duty properly, how they could be beaten. In fact, the next book I read after this was an amazing book by Laura Hillenbrand named Unbroken, which I highly recommend to any of you. It's about the story of Louise Ann Borini helping Japanese prison camps during the war. And listening to the two books, I could see how the shame and honor culture had taken it in a certain way. It could in fact lead to the monstrosities that Louise Ann Borini and other POWs suffered under the hands of the Japanese during the war. One of the things that you begin to understand if you read the Old Testament carefully enough is that the Israelites were religious consumers. And whereas Yahweh comes to them and says, I am your master, I am your God, you shall have no other gods before me. The Israelites will say, yes, yes, that's true, that's true. But very quickly in the ancient world, if one god is good, two gods are better. And the more gods you have, the more situations, the better things you can manage. And Israelites were in fact polytheists. So when God says, I am the Lord your God, you shall have no other gods before me, many of them are simply assuming there are other options to be had. And I reflect on the fact that that's not much different from what we have here. If this religion or this thing, if this doesn't do it for me, I have my needs and I'm going to find the religion or the god or the position that suits me. And so I will fundamentally be a religious consumer, not owned by anyone, and find the god that fits me and makes me happy, at least for today. And I would suggest that this in fact pervades even how we treat each other. Because on one hand we say, marriage is supposed to be till death do you part, but in many ways we often like to say, well marriage should more be as long as this relationship works for me, which increasingly makes people disposable and tools that we use. For the last thousand years in many places in what is sometimes called Christendom, most creatures of this commandment address subtle idolatries that capture our hearts. These sermons, many of which I preach, rightly note that even if we are formally bound to a particular Yahweh by name, story, and attitude, we cheat on him by establishing our identities upon other frameworks, none of which can finally support the full range of our humanness nor the full need of our hearts. We have innumerable ways of being unfaithful to him without formal papers of divorce from our husband and master. Northern California seems decidedly post-Christendom. Formal submission to such jealous, demanding masters seems limiting, outdated, and narrow. Idolatry no longer needs to be done quietly and subversively. It's fashionable to embrace the all-God or the no-God solutions, or to simply transcend the demanding commandment because of skeptical pluralism invites us to imagine that all petitioning gods were actually one elephant in the hands of so many blind men. Couldn't we take four commandments, three pieces of advice, and throw in the golden rule and just leave it at that? Wouldn't that be good enough for us? The foreword to Shushengawa, at least the new edition that's come out now, has a little bit of historical background. And what we discover is that the story is in some ways the reverse of what we know about the story from history. This young daimyo, of course, is at Sino-Naginori, the hero of Shushengawa. In reality, he was a self-indulgent libertine of 34, the descendant of great warriors, but now found to be dissolute and pleasure-seeking, content to leave his domain in the hands of others. And so I actually first heard the foreword before I read the story, and then I went back and listened to the foreword again and asked myself, why did the Japanese in the 18th century latch onto this story so hard, and why did it shape that? From what is said about that time in Japan, it was a time of corruption. It was a time when people would use each other, politicians and priests and servants could be bought. And so quite likely, the people hungered for a day when someone would say something, and they meant it, and they followed through, where people would be honest and loyal and faithful. And what they saw around them was that in a consumerist land, anything can be bought. I think what really captivated me by the story was in fact the story of his chief retainer, Oishi. Because what happens, of course, is that his lord is cut down, and then the shogun confiscates the palace, and then everyone in that feudal society is out of the job, and they're all heading to poverty, and nobody knows what to do. But Oishi had value, and other daibyo's were approaching him and saying, why don't you work for me? Why don't you work for me? You've got a few years left in your career, you don't have to be in poverty like the rest of the house. But he stays faithful to his master. And in fact, he and the other, there were four or five hundred samurai that were dispossessed, but only forty-seven finally say, I will be faithful to my lord, and I will follow him. In fact, Oishi, in order to throw off the spies from the allies of Lord Kira that everyone assumes they're fighting against, Oishi has to take on a life that to the world looks dissolute. So he sends away his family, and he takes up with a geisha girl, and he's drunken in the streets, and he acts like a fool until everyone else in Japan says, Oishi has simply lost it, and there's no honor left in him. And it's only then when the whole world believes he's corrupt and dissolute that he can actually organize the remnants of his men and be faithful to his lord. Oishi rebuffs other job offers. It is his love for the Asano family. However unworthy they might be, that propels the story. He sacrifices himself, a happy family life, his reputation, finally giving his life for the love and welfare of his lord, his family, his soldiers and friends. He was the loyal retainer who sacrificed himself for love. And I was listening to the story, I was thinking, there's something so powerful and attractive to this. You know, I could read the commandment and say to the Northern Californians who are trapped in all God, no God, which God, and say, you should serve the lord your God. And they'll say, why? What's in it for me? And I could argue with them about a bunch of things. It's not finally an argument that draws us, it's beauty. So you know, you expect that the preacher's job is to get you to be afraid, to bully you into submission. But I saw last week's sermon, that doesn't work. I can maybe intimidate you or impress you or somehow keep reminding you to be good. But it's really beauty and love and joy that draws us. Because when we hear of someone like Oishi, we think, I would love to have someone love me like that. I would love to be someone who could love like that. In Christianity, the god of Sinai comes as a puzzling, humble man. Even John the Baptist expects fireworks, but the prophet Isaiah says of him, the bruised reed he will not break. The smoldering whip he will not snuff out. He came out of love and died in love. And I think what I saw in the story of 42nd Roman is in the love of Oishi, I saw the love of Christ. Religious consumers say, the religious authorities ask, can we make him useful to our agenda? And the crowd of religious consumers around Jesus say, can we make him useful to get out of him what we want? And in the end, both abandon him because he won't be used by the religious authorities. And the crowds finally say, he's not plain to our tune. See, all god, no god, rich god, all god and rich god tend to indulge our consumerism. We tend to invite us to force our religion into our identity. And no god fuels our despair to save ourselves. There is no god to rescue us. We have to grab the world and force down our enemies and take control. But love is the opposite of religious consumerism. So we live as religious consumers in the land of all god, no god, rich god. We are constantly on the hunt for the religious service provider that will give us what we crave. Amusement, security, glory, identity. Each time we imagine, we will find ourselves in one and it disappoints. What we are really looking for is love. But we hardly know what love is. Somehow we know that our deliverance must not just involve finding one who loves us, but ourselves growing into the capacity to love in return. This is the kind of love we see in Oishi. A love that holds on, that doesn't let go. A love whose beauty is seen in faithfulness, in sacrifice, in costly determination. We see this love in the cross of Jesus, who saves others by refusing to save himself. We are drawn to this love, not so by the demands, but by the beauty. The demands of this love, even the shape of duty are transformed by the joyful vision of its beauty. Oishi didn't have to serve his master. He knew that in fact serving his master would cost him his life. In this way, faithful servants actually find freedom in their service. Their service is not done out of threat of punishment or fear of consequence, but out of desire of a new, beautiful identity fueled by joy. Why does Jesus go to the cross? What is he lacking? Did he lack pleasure in heaven? Did he lack glory in heaven? Did he lack glory in heaven? The only thing he lacked was us. And that's why he doesn't. In our tradition, we have this thing called the Heidelberg Catechism. And the Heidelberg Catechism begins famously with a confession that is not cultural for us. Because in a sense it says, we find ourself in him. We find our identity in God. And so I'd like to read this, and any of you who would like to read it with me, please do so. Consider this a confession of our faith. If you can't read it, don't bother. If you're not at that point right now, that's okay. But for me, this is where I feel its resonance. What is your only comfort in life and death? That I am not my own, but belong body and soul, in life and death, to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ. He has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood, and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. He also watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my neck without the will of my coppering neck. In fact, all things must work together for my salvation. Because I belong to him, Christ by his Holy Spirit assures me of eternal life, and makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him. Let's pray. Lord, we want to be consumers as long as no one else treats us that way. We long to not be tools in another person's agenda or scheme. We long to be loved and valued for ourselves, not for our beauty, not for our money, not for our strength. And we long to be lovers who are faithful and true, and who can endure to the end despite great adversity. And Lord, this is in fact what you invite us into by following Jesus. Because your Son was the loyal retainer who followed his Master for the sake of his beloved all the way into death. And we believe, Lord, that we find our identity by not establishing our independence, but by accepting our place under you. And you in fact are the Good Lord who gives his servants life. Because as we submit to you, you follow through on what Jesus said, the greatest among you is the servant of all. And so you lead us into a relationship of mutual love and joy and respect. And we know, Lord, that we fail in this often. And so we ask, Lord, that you would forgive us. And we are comforted by your assurance of forgiveness. Help us, Lord, to in fact know this love not only by receiving it and hearing about it, but living it out with each other. This we ask in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand? I want one last thanks to thee, that they know. No one will be rising up, reaching before his throne. But I know that I believe that I have to swing around like he's able. And I believe that he's able to be found unto him on this land. The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you. The Lord turn his face toward you and give you his peace. Amen. Lord, I hope that you'll save me from this turn. Please, my great and fallen. Lord, I hope that you'll give me a place in whose heart the peace that I have. But I know that I believe that I have to swing around like he's able. Swing around like he's able. He can't come without a big hand. But you'll hear the voice of his love. Amen.