https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2UIX5TAU7FQ

 This works. I didn't update the server on my computer, Rod. So we're going to have to do this manually this morning. What's that? Oh, yeah? Okay. That works. Good. We've been going through the book of Leviticus, and our relationship with the book of Leviticus is often strange. We are, we have questions about restrictive food laws, questionable rules, especially about women, the violence of God against air and sun, rules about sex that we talked about last week. But this week, we talk about the chapter that a lot of people like, because we'll get some environmental policy and debt elimination. What could be bad about that? The Lord said to Moses at Mount Sinai, Speak to the Israelites and say to them, When you enter the land I am going to give you, the land itself must observe a Sabbath for the Lord. For six years sow your field, and for six years prune your vineyards and gather their crops. But in the seventh year, the law is to have a year of Sabbath, and the land is to have a year of Sabbath rest. A Sabbath for the Lord. Do not sow your field or prune your vineyards. Do not reap what grows in it or harvest the grapes of your untended vines. The land is to have a year of rest. Whatever the land yields during the Sabbath year will be food for you, for yourself, your male and female servants, and the higher workers and temporary residents who live among you, as well as for your livestock and the wild animals in your land. Whatever the land produces may be eaten. Now again, as we've seen again and again in the book of Leviticus, this rule really isn't about science. And again, as I look at commentators who look at Leviticus, they'll say, Yeah, the dietary laws, no more. The laws about two different kinds of fabrics, put that aside. The sex laws, yes we want that. And the clean and unclean, that's about out. And then therefore the farm laws are about agriculture. And what I've been trying to say throughout this series is that those were the factors that the people, or I believe the Lord, in giving them were dealing with. Sabbath to the land is not about good agricultural policy, although farmers throughout centuries have known that to keep a field fallow or to, before the development of, I read a book about this, so maybe Jack will correct me if I'm wrong. Before chemical fertilizers, we figured out how to get nitrogen from the air. They'd often put beans and certain crops in the field to recharge the nitrogen in the soil. Did I get that right? Okay. To recharge the nitrogen in the soil so that the crops could produce. And so on one hand we could say, oh see the Lord was looking out for them, but I don't think that was the case in this law. Not that the Lord wasn't looking out for them, but that this law wasn't about improving farming yields. The law was about an understanding about our relationship with the land and with nature. What God was doing is molding Israel's religious assumptions. The land belongs to God, not to us. You are God's servants over the land, which means you have control over it. You are God's servants of the land, which means you are responsible for it, but you are also God's servants with the land. St. Francis was known as calling aspects of nature brother and sister. Brother son and sister moon. And what Francis was basically saying is that on one hand we have power over these things. We are God's servants of these things, meaning we are responsible to God for them, but we are also God's servants with these things. That the land, even though it is not a person, the land is God's servant too. And that's what these rules were about. But chapter 25 doesn't stop there. It keeps going. Count off seven Sabbath years. Seven times seven years. So that the seven Sabbath years amount to a period of 49 years. The keepers like that. They then have the trumpet sounded everywhere on the tenth day of the seventh month. On the day of atonement, sound the trumpet throughout the land. Consecrate the fiftieth year and proclaim liberty throughout the land to all of its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee for you. Each of you is to return to your family property and to your old clad. The fiftieth year shall be a jubilee for you. Do not sow and do not reap what grows of itself or harvest its untended vines. For it is a jubilee, it is to be holy for you. Eat only what is taken directly from the fields. In this year of jubilee, everyone is to return to their own property. If you sell land to any of your own people or buy land from them, do not take advantage of each other. You are to buy from your own people on the basis of the number of years since the jubilee. And they are to sell to you on the basis of the number of years left for harvesting crops. When the years are many, you are to increase the price. When the years are few, you are to decrease the price. Because what is really being sold to you is the number of crops. Do not take advantage of each other, but fear your God. I am the Lord your God. Follow my decrees and be careful to obey my laws, and you will live safely in the land. Then the land will yield its fruit, and you will eat your fill and live there and safely. You may ask, what will we eat in the seventh year if we do not plant or harvest our crops? I will send such a blessing in the sixth year that the land will yield enough for three years. While you plant during the eighth year, you will eat from the old crop and will continue to eat from it until the harvest of the ninth year comes in. The land must not be sold permanently, because the land is mine. And you reside on my land as foreigners and strangers. Throughout the land that you hold as a possession, you must provide for the protection of the land. It's a little complicated, but what God basically sets up was when Israel would move into the land, every family would get an inheritance, would get a lot. And that lot was to stay with that family. So in the year of Jubilee pain, if perhaps you had had some bad years or some other misfortune and you had gone into debt and perhaps lost your land, you would get it back. This is actually known throughout the ancient world. In preparation for the sermon, I've been reading a very interesting book entitled Debt, the first 5000 years. Many of the things we find in the book of Leviticus were dealt with in this book. By 2400 BC, it had already appeared to have been common practice on the part of local officials or wealthy merchants to advance loans to peasants who were in financial trouble, uncollateral, and begin to appropriate their possessions if they were not unable to pay it. It usually started with grain, sheep, goats, and furniture, then moved on to fields and houses for alternatively or ultimately family members. Servants, if any, went quickly, followed by children, wives, and in some extreme occasions, even the borrower himself. These would be reduced to debt peons. Do you ever hear that word, peon? That's where this idea comes from. These would be reduced to debt peons, not quite slaves, but very close to that. Forced into perpetual service in the lender's household or sometimes in the temple or houses themselves. In theory, of course, any of that could be redeemed whenever the borrower repaid the money. But for obvious reasons, the more a peasant's resources were stripped away from him, the harder that became. The effects were such that they often threatened to rip society apart. If for any reason there was a bad harvest, large proportions of the peasantry would fall into debt peonage. Families would be broken out. Before long, lands were abandoned as indebted farmers fled their homes for fear of repossession and joined semi-nomadic tribes on the desert fringes of urban civilization. Those tribes would sometimes then resort to banditry. Faced with the potential of complete social breakdown, Sumerian and later Babylonian kings periodically announced general amnesties, clean slates, as economic historian Michael Hudson referred to them. Such decrees were typically declared all outstanding consumer debts null and void. Commercial debts were not affected. Return all land to its original owners and allow all debt peons to return to their families. Before long, it became more or less a regular habit for kings to make such a declaration of first-assuming power, and many were forced to repeat it periodically over the course of their reigns. In Sumeria, these were called declarations of freedom, and it is significant that the Sumerian word amarbi, the first recorded word for freedom in any known human language literally means return to mother. So you mothers can put that in your profile and remember to pull it out some day. Return to mother means freedom. Who do you live with, Anthony? Since this is what pre-debt peons were finally allowed to do. A lot of this I didn't know before studying for this sermon. I wasn't aware of the situation in the surrounding countryside, and so the question then comes, what makes Israel different? One of the things that you might have known throughout our talk about the book of Leviticus, one figure does not show up at all in the book of Leviticus. Anybody reading similar documents from Sumeria or Babylon or the Assyrians would have immediately noticed the absence of the king in the book of Leviticus. Now we might say, yeah, but the king didn't come to watch until later in Israel's history, but one thing we do know about the first five books of the Torah is that they were pretty regularly updated, and so in fact in the book of Deuteronomy you'll find references to the king, even though the king comes quite a bit later in Israel's history. And one of the things that we noticed is that neighboring kings would prop up their popularity by declaring general amnesty. Can you imagine if whoever wins the next presidential campaign would stand up and say, I'm going to declare all credit card debts canceled? Can you imagine making that a campaign promise? One guy says, well, I'm going to improve the economy. The other guy says, I'm going to cancel all your credit card debt. Boy, you get a lot of votes that way. Well, we'll talk about that a little bit more. So neighboring kings would declare these general amnesties, and probably everyone would be happy, at least those who had debt would be happy. But it was interesting because the year of Jubilee was not to be tied to a human king. The year of Jubilee was supposed to come regularly and within intervals. The difficulty we have, however, is that biblical scholars have long noted we can find little or no evidence that Israel ever celebrated the year of Jubilee. They practiced the Sabbath years with respect to the Lamb, but we can't find any Bible passage, nor can we find any other evidence in archaeology that when the 50-year mark came, Israel released the slaves and sent the Lamb back to the original people. This is really funny because we've seen a lot of laws in the book of Leviticus, and a lot of those laws have been practiced, and those laws about clean and unclean, those laws about sacrifice. We saw Moses in Exodus come down from Mount Sinai, and when they named the golden calf, Moses called the Levites and they strapped on swords, and 3,000 were killed. And we've seen in the book of Leviticus that when Aaron's sons brought strange fire, we talked about this a number of weeks ago, fire came out from the Holy of Holies and killed the two sons of Aaron. So why on earth would they be what seems to be the nicest, best law in the book of Leviticus, and God just lets it slide? We don't find Moses applying it, well maybe it waited until the Promised Land. We don't find Joshua applying it. We don't find David applying it. We don't find Solomon applying it. And we also know that as they continue to update these books of the Torah, why would they leave it in the book if they in fact never will build it? And why would God enforce it? We see a great deal of evidence about what happened because it wasn't practiced. Those of you who attend the 930-some-day school class know that almost any answer you can get correct in our study of Isaiah by saying Isaiah 5. The inner Adam of Isaiah 5, God tells a parable about the vineyard. The vineyard of the Lord Almighty is the nation of Israel, and the people of Judah are the vines he delighted in. He looked for justice but saw bloodshed, for righteousness but heard cries of distress. And then the following verse, woe to you who had house to house and joint field to field till no place is left and you live alone in the land. Now we hear in that one thing, well what's wrong with adding house to house? If you understand the history of Israel, what you realize is that certain people were getting more wealthy and more powerful at the expense of others, and you have within the nation a perpetual class of impoverished people. And the idea behind the year of Jubilee was that every 50 years they basically hit a reset and people would get a second chance. And what archaeologists have noticed is that the longer Israel went on, the bigger the difference began to create between the houses and the farms of the wealthy and the poor. Now what's very interesting about this is that not only does Leviticus 25 stay in the book of Leviticus, but when Jesus comes he says this. He went to Nazareth where he had been brought up, and on the Sabbath day he went into the synagogue. It was his custom. He stood up to read and the scrolls of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. Unrolling it he found a place where it was written, The spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim freedom for the prisoner and recovery of sight to the blind, to set the oppressed free. To proclaim the year of the Lord's favorite. And he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant and sat down. The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were passing on him. He began by saying to them, Today the scripture is fulfilled in your theory. Jesus here quotes from the book of Isaiah. And everyone in the synagogue by the choice of words that Jesus decided to quote would have understood that Jesus was announcing the year of Jubilee in himself. Now this is a very famous sermon because the sermon starts out and everyone is at first, oh this sounds good, this sounds good. Just like if I said, you know, the Democratic candidate is running on a platform of canceling all credit card debts. And everyone says, yay! What would happen a little bit after that? Well, what if all this debt does get canceled? Well, what would happen to the banking system? Well, what would, and then something like that kind of happens in the middle of the synagogue. At first they're like, yay! And then they start to hear things they don't like. And their nice little service ends with trying to take Jesus' life. You see, there's a funny thing with the year of Jubilee. There's a reason they never practiced it. And the reasons were complicated in reading this book on debt. One of the things that I've really, it's a fascinating book. I haven't read a book this interesting in a long time. Although sometimes every time you talk to me the book I'm reading now is the most interesting, so take that with a great song. This language of debt, and Ben put a lot of that in the songs that we sang this morning. This language of debt runs through all of life. And just as when the Lord says, give the land a rest for the Sabbath, he isn't just saying, oh, that'll be good for the soil. He's making a statement about our relationship with the land. When we start talking about Jubilee, and we start talking about debts, well, the ways that I'm indebted and I'm free from those, yay! That sounds wonderful. But what about the ways that others are in debt to me? I'm not so sure this Jubilee is a good idea. I'm not so sure I want people just canceling debts right or left. I'm not so sure people should just be able to get away with stuff. You see, Jubilee is not just about money and property. The chapter ends in Leviticus. Even if someone is not redeemed in any of these ways, basically the chapter is set up to say, you know, if they get into a little bit of trouble, then their cousin will bail them out. But if they keep getting into trouble, well, then they themselves and maybe their children, it's very interesting in Leviticus 25, the light member goes into bondage. It's a very curious thing. But the man and his children might go into bondage. Then they might lose their land. Then, and then it gets all the way down to the bottom of the corner. Then it goes all the way down to the bottom and then it ends here. Even if someone is not redeemed in any of these ways, they and their children are to be released in the year of Jubilee. For Israelites belong to me as servants. They are my servants whom I brought out of Egypt. I am the Lord your God. In other words, God is making a dramatic claim here. You all are practicing things right and left here, getting in debt to one another, borrowing to another in terms of money, but you're also doing this relationally. One of the things that the book talks about is that there are some cultures in which they gave the example of a missionary goes to Africa and finds a man who is sick with pneumonia. And the missionary cares for the man and helps bring the man back to health. And once the man is back to health, what does the missionary expect the man would feel towards him? Grateful. Well, the man immediately gets up and asks the missionary for a large gift of money. And the missionary says, how ungrateful can you be to make a gift like this? Well, what the missionary didn't understand is that in that culture, by helping this man, the missionary has now basically become the man's father. And if he's the man's father, well then the missionary is obviously so much more wealthy and powerful than him, then he should ask for a large gift. And so on and on it goes in terms of debts and relationships. But what the book of Leviticus says is we do all of this keeping tabs on one another back and forth. How many times did I help you? How many times did you help me? And the Lord says, but guess what? I own you all. And what I want for all of you fundamentally is freedom. But how will that work? Peter came to Jesus and asked, Lord, how many times shall I forgive my brother or sister who sins against me? After seven times, you notice the seven connected with the Jubilee, shall I forgive him just a seventh amount of times? And seven was big in terms of the Jewish civilization at that point. They often said, well you can forgive him twice maybe. After that, no more. Seven times Peter thought he was being dramatic. Jesus answered, I tell you not seven times, but seventy-seven times. Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors, the Lord's prayer says. Therefore the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wants to settle accounts with his servants. As he began the settlement, the man who owed him ten thousand bags of gold was brought to him. Since he was not able to pay, of course, the master ordered that he and his wife and his children and all that he has be sold to repay the debt. At this the servant fell on his knees before him. Be patient with me, he begged, and I will pay everything back. Which is silly. The servant's master took pity on him, canceled the debt, and let him go. Jubilee. But when the servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. He began to choke him, pay back what you owed me, you demanded. This fellow servant fell to his knees in pain, and be patient with me and I will pay it back. Which he would be able to do. But he refused. Instead he went off and had the man thrown into prison until he could pay the debt. When the other servant saw what had happened, they were outraged. And went and told their master everything that had happened. Then the master called the servant in. You wicked servant, he said, I canceled all of the debts of yours because you begged me to. Shouldn't you have had mercy on your fellow servant just as I had on you? In anger his master handed him over to the jailers to be tortured until he should pay back all that he owed. This is how my heavenly father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother or sister from your heart. How nice is Jesus? How does this change our relationships with each other? We all live in a fabric of relationships. Creditors and debtors. And these things are constantly with us. If you pay any attention you realize that. That we're always keeping these little tabs up and down, right and left. And there's not necessarily anything wrong with this. In some cultures in fact, people are in the habit of, they'll come up to you and give you two years of corn. It's like, what's this about? Well, in a month or two later they expect you to come and give them maybe a book. What's that about? In that culture, they give these little gifts constantly just so that everyone is in everyone else's debt. And they're all even in it. Isn't that a funny thing? So we're all in this fabric of creditors and debtors. And not just with respect to money. We can't take credit for most of what we have and we can never really repay the debts we have. Your mama might say to you, well I brought you into this world. Is there any real way you can pay that back? But here's the thing. We want to be forgiven. But forgiveness is constant. What Jesus does in his crucifixion brings you to believe in the strangest way. Why should God, the universal creditor, pay the debt we owe to him? There is nothing that obliges him to do so. All we have to bring to him is our need. And he sees and fulfills. The only obstacle we have is our own pride. And the imagination that we can get ourselves out of the debt. That's the funniest line in Jesus' parallel. I'll pay you back. Really? No. Like paying back your mother. Can't be done. We imagine we are good enough to have moral capital in the bank. Then we decide that Jesus is not needed. And we can stand before God on our own. Do you recognize the gift you've been given? And what you owe? If you don't, you tend to devolve into a world of petty entitlements and views. Suddenly, if the debt we no longer recognize that God has forgotten, then suddenly we're very conscious of all the ways that others have slighted us. That we become entitled, we become paid, we become, you know, we become unforgiving. And if you do this, your life is transformed into worse. But what Jubilee says is you can be free to love even those who owe you. Because you have been forgiven a greater debt. You can be generous even to the self-imagined entitled. Because your generosity comes from something else. Not their delusion of entitlements. This is exactly what you have in this meal. What does the Bible say? On the night Jesus was betrayed, that's a word of thing. On the night Jesus was betrayed, did he say, Judas, you really owe me now. I at least get a cut of the 20 pieces of silver. God is used to being betrayed. On the night Jesus was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he said, this is my body that I owe to you. Is that what he said? This is my body given for you. This is the Christian story. It is Jubilee. You can never repay God what you owe him. Just like you can't even repay your mother what you owe her. But God comes and does what? Even while Judas is racking up more debt, he gives himself for you. And what you do by taking this bread is basically saying, what one of the songs that Ben Fick says, I accept your gift. And I accept both your forgiving my debt and I now am free. The table is for you. Thank you.