https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PWZRxKJRlJc

 How many of you have heard the story of Brendan Eich? A few of you. This has been roaming around the internet a little bit. He just recently took the CEO position of Mozilla, the company that makes Firefox. And a few weeks after he took the position, some people started passing around the contributors list to ProPro8 back in 2008. And what developed was an internet campaign to get him fired. Now firing him would have been illegal in the state of California because you cannot fire someone for participating in a political process. But enough pressure built that he stepped down. And this in fact caused a lot of discussion, continues to cause a lot of discussion about what is the nature of our freedom? Andrew Sullivan, who is a very prominent blogger, I think held out a pretty good distinction between what he called the liberal and progressive approach. The liberal approach basically says, well, ideas should be allowed to be out there in the marketplace and be passed back and forth. John Lovett, who wrote a very interesting article this week in the Atlantic called The Culture of Shut Up, said basically, you don't beat an idea by beating a person. You beat an idea by beating an idea. And that for Andrew Sullivan epitomized the kind of the liberal posture towards freedom and ideas. There's the other posture which is perhaps called the progressive posture. And the idea basically is that once a community achieves something, the power of the community ought to be marshaled to maintain that idea. For example, you ought not to let the Ku Klux Klan continue to make statements on the airwaves or get a lot of publicity and press because their ideas are too ugly and they should simply be suppressed. Now, there's a lot to be said for both of these positions and we could have an interesting discussion back and forth what we think about them. But the heart, actually, both positions are awfully optimistic about what we're able to achieve. Are our minds really clear enough? Are our hearts pure enough to when we see two ideas to simply say, yep, that's the better one? Because if I, in fact, were to make a statement about almost anything politically in this room, this room is diverse enough that we could probably have a very lively argument. And I know many of you well enough that I could say, I could name names and say, you folks sit over here on the left and you other folks sit on the right and then I'll throw an idea out and you would all have at each other. And we don't do that here for good reasons. Also about the progressive idea, it's like, well, in 1920, prohibition seemed like a really good idea. But by 1940, prohibition seemed like a stupid idea. Are newer ideas always better? What about past beliefs that we assumed were achievements, like now we think we're really not very smart? Anybody know what this is a picture of? The world. Very good. Part of the world in a time and a place. Any other guesses? Rome. This is a picture of the Roman Empire, the various provinces. One of the things that we don't recognize when we read the Bible, especially the New Testament, is what a success the Roman Empire was. You see, when the Romans conquered the world, they didn't just stroll into a country and say, oh, we're stronger than you, so give up everything. They basically said, we're going to conquer you, but it's for your own good. Because we have the Roman way, and everybody knows that the Roman way is the best way. Why do we know that the Roman way is the best way? Because we're successful. We have achieved peace in the world. When you were back in school, did you ever hear about the pox romana? Now that isn't pox, P-O-X in terms of smallpox. That is E-A-X in terms of the peace of Rome. And Rome basically said, we are the rulers of the world because we are the smartest, we are the strongest, we are the best. We have better ideas, and we know how to instill them. And as Rome said, never before has the world been at peace, has had so much technology. Do you know that the Romans knew how to make concrete? And do you know that that idea was lost? And do you know how long it took us to discover cement again? Anybody know? About 1700 years. About 1700 years. In other words, the Romans were doing something that we forgot how to do and then figured out again for another 1700 years. And so the Romans quite rightly, when they conquered a people, said, I appreciate the fact that you had all your own little ways of life, but if you have any brains at all, you'll listen to us and we'll show you and tell you how to live. Now most of you being Americans hear that, kind of makes your skin crawl because you say, nobody's going to tell me how to live. Is that what you're feeling, man? In fact, in the life of Brian, one of my favorite scenes, this Monty Python movie, you have all these Jewish revolutionaries together and they're saying, what have the Romans ever done for us? And someone says, well, there's the sanitation. Okay, but besides the sanitation, what have the Romans ever done for us? Well, there's medicine. Okay, so besides sanitation and medicine, what have the Romans ever done for us? And the whole scene goes this way. All right, but apart from the sanitation, the medicine, the education, the wine, the public order, the irrigation, the roads, the freshwater system, the public health, what have the Romans ever done for us? Brought peace? Oh, shut up. And the idea is this. For the Romans, the Roman way of life was the best way of life. James Davison Hunter has written a very interesting book called The Change the World, and he notes in our political conversation how one of the new things that we brought to the conversation is this sense of entitled victims. The sense of injury is key. Over time, the perceived injustice becomes central to the person's identity and the group's identity. Understanding themselves to be victimized is not a passive acknowledgement, but a belief that can be cultivated. Accounts of atrocity become the crucial subplot of the narrative, evidence that reinforces the sense that they have been or will be wronged or victimized. Cultivating the fear of further injury becomes a strategy for generating solidarity within the group and mobilizes the group to action. It is often useful at such times to exaggerate or to magnify the threat. The injury or threat thereof is so central to the identity and the dynamics of the group that to give it up is to give up a critical part of who they understand themselves to be. Thus, instead of letting go, the sense of injury continues to get deeper. You hear this on both sides of the culture war. Well, they did that to me. In fact, you can hear it in children on the playground. Well, what he did to me was worse than what I did back to him. It was only justice what I was doing. You can probably hear it in your marital spats. Well, you did this and you did that, and that's a lot worse than what I did before, and what I'm doing now is justified by the bad things you've done. Hunter makes the point that we begin to identify ourselves as entitled victims, and we play this with each other. And in fact, if you look at the broader cultural culture wars, both sides do this, or however many sides there actually are, do this better and better. One of the things that's difficult for Americans to recognize is in many parts of the world, people have long memories. This is a map of the Assyrian Empire, and in about the 8th century BC, the Assyrians came through and took out the northern kingdom of Israel. After the Assyrians came the Babylonian Empire, and the Babylonians destroyed Jerusalem and the temple in Jerusalem. After the Babylonians, the Persians came through and took over where the Babylonians left off, and the Jews liked the Persians a little bit more because their particular idea, the assimilation, was send all the people back and rebuild all their temples, and maybe the gods will benefit us. The Persians were replaced by the Greeks, and the Greeks came through, and Alexander the Great came through, and as a very young man conquered the world, even over into what is now Iran and towards Pakistan. But Alexander the Great died, and so his empires carved up the nation, but there's Jerusalem still as part of this broader empire. And then of course after that, the Romans came through and said, we'll show you how it's done. And so what happened to the Jews was that for hundreds of years, now for us if something takes a year we get a little impatient, if something takes five years we feel very entitled, if something takes 50 years we're absolutely ready to start a revolution, but the Jews waited 750 years for something that Isaiah had to do. And Isaiah, the prophet, promised. Now I want you to get a sense of what these kinds of ideas would cultivate in the minds and imaginations of the Hebrew people. A shoot will come up from the stump of Jesse. From his roots a branch will bear fruit. The spirit of the Lord will rest on him, the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord. He will delight in the fear of the Lord. He will not judge by what he sees with his eyes or decide what he hears with his ears, but with righteousness he will judge the needy. With justice he will give decisions for the poor of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod in his mouth. With the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked. Righteousness will be his belt and faithfulness the sash around his waist. The wolf will lie with the lamb. The shepherd will lie down with the goat. The calf and the lion and the yearling together. And a little child will lead them. The cow will feed with the bear. The young will lie down together. And the lion will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the cobra's den. The young child will put his hand on the vipers' nest. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. Let that image sink in. In that day the root of Jesse will stand as a banner for the peoples. The nations will rally to him and his resting place will be glorious. In that day the Lord will reach out his hand a second time to reclaim the surviving remnants of his people from Assyria, from Lower Egypt, from Upper Egypt, from Kush, from Elan, from Babylonia, from Haman and from the islands of the Mediterranean. Way back in the 8th century Isaiah said, a time is coming when one son of David will rise up and this son of David will set all things right. And so for 750 years they wait and they look and they long and they don't give up and they keep rehearsing this passage and passages like it. But their minds are all filled with a certain expectation and imagination of what this King will bring. Of course as Christians we say this King was Jesus. And right away we saw at the beginning of Lent, Satan says to Jesus, fulfill this national expectation of you. Light the fire. Lately I've been listening to the Hunger Games trilogy and going through those books and here in the Hunger Games it's a dystopian future vision and this little girl Katniss lights a fire that builds revolution in the districts. Satan tempts Jesus basically saying, light the fire, they're ready to blow and in fact they were ready to blow. Jesus however continues to use very cryptic language. Jesus doesn't just say, light the fire, they're ready to blow and in fact they were ready to blow. Jesus however continues to use very cryptic language. Jesus doesn't just stand up and say, I'm the Messiah, follow me. He calls himself the son of man which people would listen to and they do about the David connection and they ponder what it would mean. Because the fact that Jesus starts doing miracles and claiming to be the Messiah is a sign of the fact that he's the Messiah. Because the fact that Jesus starts doing miracles and claiming to be the Messiah, all kinds of people rally to him and we see that in the gallery. Last week when we talked about the raising of Lazarus though, Jesus really forces the issue. We talked about the fact last week that if a person had sufficient power to raise someone dead for days, even today nations and governments would take notice. On Palm Sunday, Jesus presses his claims completely. Now it's interesting to ask the question, who is Jesus? Because a lot of people today will say, well there's lots of stories in the ancient world about miracles and maybe those get exaggerated and people just say that in order to make them sound special. But even on the barest outline of what Jesus did, what happens after Palm Sunday is truly amazing because you have Romans and Pharisees and Zealots who hate each other. But what happens at the end of this week is that they can't agree on politics. They can't agree on whether the Roman way is the right way or a pagan heinous way to live. But they can't agree that Jesus must be silenced. They are not in any way liberal. They can't agree that Jesus must be suppressed and that Jesus must be killed because what he is saying and doing is fundamentally dangerous and will destabilize the status quo that all of them, one way or another, benefit from. Now imagine, if you will, what Jesus could do with the power he had. Jesus, in fact, which is harder, to raise someone from the dead or to kill them? It's easy. Raise him from the dead? We can't do that. But if Jesus could call Lazarus out of the tomb with his voice, couldn't he kill an army with a word? If Jesus could steal a storm with a word, couldn't he start a storm and prevent reinforcements from marching into Jerusalem? If Jesus could multiply loaves and fishes, couldn't he multiply gold and silver? If he had this kind of power and he used it the way all of us, well, just think about it for a minute. If you could multiply gold and silver, couldn't you do that? Think about it. Maybe just this one time. Nobody will know. Jesus could conquer the world. And in fact, this was pretty much what everyone was imagining Jesus would do. He could see what he would mark on the cross, he could see what he would do. He could see what he would do. He could see what he would do. This was pretty much what everyone was imagining Jesus would do. He could see what he would march into Jerusalem. He could then go from Jerusalem maybe down to Egypt, Alexandria, and then maybe up the coast, Hitt, Tyre, and then Antioch, and then over to Rome and conquer the world, and then he could go up into Gaul, and then maybe over to India and China, and to the Americas. Jesus could rule the world. With power like this, Alexander with considerably less power conquered the world. And then when he got there, he could decree, make his beautiful teachings to law. And after he had conquered the world and put down all the armies and destroyed all of the power of the nations of the world, he could say, and turn the other cheek. And he could say, love your enemies. And he could say, do good to those who do bad to you. And what would everyone think? Well, you know, in Nazi Germany, if you were going to a death camp, do you know what the sign above the death camp said? Work makes free. People saw that and thought, yeah, right. Anybody, some of you are old enough to remember the Soviet Union. Do you remember what the government news outlet was in the Soviet Union? Remember what it was called? Do you know what it means in Russian? True. And everyone listened to that and thought, yeah. So if in fact Jesus did what everyone wanted Jesus to do, and what we ourselves, if we were Jesus, would use the power that we have. If Jesus had done that, where would the world be? Everyone would say, oh yes, maybe odds ever be in your favor. Or oh yes, turn the other cheek. In fact, even in church, hardly believe in something like that. What's really striking, however, is the liberality of God. As a pastor, I very often have people, if they're hurt or bad things have happened, and they come to me and said, surely if there's a good God, this God would have stopped this bad thing from happening. And I very much understand what they're saying. But at the same time, what if God simply decided, we're going to erase poverty from the earth, and we're going to do that by making everybody in the world own the same amount. Now, even where we sit in our culture, we might think, yeah, there's a lot of people who have a lot more than I do. But actually what that would mean would be that in a group this size, there'd be four cars for us to share. Oh, well, I'm not sure I want reorganization of money that way. Jesus doesn't silence his adversaries. He lets them speak. In fact, if he could make the dumb people speak, he could make the speaking people dumb. But he doesn't. You have heard it said, love your neighbor and hate your enemy. But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his Son to rise on the evil and the good, and send rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Jesus teaches in the Sermon on the Mount, be perfect therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect. In fact, what really is shocking to us is not so much God's hard law, but the liberality of what God lets us get away with, and still doesn't turn the screws on us. Now, when I talk this way, people will often say things like, Pastor, this won't work. And you're right, it won't. It usually doesn't. But Jesus continues. Jesus then uses his power not to dominate his enemies, but to love them. Progress comes with power used for the flourishing of others. In fact, that's what Jesus uses power for. This is never an easy path. It's always a costly path, and seldom a clear and simple path. Jesus will seemingly functionally surrender to his enemies who jeer and enjoy his humiliation, torture and death on the cross. And no one in the world could imagine what good would come of taking Jesus, beating him, and hanging him naked on a Roman instrument of crucifixion. In fact, all of his friends despair. With him died the messianic hopes of all who imagined him using power to crush his adversaries. The book of Philippians says this. In your relationships with one another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God as something to be used for his own advantage. Rather, he made himself of nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness, and being found in appearance as a man. He humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. Therefore, God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of Father. So Jesus comes riding into Jerusalem, but he is the most ironic cake this world could ever imagine. Because every other cake presses the advantage and subdues his enemies and takes them down. Jesus comes into Jerusalem riding on the foal of a donkey. He is received as a conquering king and everyone expects him to turn his advantage into political capital and then economic capital and then to somehow suppress and control the world. But by Friday he will be hanging naked on a tree with his enemies jeering that they've won. This is Jesus, the surprising, ironic king that completely subverts all of our notions of kingship. Like I said, the blogs were chewing this thing up and this particular blogger is a Roman Catholic woman and so she says, a gay CEO with balls needs to hire heighten and halt this crap. Okay, doesn't that just turn the culture war one more turn? In fact, what we see is that either with liberality or progressivism, you can just continue to play this game. You can take the high road and then use taking the high road as yet another pawn to subvert your enemy. Well, we did the right thing, therefore you should blah blah blah. You can appropriate liberality as a power-laden agenda. Your enemy just then plays the entitlement victim card and round and round you go. Yeah, if you've been in an argument network, if you've been in an argument with a spouse, if you've been in an argument with a friend, you know how the game is played. There's no winning these arguments. What if instead of using this to shame or coerce your adversary, you just do the kind and generous thing out of gratitude? Because isn't that what Jesus says? He says, turn the other cheek, not to say, well you turn the other cheek, then you make the person feel bad because they look like such a jerk. That what he said? Here's the thing, you may win your culture war and get the laws just as you want them. Okay, then what? Then everyone that you want against will do what? Grumble? Complain? Jesus won on Palm Sunday and the Pharisees were complaining and the Romans were worried. And then at the end of the week, they thought they won. Meanwhile, did it solve anything? You may win your culture war, but won't that frustrate your adversary and the fights just keep continuing? Is there any winning here, really? Really? Solomon's liberal versus progressive, again, are both built on unwarranted optimism. Do better ideas always beat other ideas? A lot of really bad ideas win a lot. Are the newer ideas always better than the older ideas? Most of us will say no. Christianity's optimism, however, far exceeds the other. The irony of a lot of this conversation is like, well, you know, things keep getting better, but then if you ask, well we're also destroying the planet and we're pretty sure that the Roman apocalypse is going to come, and where is this all going? What Jesus says is, I came into your mess, and instead of having power over you, I said, I will show you the way of love and I will let you hate me. And when he strolls into the Garden of Eden and Peter takes out his sword and cuts off the ear of the high priest's servant, Jesus heals him and basically says, look, if anybody's blood is going to be shed, it's going to be mine. Because what you need to know is that I love you and I am so deeply committed to your welfare, I am willing to go and pay the price and do what you cannot do for yourself, and you are certainly not willing to do for your enemies, but I will do it for you. And I am going to do it for you. Isn't this what each of us wants to hear from the other? In fact, in the context of a marriage or a family relationship or a co-worker, don't we want to hear the other say, look, I love you, I am committed to your best interest, and I am going to do for you what I might not think is necessarily the greatest idea, but out of concern and love and commitment for you, I will serve and help you. And when someone really says that, we say, really? And what then does that make your heart want to do? To turn around and say, they really do care for me, they really do love me, I want to do that for them. You see, the thing about the Christian religion is that at the heart of our religion is a God who is three persons, and if those three persons acted like we act in politics or like we do in marriage or like we do in a family or the workplace, what would they be doing? Well, you know, Jesus got all the publicity in Galilee and the Holy Spirit gets nothing. Oh, but now the Holy, all the Pentecostals love the Holy Spirit, so you know, God the Father, He's the bad guy. You can imagine this go round and round. But within the Trinity, they love and serve and do for each other, and so Jesus comes and says, I will serve the Father, and even when it comes to the crucifixion, Jesus says, this is going to be horrible, I really want another way, but not my will, but yours be done. How can you now love your enemy? Because you no longer fear. Because what the Gospel says is that by virtue of Jesus' sacrifice and resurrection, you no longer have anything to fear. This world can take your money, this world can take your body, this world can subvert your agenda, but your life is preserved by God for you, that the age of decay cannot come. And so if that is true, can you in fact, when your enemy is being an idiot or a jerk, still love him? Can you maintain a different opinion of the masses without anxiety? Because you know fear drives a lot of this stuff. Can you live out that perfect generosity Jesus talks about in the Sermon on the Mount? You can't do it as duty, well I've got to love my neighbor today, and I've got a lousy neighbor. But if that's how we're doing it, well I'm looking across the table at whoever you have to love, and I guess I've got to love you because that's what God says. I don't want to be loved like that. How do I want to be loved? Pete may say to me, you're a jerk, you're selfish, you don't always preach good sermons, but I've got your back. He cares for me. This is what we do. See I always pick on whoever sits there, Brandon's usually there. Isn't this what we want from each other? Do you believe that the one who could have felled armies and conquered the world came not to advantage himself, but to become what we needed him to be? And as the book of Philippians says, in doing so is now the ruler of the world. Do you believe that? Let's pray. Lord, we all desperately want to be loved, but we're not terribly eager about loving each other. And so you come to us and you invite us into your way of life, believing that you have saved us from the devil, from each other, from any possible threat. And now you invite us to in fact live out gratitude. Lord, may we believe in you. May we understand that all of this selfish bickering goes nowhere. May we in fact see that nothing less than the Son of God has come and become a sacrifice on our behalf and walked out of the tomb on Easter Sunday. And may we see that as pure love given for us and may we understand and have that motivate us to love and forgive and be patient and to in fact be committed for the well-beings of others, even when it comes at our own expense. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Where'd you stand? Oh, thanks. I always forget stuff. Good Friday service. This Friday is Good Friday. We have a service, 730 Friday evening here at church. Thanks. Good Friday.