https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A2u3wFWb2Uw

 Council has been talking about doing a retreat. First talked about it as a council retreat. And then a number of the council members thought it would be good to open it up to others in the church who might want to come. So if you're interested in helping to organize the retreat, you should talk to Reggie. Where is Reggie? Raise your arms so everybody knows who Reggie is. So talk to Reggie. And we don't have a date yet. We do have a facilitator. And we'll talk about the future of the church and where we'd like to go. I am leaving on vacation later this evening for a week so I won't be around this week. Doug Bowles will be here next week. I'm going to go visit my friend Calvin who lost his son in Minnesota and my mother in Massachusetts. So I'll be back on the 19th. Every two or three months a friend of mine who teaches a class called Myth, Ritual, and Magic asks me to come and talk about Christianity at the Art Institute here in Sacramento. And that's an experience I always look forward to. It's hard to describe what it's like to be in a room full of usually 20 to 30, mostly 20-somethings. Most of the people have very little connection with church, very little understanding of the Bible. At almost every class I will tell them the parable of the prodigal son. And I'll often ask, who's ever heard this parable? And one or two people, and maybe a class of 30 here. And so the experience of walking them through the story of the father running out to greet the son and the story of the older son staying far off in the field and being begrudging towards the father and the son is a thrilling experience for people who have never heard this story before. And I'm always amazed at how powerful this class is. I usually have about two hours. This last class people were moved to tears as I was talking to them about love and what love means and what love costs and how little love there can be in this world. One woman in the last class I taught a couple of weeks ago, I remember she was often, there was a few students who were a little older than average, I think she was a little older than average, but she began to cry and she said, why do so often the people that I give so much to hurt me in return? What amazes me is that when you go to this class, if I were to ask them religious questions about God or Jesus, whether there is a God or isn't a God, is God personal or is God a force or all of the universe combined, all of these questions, everyone would be all over the map. But the one thing they can all agree on is that life is supposed to be about love. They all get this and they all talk about it. Yet when I ask them about love and when they begin to dig a little bit deeper about love, they all express the reality that this world is not a loving place. And whereas many of them, if you would ask them, would say, well I'm a loving person and I try to treat others with love, they would tell me a number of things like, but that gets trampled on, I act, and people don't reciprocate. But if we dig a little deeper, I usually bring them to the point of recognizing not only is this world not a loving place, but each of us in many respects are bad lovers. Why is love so hard? John 15 says this, As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you, and remain in my love. If you keep my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commands and remain in his love. I have told you this so that my joy may be in you and that your joy may be complete. My command is this, love each other as I have loved you. Greater love has no one than this than to lay down one's life for one's friends. You are my friends if you do what I command. I no longer call you servants because a servant does not know his master's business. Instead I have called you friends for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you. You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you so that you might go and bear fruit, fruit that will last. And so then whatever you ask in my name the Father will give you. This is my command, love each other. Now, if I were to read this to this class over at the Art Institute, I think it would sound like, blah blah blah blah blah blah blah, love each other blah blah blah blah blah, love one another blah blah blah blah blah, love is good blah blah blah blah, commands don't look that way. Because we have this instinctive idea that what love is, is doing what others want us to do. And in fact, we get this idea from a very good source. It's in fact known as the Golden Rule. Do to others as you would have them do to you. If you don't want other people saying no to you, if you don't want other people being mean to you, if you don't want other people being unkind to you, then you had better be nice, you had better be good, you had better be permissive, you had better give other people what they want. And I think this is our cultural fundamental definition of love. The Golden Rule. Do to others as you would have them do to you. And if you ask almost anyone, do you agree with this Golden Rule? They would say yes. This is a good rule. Do you agree that this is the definition of love? People would say yes, this is the definition of love. And what's more, Jesus said this, so shouldn't the church be about that? You see, it's also ironic that if I talk to the people at the Art Institute about the church, even though many of them have very little experience with the church, they will sometimes say things like, well, churches are unloving, churches are about rules, churches are about saying no to certain people, or discriminating against certain people, or not accepting people, they will often say, well, this Jesus is loving and kind and receiving, but the church has somehow gotten about rules, blah, blah, blah. What's interesting is that you may or may not notice, but the Golden Rule is not original to Jesus, at least in terms of the time when he said it to his disciples. You in fact can find variations of the Golden Rule, it's sometimes called the Rule of Reciprocity. You can find versions of it in Hanarabi's Code. You can kind of find versions of it in ancient China, in Taoism, in Confucianism, a saying that Confucius is nearly identical to what Jesus said. You can find versions of it in ancient Egypt. You can find versions of it in ancient Greece, in ancient Rome. You can find versions of it in India. It is in fact almost all over the world that you can find people basically saying the same idea. You want to know how you should behave, behave in the way that others would like to be, that you would like others to behave towards you. It's basic reciprocity, it seems simple, it seems obvious, but the more simple and obvious it is, the more the question is asked, well if it's so obvious and if it's so simple, why does human history look like it does? And why do all of our relationships look like they do? In fact the most shocking place to look at this is usually within let's say a family or a marriage. You have mothers and children and the children, I remember being a little boy and we were close to some different families in our church and I remember one of my friends saying to me one day, my mother is mean. I said, oh I didn't experience her as being very mean. But looking back on it I think he said that because his mother probably said no. And if you were to introduce the law of reciprocity to your child and if your child were to try and hold that law against you, what would that mean for your family life? It would mean candy and whatever they wanted all the time, right? But ask any good mother and the mother will say, a good mother says no. Or within a marriage you have this man and this woman standing up in front of all kinds of people professing undying love that they will live together for the rest of their life in love and you marry a couple's wife. Why? Don't they love each other? Don't they know what the other one wants? So in other words here you have this golden rule and here we can almost all agree that this is the definition of love and it's within almost every culture and we discover we're completely bad at it. Does it work? Here's something that you probably never thought of in terms of the golden rule. You see Jesus says, love one another. If you love me you'll do what I command. And when we hear that part of us says, okay, loving Jesus, yes, but doing what he commands, there's nothing loving about a command. Commands are not about love. Commands are about control. Commands are about limitation. Commands are about binding my freedom. But think about this, the golden rule has an implicit law within it. Let's say, okay, you say you're a lover. You say you believe in love. You say love is love or love is my religion. Okay, and you say that the golden rule exhibits love. So you love me. Oh, what am I going to pick on? Reggie's here. I'll pick on Reggie. So let's say Reggie says he's a lover not a fighter. Are you a lover not a fighter, Reggie? You look at him. So Reggie's a lover not a fighter. And Reggie's my friend, so Reggie's going to love me. And so I think, you know, Reggie, you know what I'd like? I'd really like it if you were to exercise more faithfully. I'd really like it if you would train and compete and get in that Boston Marathon. I'd really like it if you could kind of stay away from the donut table after church. And you might say, well, you know, but that's not really about you. Ah, but it's how I want you to love me. It's how I want you to be about me. When a mother tells the child to do this or not do this, or the mother will be upset or the mother will be angry, or the child avoids things because it will make the mother upset or angry, it's the golden rule and application. It's just the implicit command beneath the golden rule that's operating. You see, we look at the golden rule and say, well, that's just love and that's the key to love. But underneath the golden rule is, will you please me? Will you make me happy by what you do? Now, the marriage counselor would listen to this and say, well, this is all about control. This is all about enmeshment. This is all about one person controlling the other. It might be about co-dependency. It could be about a whole bunch of things. And I would say, yes, it is. So what are we talking about? C.S. Lewis wrote really what is a fine little book called The Four Loves. Part of the difficulty we have with this conversation when we say love is love is that we have one word in English for love. C.S. Lewis highlights four Greek words for love. There's sordid, which is affection, maybe the love that you have for a pet or the love that you have for a car. Eros, which is romantic love. Phileo, which is friendship, the love you can have for a friend. And agape, which is the self-sacrificial love. And even as C.S. Lewis goes through these four loves, you begin to realize that there's way more words for love than even just these four. That love has so many different dimensions and so many different kinds to them. So that when a mother tells her child no, the mother is loving the child. And we all know this, and we call it love, but that's a very different love than romantic love. And it's a very different love than affection. And it's a very different love than friendship. And then we begin to realize that love is actually an extremely comprehensive and complex reality that we often begin to notice if we live within a family. You see, the opposite of love is not necessarily hostility. The opposite of love is neglect and indifference. Because the mother who loves their child is concerned about their child and prays for their child and weeps for their child and worries for their child. And I once heard this one saying that once you have a child, there is in fact, you will never be happier than your most miserable child from that day forward. There's a lot of truth to that. So love is love, but love is complicated. And one of the things that we realize is, well, maybe none of us is love. Lewis goes on to say, there is no safe investment. To love at all is to be vulnerable. Love anything and your heart will certainly be wrong and possibly be broken. If you want to make sure of keeping it intact, you must give your heart to no one, not even to an animal. Wrap it carefully around with hobbies and little luxuries. Avoid all entanglements. Lock it up safe in the casket or coffin or your own selfishness. But in that casket, safe, dark, motionless, airless, it will change. It will be broken. It will not be broken. It will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. The alternative to tragedy, or at least to the risk of tragedy, is damnation. The only place outside heaven where you can be perfectly safe from all the dangers and perturbations of love is hell. So those are your options. Love and your heart will be broken. Or don't love and begin the long road to a place where you will be all by yourself, secure in yourself, utterly alone, cut off from God and anything good that he gives. What's interesting about this passage is if you read it, Jesus is using a language about love. That is not the way we usually talk about love. As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you, now remain in my love. If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love. What does it mean to remain in love? Again, when I say it that way, our minds jump to romantic love. But it's not really what we're talking about. To remain in love, well, actually, the same word is used later in chapter 15 as it is earlier, as we talked about last week with the buying of the branches. Jesus says in 15 verse 4, remain in me. Now again, this is a very weird thing. To have one man say to another group of men, remain in me, makes really very little sense. But he's talking about this buying and this metaphor, the branches. No branch can bear fruit by itself. It must remain in the buying. I'm trying to get at it. A branch remains in the buying. Neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in me. And then a little bit later, he says, remain in my love. If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love. Now again, if you were to apply this in a romantic relationship or even in a marriage or in a family, there is a sense in which it transfers, but there's another sense in which this could become awful. Most of the problems I look at when people come to me and they are anxious about their relational situations, a lot of them have to do with control. A lot of them have to do with conditionality. I have to do this to keep them happy or I have to do this to keep them there or I have to do this or I will lose them. There's all of these things going around. But what we look at when we look at this passage is that our relationship with God is not a symmetrical relationship. It's not one to another as I am to Reggie or each of us is to one another. It is us to God. And this God, this relationship with God, God is so far beyond another living human being that it's difficult for us to think, what does this mean? Remain in my love. One thing we might say is, how can we not be in your love? How can we be outside of this thing, especially if we realize that all of the goodness around us we experience as a product of this love? What would it be to be without God? If you look at Matthew 5, you have heard it said, love your enemy, love your neighbor, and hate your enemy. But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your father in heaven. In other words, this is how God is to us. In a sense, God is like an ungrateful child. Now this may motivate some of you today. Who does not call his mother on Mother's Day, who does not send her a card, who does not show up for dinner, who does not find out if she has any needs, who does not do for her what love and duty require. You see what Jesus says here in the Sermon on the Mount is, God the Father does what for us? Gives us this world, gives us the seasons, gives us the water that our plants need, gives us all that we have for life, and we treat him how. I tell you the truth, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your father in heaven. He causes the sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even the pagans do that? Be perfect therefore, as your heavenly father is perfect. See what's shocking here is that this phrase, almost every time I quiz someone, when Jesus says be perfect as your heavenly father is perfect, almost everyone jumps to morality. Oh, I should be circumspect about my behavior with respect to myself. When in fact the text says you should be lavish with your love even towards your enemies, because that is the kind of perfection that the Father has. Now if we transpose that here into John 15 where we're talking about the buying of the branches, in a sense what Jesus is saying is this kind of love that the Father has for the sun and that the sun has for us, and this kind of buy that grows where we are there as the grapes, as the branches, part of the fruit, and we are there to bear fruit, this is the kind of relationship that we are to have. If we remain in his love, we will express his love to others just as he in fact does towards those who ignore him, those who deny him, those who offend him, and those who damage and harm this world. That's an alarming thing. And the reason for this is joy. Here's just a little chart. If you look at the passage, if you read through John 15 you'll notice, boy, there's a lot of repetition in here. He says the same thing like twice. What scholars have noticed that in fact there is structure to this, and the reason that there is repetition is he's going through it and saying, I want you to see the point of this. If my words remain in you, verse 7, verse 17, I command you, verse 7, ask for whatever you will and it will be done, verse 16, the father will give you whatever you ask, verse 16, bear fruit, verse 8, eat my disciples, verse 16, I choose you. The fathers love me, I revealed everything I heard from the father, I have loved you, I have followed you my beloved. You were remained in my club, if you keep my commandments, you are the ones I love when you do what I command, I command that this is love one another, but the center of this is I have said this to you that my joy may be yours. In other words, the goal of love is to think, oh gosh, I've got to go out there and I have to forgive these awful people. I have to forgive these people who are hurting me. I have to go back to this person after all we've been through, after all the times that they've hurt me and crushed me and done this. I have to go back to them and once again engage them with love, which is not the same again as simply doing what they want or doing what they're asked. But I have to engage them with love because the purpose of this entire thing is joy. So I have these children down here and I wish you could all sit up here with me and be this close to their little faces and talk to them and I'm sorry about the parents and the stories because you always get stories out of the house. What these children have no idea is why, how much joy it gives their parents when they play together nicely, right? And any of you that have experienced that watching children play, watching them share, watching them love one another, watching them have each other's back, watching them do this, how much joy does that give a parent? And how much joy does that give us when we're a part of that? And Jesus says, this is the joy I want, this is the joy I experienced with my father, this is the joy I want all of you to have and the way you have this is to love one another. And part of us says, yeah, that's right. But this whole conversation started in Chapter 13 where Jesus takes off his clothes, wraps a towel around himself, begins to wash the feet of his disciples and his disciples pull back and say, you can't wash my feet, I should wash your feet. And Jesus says, no, I want to show you what love is. Now, in the class at the Art Institute, when I talk about this, people very quickly get complicated for that. When I ask them, what happens when you turn the other cheek? And they say, I get hit again. And so every time I talk about this, they think, boy, if I only love someone, if I only turn the other cheek, then the other person is going to stop and say, oh, how magnanimous and gracious you are, I'll stop being a jerk. That's usually what you try in like the first year of marriage. You know, well, I did that for you. Why don't you do this for me? And the talk of war starts. The truth is, this is no formula around the back to get what you want, which is what we all jump to in our minds. Because the truth is this, what does God's law require of us? Christ teaches us this in the summary of Matthew 22. Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, with all your strength. This is the first greatest commandment and the second like it. Love your neighbor as yourself all along the prophets, having these two commandments. So, yeah, everybody in the art institute is dead on right. The world is about love. The world was made for love. We were made to love each other. And then the second is this. Can you live up to this perfectly? No, I have a natural tendency to hate God and my neighbor. Which is why Jesus strips down and washes his disciples feet and says a little bit later tonight, you're going to see my glory as it's not just my pride. It's just my vanity. It's just not my convenience that I excuse myself in your favor. I am going to give my very life for you and the world will not notice. That's deliverance. Because the shocking thing that the Art Institute students are blown away by every time I tell this story is that they expect us to hear, well, we should love one another. But what they don't expect to hear is that the God of the universe became human and died naked on a cross exposed to our mockery out of his love for you. And that's how much he loves you. And if you know that, if you feel that, when your neighbor is crucifying you, maybe justly, maybe unjustly, when the heat is on and when all of the times that you've done good is simply ignored and refused like that. And then refused like perhaps some are doing this Mother's Day. God's love doesn't end. And the moment we see that, we see God's beauty and we see the joy of that kind of love, our hearts are in fact moved to gratitude. And we once again forgive the thing that we've forgiven a thousand times. And we once again ignore the harsh words that we've heard a hundred times. And we once again don't hold it against that child who was too wrapped up in all of the things that this world can wrap you up in. And we once again, like the father of the prodigal son, stand looking out over the road and say, will my son come back? And when the son comes back and the older son is out in the field and the father says to the older son, won't you come? Won't you come and join the party because my son was lost and has now been found? This is joy. This is gratitude. This is grace. This is the joy he wants for us. And we don't have it only by receiving it. We taste it by doing it and giving it. And so he invites us into that. If you remain in my love, you do what I command. And what does he command you to do? To forgive, to love, to turn the other cheek, to walk the extra mile, to figure out when you can't seem to figure out what love actually requires to continue to do that hard work. Love one another. Let's pray. Lord, this is so far beyond us, and yet it is the simplest, obvious first lesson. Help us to see what you have done for us, and may we do it for each other. This is the whole Christian life. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand? Would you stand?