https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oXRvlvG0Qng

 I've been reading this very interesting book by a Jewish scholar, teaches in the University in Jerusalem. It's a secular book. I have never reason to believe in anything else. Very interesting book. And then he declares, The leading project of the scientific revolution is to give humankind eternal life. I found that to be a very interesting statement. One of mankind's ostensibly insoluble problems, what has remained the most interesting and important, is the problem of death itself. It tells us the story of Gilgamesh. That is the theme of the most ancient myth that comes down to us, the Gilgamesh myth, the ancient Sumer. Its hero is the strongest and most capable man in the world, King Gilgamesh of Uruk, who could defeat anyone in battle. One day Gilgamesh's best friend, Nandiku, died. Gilgamesh sat by the body and observed it for many days, until he saw a worm dropping out of his transnational. At that moment, Gilgamesh was gripped by a terrible heart, and he resolved that he himself would never die. He would somehow find a way to defeat death. Gilgamesh then undertook the journey to the end of the universe, killing lions, battling scorpion men, and finding his way into the underworld. He shattered the mysterious stone thing of Urshanibe, the ferryman of the river of the dead, and found Utsnakishchin, the last survivor of the primordial flood. Yet Gilgamesh failed in his quest. He returned home empty-handed, as mortal as ever, but with one new piece of wisdom. For the gods created man, Gilgamesh had learned. They set death as Nand's inevitable destiny, and Nand must learn to live with it. Disciples of progress do not share this disproved attitude. For men of science, death is not an inevitable destiny, but merely a technical problem. People die not because the gods be created, but due to various technical failures, a heart attack, cancer, and infection. And every technical problem has a technical solution. If the heart flutters, it can be stimulated by a placemaker, or replaced by a new heart. If cancer rampages, it can be killed with drugs and radiation. If bacteria proliferate, they can be subdued with antibiotics. True, at present, we cannot solve all technical problems, but we are working on them. Our best minds are not wasting their time trying to give meaning to death. Instead, they are busy in physiological, hormonal, and responsible for disease and old age. We are developing new medicines, revolutionary treatments, and artificial organs that will lengthen our lives and might one day vanquish the grim reaper and cell. You would have not heard scientists or anyone else speak so bluntly. We have what nonsense. We are only trying to cure cancer, tuberculosis, and Alzheimer's disease. They have avoided the issue of death because the goal seems too elusive. Why create unreasonable expectations? We're now at that point, however, where we can be frank about it. The leading project of the scientific revolution is to give humankind eternal life. Ray Kurzweil, who invented the electronic, basically synthetic music, lives in Silicon Valley, believes that by the year 2045, we will reach what he calls a singularity, where we will be able to finally interface our brains with computer technology and therefore be able to survive the death of our body. Arari, based on leading experts in the field, believes that by 2050, there will be individuals who will be able to basically not die, that we will have enough medical technology to keep their bodies alive, and they will be able to continue to live barring any accidents or devastating illness, that we will in fact defeat old age. Could be. I don't know. I'm not an expert. But I thought it was very interesting that Arari's term he used was eternal life. He didn't say the revolution is to give humankind everlasting life. He didn't say to give humankind ongoing biological endurance. He said eternal life. Arari is a historian, basically a macro historian, and his book is very interesting, because he takes the world in his view from all the way to the beginning to all the way to the end. And what's fascinating to me is he knows Greek. He knows the Bible. And he has to know John 3.16. For this is the way that God loved the world. He gave his one and only son that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have eternal life. Now what's interesting, and what most of us when we read the Bible, we see those words, eternal life, we think of, not dying. But the words are actually a little bit more complicated. John uses the term eternal life while the other gospels use the term the kingdom of God. And the term actually, eternal life, that we translate into English, in Greek really says life of the age. After I read this verse it said, he gave his one and only son so that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have the life of the age. You would all say, what does that mean? In biblical terms, it's the life of the age to come. It's the life of heaven. It's the life of a world unbroken. It's the life you've always wanted and somewhere deep in your heart that felt. You should have had. Now if you listen to Harari, you might think that a 20 year old has eternal life. Is being 20 having eternal life? Go and find a 20 year old and say to them, wow, look at you. You have it all together. You have everything you could possibly want. Surely you have it and you have no troubles at all. Do any of you know any 20 year olds? Do they have problems? Now if they're fortunate, their body is as healthy as it's ever going to be, their heart works, their arms work, their blood pressure is low, all of their numbers are great. Would we say that a 20 year old has eternal life? As low as this hierarchy of human needs. And if you look at the hierarchy, you realize what every 20 year old realizes is that their body may be healthy, they may not have any physical problems at all, but there's whole host of things that they make you worry about. Way up the bottom, we're concerned with our physiology, breathing, food, water, sex, sleep, homeostasis, excretion. But above that we want to be safe, we want to be able to work. Above that we care about friendships, family, sexual intimacy. Above that we're concerned with self-esteem, confidence, achievement, respect of others, being respected by others. And even above that there's morality, creativity, problem solving, bias, all of this stuff. Many of you perhaps have no physical ailments at all, but you wouldn't describe your life as living the life of heaven. What would it in fact take to make you think you're living the life of heaven? Some of you might remember this TV Guide cover from 1989, where in order to have their name, some of you don't even know what TV Guide is. See, for all you young folks, back in the day, if we wanted to watch TV, stuff was only broadcast at a certain hour, and so we took a book, and we opened it up and found listings when stuff would be on it. That's how old people used to watch TV. And so back in the day, Oprah had her TV show on regular TV that went through the air, and Oprah, the richest woman on TV, surely if anybody had eternal life it would be Oprah, she and her net worth is around $3 billion. She's one of the most powerful people in Hollywood, yet when TV Guide wanted to put her on the cover, they did a quick copy paste job to paste her head on Anne Margaret's body. What does this say? What does this say about us? What does this say about this imagined eternal life? John Paul Sartre, in his claim to a legend, basically said, how is the other? And what he meant by that is other people. Because no matter if science can develop nanotechnology that can infiltrate my body and clear all the plaque out of my arteries and go into my brain and clear all the plaque out of my brain so I don't get Alzheimer's and I don't have heart disease, and they replace all of my joints with joints that can be replaced and not wear out, and they find skin cream that will keep my skin supple and fix the amino acids that make my hair gray and solve nail pattern baldness and do all of these things so that I look like I was when I was 20 years old. Would I then have eternal life? What I would discover is what John Paul Sartre noticed and what C.S. Lewis noticed when he wrote his book The Great Divorce, that how in C.S. Lewis's imaginary world sounds to many people today like heaven. He would say, imagine living in a world where you could have everything you wanted just by thinking about it. Think about it. Think about your dream home. Food, you have your dream home. Think about food. Food, you have your food. Think about life. You have life and everything that you dream of. So this person, when he gets to this city, starts walking and sees these beautiful elaborate homes, but what does he discover? Most of them are empty. Why? Because of the neighbors. Because here's the one thing, maybe they can put nanorobots in my body and keep me perpetually like I was when I was 20. But you know what they can't do? Fix all of you so all of you do what I want you to. There was a Star Trek episode, I, Mudd, where Spock and Kurt go to a planet and there's this dude on the planet and he's surrounded by these beautiful women. It's like wow, this must be wonderful. And then they learn, well, they're not really women, they're robots and so they do everything that he wants. Wow, this must be wonderful. Guess what? Mudd wanted off the planet. Why? They were still driving him crazy. What is with us? Would fixing my body give me eternal life? Now a certain man, a Pharisee named Nicodemus, was a member of the Jewish Catholic Council, came to Jesus that night and said to him, Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who comes from God. No one can perform the miraculous signs that you do unless God is with them. Jesus replied, I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus said to him, how can a man be born when he is old? He cannot enter his mother's womb and be born a second time, can he? Jesus answered, I tell you the solemn truth, unless a person is born of water and spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God. What is born of flesh is flesh and what is born of spirit is spirit. Do not be amazed that I tell this to you. You must all be born from above. The wind blows wherever it wills and you will hear the sound it makes. But do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is with everyone who is born of the spirit. Nicodemus comes to Jesus that night and Nicodemus has seen his power and he knows there is something about this Jesus, but Nicodemus also knows to step out socially would put him at risk. So he sneaks into Jesus that night and Jesus tells him you must be born. And then Jesus uses a Greek word that is ambiguous. It either means born again, meaning a second time, or born from above, which means from above. Now what is strange with this is that, and this is common in the Gospel of John, Jesus means it one way, but Nicodemus takes it the other. And that then becomes what they talk about. But what Jesus essentially tells Nicodemus here is that Nicodemus, even though you are a prominent man, even though you are a powerful man in your community, even though you are learned from the scriptures, unless you are born from above, unless the Holy Spirit takes a hold of you and grabs you, all of this other stuff you do is of no good. This is terribly troublesome to Nicodemus because he has been working all of his life towards being a good man, being a righteous man, being a holy man, being someone after God's own heart. Nicodemus has done all of this work and now Jesus says to Nicodemus, you must be born from above. And Nicodemus is like, but I have no control over this. But where does that lead me? Have you lived under the illusion of your control? Jesus then continues, no one has ascended into heaven except the one who has descended from heaven, the Son of Man. Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life. Now notice eternal life here, the life of the age is synonymous with the Kingdom of God, right here in the Gospel of John, as it is in the other Gospels and in the New Testament. So on one hand Jesus says, you must be born from above, and that is completely out of your control. On the other hand, anyone who looks at the Son of Man lifted up will be saved. That sounds like that's within my control. So where does that lead me? For this is the way God loved the world, that he gave his one and only Son so that everyone who believes in him will not perish but have eternal life. Now, forget that he did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world should be saved through him. The one who believes in him is not condemned. The one who does not believe has been condemned already because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God. Now, Jesus gives Nicodemus a little Old Testament lesson here by referencing Moses and the snake. That story comes from this here in the Book of Numbers. We've been going through the Book of Numbers quite a bit, and this will sound familiar to you when you think about Israel in the desert and who they were and the kinds of things they did. And they traveled to Mount Mor, by the road to the sea, to go around the land of Eden. But the people became impatient along the way. And the people spoke against God and against Moses again. Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness, where there was no bread and no water? And we detest this worthless food, the man. So the Lord said, poison the snakes among the people, and they hid the people. And many people of Israel died. Then the people came to Moses and said, we have sinned, for we have spoken against the Lord and against you. Pray to the Lord that he will take away the snakes from us. So Moses prayed for the people, and the Lord said to Moses, make a poisonous snake and set it out of the hole. When anyone who has bit and looks at it, he will live. So Moses made a broad snake and put it out of the hole, so that if a snake had been bitten by someone, they looked at the broad snake and he would. Now this is hands down one of the strangest stories in the Old Testament, for a whole number of reasons. We might imagine that if the Lord wanted to make an object lesson, he could have said, now when you've been bitten by a snake, go look at the tavern apple, because that's where I live, and place your trust in me. Or he could have said, now someone has been bitten by a snake, take the ark of the covenant out and place that before them, and so then they'll trust in me. But he says, make a broad snake, put it out of the hole, and when they see the broad snake out of the hole, they'll be here. Now if you were to ask me, if I were just a dude in Israel, and Moses said, this is our plan, and I was theologically educated, I would say, Moses, this sounds like idolatry. This sounds like idolatry. Honor the Lord your God, right? Do not make for yourself a graven image of anything in the heaven above, or the earth beneath, or the waters under the earth. Isn't this a violation of the no idols command? But God, you gave this command. What on earth does this mean? In fact, later on, as you read in the book of Kings, that, wouldn't you know it, they kept the snake, and then they made the snake into an idol, and they worshiped the snake. And so you have to say in this passage, Lord, this whole snake thing sounds very pagan and a very bad idea. In fact, and I'll reference the brick Bible. Al knows the brick Bible, some of you know it, it's out there on the internet, where this guy tells Bible stories using little Lego creatures. The whole snake on a pole idea, that's not like, you know, a hot dog on a stick if you go to the mall. Snake on a pole is basically kind of like snakes are scary, so I'm going to kill a snake. It's like if your child came to you and said, I'm afraid of dogs, and you take a little stuffed dog and you bang it on the bed and say, see, you don't need to be afraid of dogs anymore. See the dog, bang, bang, bang. In the ancient world, if you wanted to kill something, you put it on a stick when it's dead, and everybody can see it's dead. So for example, when the Philistines stole the Ark of the Covenant, and then the Ark of the Covenant starts wreaking havoc in their town, what do the Philistines do? The plague that the Ark seemed to bring, at least they thought, was rats and tumors. So they made golden rats and golden tumors, and they put it in a box, and they sent it back with the Ark, and that seemed to solve the problem. The story of good King Saul, or bad King Saul, who took his own life by falling on the sword. So the Philistines then found the dead body of Saul, and they decapitated him, but what did they do? They took his armor and his head, and they put it in the Temple of Dagon, and they took his body and the body of his sons, and they hung them on a wall. Why? There was a point, and the point was this. The Philistines were telling all of Israel, we owe you. Why, when the Romans crucified people, did they put them up along the major highways and left the dead bodies, and for the birds to pick them? If you want to make a point, you kill it, and you put it on a stick. Why would Jesus say this? Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, put that fake snake on a stick and said, look at the dead snake and believe. So must the Son of Man be lifted up, so that everyone who believes in man will have eternal life. What does this mean, Jesus? What do you believe? Do you believe that science and technology can deliver to you eternal life? We live in the midst of this all the time. If you get sick, I'll say go to the hospital, and I'll come by and pray for you. But get to the hospital first. It's true. Why would you do that? For then believing in the Son of Man lifted on a pole can deliver you. There's a reason your friends and neighbors, when they hear what you really believe, might say, do you really believe that? Really? That's far-fetched. In fact, Harari in this interview, basically says, he was interviewed by another historian, and Harari basically says, you know, in a few years, once they get all this medical stuff, they can make, you know, once her head looks young, keep stretching the skin, get rid of the wrinkles. Ironically, of course, she died at the hand of her plastic surgeon. But he says, basically, I find it difficult to imagine that people are going to become unnecessary. The real issue of planet Earth will not be whether we can make one person live a very long time. It'll be all the rest of us who we can't afford to save. Because you know what? Joan Rivers and the people with both the power, they're going to keep going on living. Us? Without fame and money and importance in the eyes of this world? Harari says, basically, the real challenge of this world will be, we're going to give people drugs to keep them happy and computer games to keep them abused until they die because they're essentially not useful. Jesus comes to us and says, you are born from above. This week I found a picture of my sixth grade devotion. And I asked myself, what would I say to little Paul VanderKlaas, who was 12 years old, standing there, I guess we were protesting in favor of the Bruce McSphere. What would I say to myself? Now I'm a 51 year old. What wisdom could I give? And the more I thought about it, I thought, what could my 12 year old self understand? As a boy, I could sit there and tell him all kinds of things. I don't think it would make a difference. Go ahead and sit your child down, explain things to them. They'll look at you. They're a child. And that emphasizes the fact that Jesus talks to Nicodemus and Nicodemus is like, how can I understand what any of this means? Born from above? See, the son of man is lifted up. But he doesn't lift up like every other emperor in this world. He doesn't lift up. His enemy's on a pole. He says, you will lift me up on a pole. You will lift humanity up on a pole. And when you see me lifted up and believe, that's where eternal life begins. And on one hand, it's not something we can do for ourselves. It's just a mystery. It's like talking to a 12 year old man who looks at me and says, where did your hair go? You know, how can we understand? On the other hand, it's an open and welcome invitation. The son of man comes out of the tomb and asks the disciples, put your fingers in my hands, put your hand in my side. And even then they look at him and think, I have no idea what's going on. But with power and glory beyond the body of his birth. So what do you believe? You believe Ferrari's eternal life is really just a very long, biological life for the wealthy and the powerful? Is that where you're putting your hope? Because of course the irony is that this kind of eternal life probably none of us will qualify for. See, as Lewis notes that, in fact, if you follow that myth to the end, the sun goes out. You can only forestall this stuff so long, the universe goes dark. Or do you, like desperate Israel, see the snakes and look to the victim who was lifted up? Jesus, in a sense, invites you to believe that the maker of all of this came and became one of us. And when he came into the world, as they were doing all this horrible stuff to each other, he said, stop, look, take me, take me, lift me up and I will heal you. And you don't have to be Nicodemus. And you don't have to be Joan Rivers. And you don't have to be one of the, one percent of the one percent of the one percent. Do you believe when he came out of that tomb that his body was new? Do you believe that his body would not decay again? Do you believe that he reigns even now? Do you believe that he can begin this process in your life today? Because he doesn't ask you for anything else. Let's pray. Lord, it's understandable that people hear this and scratch their heads and think, really? Can this Jesus really save me? Can this Jesus really raise me? Can this Jesus really change me from the inside out? We know, Lord, that Nicodemus who came full of himself left empty and you filled him. And your disciples that have not a clue, you gave them your Holy Spirit and they changed the world. Help us to believe, Lord, that when we pray you listen and that when we call you answer and that in fact, Lord, you have us on a path that we can take. And in fact, Lord, you have us on a path that leads to the resurrection of our bodies. These bodies right now, Lord, are seeds that will go into the ground and die. But you, Lord, will raise us up. And we put our hope in you. In the name of Jesus. Amen. Do you understand that? Amen.