https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YTAqd2VQ7cg

 If there is an issue that has dominant the cultural conversation, probably, I think the issue has always been with us. But it's been intense for the last number of decades. The issue has been marriage. Marriage and human sexuality. What kind of norms should we embrace as a society, as a church? And even if you just look at this list, for habitation, divorce, remarriage, same-sex marriage, polygamy, polyamorous relationships, unconscious uncoupling, polyandry. Anybody know what throuples are? We can talk three. There was a piece I caught last week coming out of Great Britain, a lesbian relationship that was going on in the United States. A lesbian relationship with three women. The story talking about how they were arranging their relationship. Out of wedlock births, plural marriage, premarital sex, open marriage. All of these things are very hot discussions. And they are not abstract discussions. They are real discussions about how we should relate to one another, how we should organize our lives, how, in fact, people can live together with different views on all of this. And of course, in the conversation, what is right and wrong? Is there a God? And whether God cares how we arrange ourselves in this way? The question that I seldom hear asked, however, in most of these conversations is simply this. What is marriage for? What is marriage for? The reason I think we never hear that question in any of these debates is because for most Americans, the answer is obvious, because it's the same answer for almost every large question we ask. What is heaven for? What is God for? What are children for? What is vocation for? What is sex for? What is my life for? What is romance for? What is money for? What is the church for? What are the sacraments for? And what is almost anything else for? And I think the consistent answer we get implicit within our society is happiness and individual self-fulfillment. What is marriage for? Marriage is to make you happy and to make you feel fulfilled. That is the assumed answer. But again, if you look at almost all of these questions, what is heaven for? Happiness. What is God for? To make me happy. What are children for? I have children because I want to feel meaning and fulfilled and be happy. What is vocation for? I want a job that makes me happy. What is sex for? Well, that's obvious. Happiness and self-fulfillment and pleasure. What is my life for? Happiness and self-fulfillment. This is the answer to almost every question. And it's simply assumed. There is also, I think, what is blank for in Christianity too. Anyone want to take a stab at the answer? The glory of God. Very good. The glory of God. But as I converse with most of my non-Christian friends, I know that that answer would trouble them. Because it conjures up in them narratives of, I don't know, of rules that make no sense. Of assertions about well-being that don't feel right. One of my best, one of the best quotes I have for this comes actually from the movie. In the novel it's a little bit different. I took the words from the novel. But the movie, The Color Purple. And it's really where the novel and the movie get the title from. You've got Shug and Sealy walking through a field. And at least this is the version from the book where Sealy is the narrator. And Shug is saying to her, more than anything else, God loves admiration. And Sealy says, are you saying God is vain? And Shug says, nah, not vain. Just wanting to share a good thing. I think it pisses God off if you walk by The Color Purple in a field somewhere and don't notice it. What is this saying? What Shug says in the novel is basically this. That God's deep interest is to share himself with us. And the form that that sharing takes is glory. And so God's deep interest is that he shares his glory with us. And we begin to see his glory. I, every couple of months I, for a friend of mine, I teach a court at the Art Institute to try and connect Christianity with myth, ritual, and magic. And so the room is always filled with art students. And so I ask them why they create. And there are some who create, who do visual arts, and some who do culinary arts. And I ask them, you know, especially if you're a chef, what is the height of what you create? What do you really enjoy about your art? And they all tell me they want to share their art and to have their art appreciated and enjoyed and beheld. And if you create a great meal, if you're a chef and you lay that meal out, what do you want more than anything? You want people to come and to eat that meal and to enjoy that meal. Well, what we're really talking about is God's glory. And that God fills this world with glory and wants us to enjoy it and to enjoy that glory in connection with him. The Shorter Westminster Confession says this, What is the chief end of man? And I doctored it a little bit. What is the chief purpose of humanity? And our chief end is to glorify God and enjoy him forever. That confession puts glory and joy right next to each other. And that's where it should be. Saint Augustine said this, Nothing can satisfy one who would not be satisfied with God. Think about that again. Nothing can satisfy someone who could not be satisfied with God. What is marriage for? Marriage is for the glory of God and for human flourishing. I think the reason the answer to glorify God makes us feel insecure is a very old one. And if you go back to the story of the man and the woman in the garden, the serpent comes and says with respect to the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, You will not certainly die, the serpent said to the woman if they eat of it. For God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will be opened and you will be like God knowing good and evil. The idea is this, that the serpent plants a seed in the hearts of the man and the woman and fundamentally says, God is not really for you. God is holding out on you. God has some good he is reluctant to share with you. And for that reason he has put a prohibition in your life. And so what you really need to do is step over that prohibition and take it for yourself and then you will have happiness and self-fulfillment. What the serpent insinuated was that God was holding out on them and rather than finding happiness and fulfillment both within the physical and relational garden of God, they could instead appropriate the creation of God for their own happiness and fulfillment. From that moment forward we would identify everything powerful and important as a potential tool for us and our happiness and fulfillment. I remember living in the Dominican Republic and standing along the beach and a pelican flew by and I was standing there with a national, he was actually a Haitian national, living in the Dominican Republic and the first question out of his mouth was, can I eat that? And I thought that summarizes who we are and what we do. We see a pelican and we are not stopped by its glory and ponder the strangeness of what a pelican really is and the glory that a pelican has, this hungry Haitian who, well the Dominican Republic in many ways, stripped bare of so many of its national resources by hungry people. And so the first thing he sees when he sees the bird is, can I eat it? I don't think you'd probably want to eat the pelican, but I suppose if I were hungry enough I would too. But this is in a sense what we've done with God's creation. This isn't just true of things and institutions, it also became especially true of people because people are the most powerful and important element of creation in our world. From that time on we began to love things and use people. Just this week on the Huffington Post, a blog, is it time to change our views of adultery in marriage? And a lot of the current conversation about marriage essentially says many of the things she says there. It's unreasonable to enter into an imagined permanent relationship with someone because we live longer and we grow old and you know, Luce Meads had a great line about this. Luce Meads was a Christian teacher and a philosopher and he taught at Fuller Seminary and at Calvin College for years. He stood up in front of a church group and said, I've been married, my wife has slept with five different men in her life. Everybody stops and thinks, what kind of place is this for a confession like that? And then he said, all of them were me. Because the truth is, if you're married not just one or two years, but five years, ten years, fifteen years, twenty-five years, forty years, fifty years, people change dramatically physically, emotionally, personality-wise. Can you possibly imagine being happy with the same person for decades? And so this particular blogger says, maybe marriage should just be for a limited time only. And once both parties decide, this no longer works for me, everyone should just say, okay, I'll be done now. When I read articles like this, I think, do these people not know anybody? Because I see people split up all the time and it's very seldom both sides coming to the moment where both sides say, okay, I don't want to be with you anymore, no hard feelings. Really? And what do the children have to say? Both sides in the marriage wars point finger at one another. One side says, your traditionalist strategies won't work at making marriage give individual happiness and fulfillment. And you can't follow your own rules anyway. Christian people and non-Christian people stray out of marriage, commit adultery, abuse, divorce. And so traditionalists look at Christians and say, it doesn't work. And you know what? They're right. It doesn't work. I read a lot of Christian material that says things like, well, if you save yourself and if you marry someone in the Lord, then everything will be wonderful. And I think, that's not true. I see it fail all the time. But I have to be equally honest with the other side and say, you're chaotic, anything-go approach defies God's law and makes a mess of community in people's lives. I know friends that they're not Christian and they decided they were going to be above it all and nice to each other, so one just wanted to go and seek her own way. And the other finally said, okay, I won't be ugly or fight you anymore. But did the children find this new process of self-discovery in their interest? I don't think it works either way. And I think the reason isn't necessarily in the institutions. The reason is us. These are how people fail. Marriage, no marriage, any configuration. In fact, marriage increasingly looks kind of like a battlefield in World War I, where you've got both sides dug in on trenches and they're all imagining, now how can we get up over the top and take this next trench and prove ourselves to be right? And they shell and they shoot and they fight and all that's left on the field is mud and blood. And so I know you might be saying, well, pastor, I thought this sermon was supposed to be about you shall not commit adultery. We want you to either, one side wants me to stand up and shell the other side, and the other side wants me to stand up and shell the traditionalists or whatever the new group wants to call themselves. And the truth is, many of you have ideas formed in your mind and no amount of shelling from the one side or the other are going to change your thoughts. And I think we're better off discussing what's been me the whole thing. I know one group likes to talk about, and I hear this sometimes and I smile, it's church things. They say, well, biblical marriage. And I think, I read the Bible all the time. And you're pretty hard pressed to find a really good marriage in the Bible. You know, you want a marriage like Abraham's? Well, he had Sarah, but then there was that whole Hagar episode and, you know, is that what you're proposing? Or a marriage like David? Well, good brief look at David, that was a mess. And Jesus and Paul both stayed single. And when you hear some of the things Jesus and Paul says about singleness, you might have questions. In fact, after Jesus talks about marriage, at one point, his disciples well up and say, then who should marry? Who could marry? Because the standard was so high. You should not commit adultery. The command that we have in the Ten Commandments addressed a Bronze Age world. And quite literally in that command, what it was fundamentally saying was, if you're a man, you cannot sleep with another married woman. But if you're a man, you can sleep with pretty much any other unmarried woman who is willing to sleep with you, and then she becomes your wife. And to the women it said basically, if you're not married, you can take a man. But if you are married, you'd better stay put. Modern egalitarians find these offensive, and the conversation then usually goes to male power and male privilege. But if you look at the commandments, and you ask the questions of power, and broader questions of power, you begin to see that, yes, power has a lot to do with it, but power is not always bad. Andy Krauss just recently wrote a very interesting book talking about power, and he said, you know, we often look at power as bad, but actually power is a gift. And how we see God using power is for human flourishing. And we use power often to make idols, which is we take a good thing, we try and make it into an ultimate thing, and we try to build our identity upon it. When we act like false gods, we create injustice. But the law was given to curb the use of unjust power. Even if you read that Old Testament set of laws that likely no one in this room would try to justify, what you begin to see is that the laws were given to protect women. Because in fact, in that patriarchal society, if you were a woman, and you had very few legal rights, you could in fact, you were subject to abuse by men with power. And the truth is, it's not just in the ancient world that men value women for their looks and their ability to reproduce, and women value men for their status and their money. That picture of Donald Trump and his new baby with his new wife, I think that picture just says it all. I saw it and I posted it on Facebook because I thought, I can't think of a better picture. And I just have to ask the Donald, do you love people or do you use them? What does it mean for you to love your wife? What does it mean for you to love the wife you had before the newer, younger, hotter model? And the children you had before this new proud little baby you hold in your arms? Beneath this conversation, we have to ask real questions about whether in fact we really love people, or whether in fact we want to use them. And to what end? One of the most important passages I'm doing Isaiah in the Sunday School class comes from Isaiah 5. I will sing for the one I love a song about his vineyard. My loved one had a vineyard on a fertile hillside. He dug it up and cleared it of stones and planted it with the choicest vines. He built a watch tower in it and cut out a wine press as well. Then he looked for a crop of good grapes, but it yielded only bad fruit. This is an Old Testament parable about what God wants from the world. And it was a parable to Israel about what God wanted from Israel. And he said, I looked for justice and saw bloodshed. I looked for wholeness and saw cries of distress. And I think that's in fact what our experience of marriage has been in this world. We look for love and we find conflict. We look for flourishing and too often we find cries of distress. What marriage does, however, is turn a stranger into a family member. Stephanie Koontz wrote a very interesting history of marriage in which she goes through the long history of marriage as an anthropologist and asks the final question with all of its permutations in human history. What is really at the heart of the marriage relationship? Not in the Christian world, but in the universal world because marriage is actually a universal institution. And the most universal thing she could come up with is that only in marriage can you make a stranger family. It turns someone with whom we don't share a direct genetic link into a family member and together the man and the woman ideally have the capacity to create a living being that in their very body represents this unity. This morning, or maybe yesterday, Mary put a picture of herself and her mother up on Facebook when Mary was young, probably even a little younger than Viv. And I saw that picture and I looked at that picture knowing that that was a picture of Mary and knowing Luke and knowing Viv said, my goodness, how much of Mary isn't in her children? And then Ben was saying, yeah, when Luke was born, he was practically indistinguishable from pictures of me when I was a baby. And of course we know this, we see this with each other, we look at children and we look at parents and we say, wow, how do they follow suit so closely? Well, amazingly, Mary and Ben's children are part of Ben and part of Mary. This is a truly audacious gift. Marriage is the best societal and spiritual context for that incredible gift. Marriage is the place where social story embodies the story of the genes. It is the place where the stories are supposed to come together and to full flourishing, where a new story together with a new being goes out to be fruitful and multiply and fulfill the earth. Each marriage is a pre-echo of a new creation. In this broken world, however, new genetic beings are brought into the world without the context that mirrors their genetic creation. We seek out all sorts of ways to catch up or remedy or just to do the best we can in this world of failed promises and debt. When Jesus says God hates divorce, it is because God wishes that all stories bear the fruitful potential within them and every divorce is either a failure or a witness to failures in other places. Adultery is the breaking of the covenant. Divorce is the torn fabric of a story that should have brought joy and flourishing, just as Adam's blaming Eve is the torn fabric of the future of his joyful song in Genesis 2. Andrew Root wrote a book, The Children of Divorce. Andrew Root was a, he was a youth pastor, and he tells the story, he had just married his wife and as they were about to leave on the honeymoon, he got the news from his parents that they were splitting up. And he wrote the book to a certain degree about his experience of that. Here he was a young adult, he had just been married, his wife's parents had also been divorced, and he reflects poignantly on, in a strange way, how his parents' divorce threatened, in some ways, his ontological being. He wrote this for a Christianity Today article. I couldn't help feeling a shadow come over me. I looked at our family portrait hanging on the wall across from us and wondered if I might be disappearing. And I remember that scene in Back to the Future where, you know, Marty's trying to get his parents together, and when he fails to get his parents together, he's dissolving. I glanced at my hand wondering if I was becoming translucent, like Marty did. My parents' impending divorce made me feel thin, as if now that my parents' marriage was disappearing, the divorce was becoming our shared identity. I, too, was disappearing. It seems that my sermon schedule always falls in strange ways with the Hallmark calendar. Why should we talk about adultery on Mother's Day? We live in this broken world, where on one hand, we have just seemingly at our grasp these dreams and hopes of flourishing and fulfillment and security that all of our hearts long for. But we never quite attain them, do we? All motherhood usually has some joy and some grief. All marriage has promise and brokenness. And the story of humanity is that we grasp for what we cannot secure. And our failure is our grief. But the story of the Bible is actually about God's bad marriage. Both Old Testament and New Testament writers repeatedly relate God's relationship to us like a marriage, a very shaky one, with adultery, betrayal, abandonment, and a whole lot more. But often in the Old Testament, we find the Lord, through the prophets, crying out about his wife. She's sleeping under every tree. She's sleeping with the neighbor's husband. I want to divorce her and send her away, but I can't. What can I do with this impossible marriage? So God sends his son to live with his abusive wife. And she does what we would fear she would do. And Jesus rips on the Isaiah parable. But when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, This is the heir. Come let us kill him and take his inheritance. So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. Also reading Barbara Eynon Erring Wright's very interesting book. She's a non-believer about these mystical experiences that she had as a child. She grew up in a terrible family with terrible dysfunction. At one point, her mother accuses her of sleeping with her father, nothing of which had happened. And she reflects on family with this statement, which I thought was one of the most insightful lines about family I had ever read. The problem with families is not that you get stuck in the same persona for life, which is what everyone complains about, but that you're always getting confused with someone else and end up taking the blame for that. You may make yourself a freestanding individual, a unique point of consciousness in the universe, but in many ways you are just something for absent family members or for departed ancestors. You see that in your family? Adultery is the great thing of bonds, as common as anger and hatred that we saw in murder last week. God in his bad marriage sends us his son, and he slips into our role in the family and takes the blame for his mother. By his death, we are forgiven for what we've done in this relationship. By his life, the new creation is inaugurated. We are invited back into the home and asked to begin the relationship again, now living out of love rather than usage. What is marriage for? Marriage is for glory, and marriage is for flourishing of human community, which always includes individuals. But if you go into it, or if you try to survive it, thinking, I'm going to get out of this happiness and self-fulfillment, maybe you'll get some, but that's not really what it's for. Ask your kids if you have some. Marriage is designed to inhibit us from loving things and using people, because we naturally get into marriage thinking, this person will make me happy. And then within a few years, they get off of that program because they've really been in the program of making themselves happy, and the two of you have to confront each other in what you really wanted and who you really are. Marriage is intended to help us grow beyond ourselves, so that we get beyond facile self-love and learn to actually love another human being, not for what they can do for us, but even simply for themselves. This is, at our core, the kind of love that all of us want. We wish not to be loved for whatever fine attributes we may have that may benefit the other, but to be loved for ourselves. Only within this kind of covenantal love that we are so batting, and that God is so determined with, do we actually arrive in this place. The Gospel story of humanity is in fact a love story. The story of God's difficult marriage, in which we regularly betray the qualities that might make us useful to Him. In His determined love, He woos us to fully love Him freely, allowing these qualities to finally emerge and into a new, undetailable world where they go further up and further in to endless lengths of joy. I doubt any of your marriages finally reach that crescendo, but I believe the one who calls us into a communal marriage with Him will bring us exactly there. Let's pray. Lord, we are adulterers. We use each other, we cheat on you, and it's almost always a bad idea, but we do it anyway. And what we make of this world is a place where it's so absolutely common to love things and use people that none of us bat an eye when we see it happening. And what you wish to do is to draw us into real relationships with real people where we have to confront our selfishness and our habit of using others, and where we have to actually begin to learn to love one another. Lord, I know this doesn't actually require a marriage, but marriage is a special place in which this and other things go on. I believe, Lord, that it's by your Holy Spirit that our hearts begin to turn from self-love to the capacity to love another. So I ask, Lord, that you give us your Spirit to give us a holy restlessness with our own selfishness and to turn us towards each other and to teach us to love even at our own expense. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand? Amen.