https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=e8eM3zjH0sc

 Last week were the Academy Awards. I usually don't watch the Academy Awards, they go on and on forever and ever. But, usually just casting speeches, and usually some of the speeches, travel news. And this year, there are a number of speeches that caught a lot of attention. The Academy Awards speeches usually follow a rather predictable script. First they act surprised, and then they act humble, and then they tell everyone they want to thank, and then sometimes at the end, they give their little shield for their little cause. This year, Graham Moore basically told everyone to be weird, because he talked about a dark time in his life, and he was suicidal, felt very outside everyone. And now, he's standing up on the stage. And so he said, if you're weird, just stick to it, and someday you'll stand where I stand. Patricia Arquette's speech about equal rights for women and income inequality was also caught the news, and quite a bit of pushback. Here, Meryl Streep and Jennifer Lopez are cheering her on. The most articulate was given by Common and John Legend about civil rights movements and continuing to move on. Now, generally speaking, these speeches are promoting good things. We shouldn't ostracize people because they're different. People should receive equal pay for equal work. And the world is unjust, and things are not the way they're supposed to be, and we should continue to work to change these things. But I listen to these speeches, and I think, okay, I know a lot of weird people. Sometimes being weird is just being weird. And truth be told, I think most of these weird people are never going to get to stand on stage and receive an Oscar and receive all the adulation of this man. Some folks just lack social skills. The income inequality conversation was interesting, too, because here you had all these fabulously rich people declaring this, and maybe Patricia Arquette, having only a net worth of $24 million, was feeling poor in this neighborhood, because her co-star, Susan Hawke, has a net worth of $45 million. Meryl Streep, who stood up and gave her a standing ovation, has a net worth of $65 million, and Jennifer Lopez sitting next to her has a net worth of $300 billion. And of course, all of them are dwarfed by Oka Whitree, who has a net worth of $3 billion. And if you're wondering, the median net worth in North America, in the United States, is $44,000, which makes Oprah a map twice, or ten times, or a hundred times, or 10,000 times, and makes her 68,000 times more wealthy than the average American. And so I listen to that and I think, you're going to make a speech here about poverty and wealth? And the conversation about justice, which we've tended to have throughout our culture, most people can agree that, on justice, as some kind of an abstract term, but when we get particular, everyone, it seems, claims victim status. Common one ought to say, God is in all of us. Okay. But then why, in fact, are we so bad to each other? That means that God is in the worst oppressors too. And what about the people who say they are no God? Should they get justice too, or do they understand justice? The consistent social Darwinian will say, the strong will inherit the earth. And if you look around the Oscars, you would have to say, yeah, the strong, the healthy, the wealthy are pretty much on top. And they're running the most exclusive party in America right now. For a century, Jews knew all of these concerns, quite frankly. Jews, if you're looking for a group of people that have been a perpetual victim almost throughout history, Jews are a really good candidate. In the ancient world, they were religiously weird as monotheists. They didn't tend to participate in the pagan temples in the Roman Empire. They didn't tend to assimilate the gods of their surrounding neighbors. They were economically exploited by just about every stronger nation around them. And they have a proud record of declarations on justice, but most of that was put against their own kings, who were notoriously unjust in many ways. Now one of the interesting things that I noticed about all of these speeches at the Oscars was they all had a path to salvation that pretty much looked the same. And it kind of goes like this. First of all, take the stage. Why all of the Oscar candidates feel the need, after they act humble, act surprised, say thank you to everyone, to take that moment to then push their cause to these people who are on the television and in the newspapers, whether or not they want to be, lack opportunities to make public statements. But it seems that while we've got 35 million people watching on TV, let me grow all my thoughts. So take the stage, declare a glorious vision, make your demands clear, amass power, political, economic, military, people power, and then use that power to achieve your goals, often at the expense of your adversaries and their agenda. If you listen carefully to people talking in the public world today, almost everyone has an idea about how to make the world better. A lot of these ideas are true and good. But the method that everyone chooses to make the world better follows this same script. I was thinking about this this morning and thinking about all the revolutions we saw in the Arab Spring and how, oh, people power is going to make life better. Two, three years later, the people who left their shack to go protest went back to their shack. It was usually just the elites that kind of moved the chairs around. And in fact, if you go back and looking at revolutions in the past, this is pretty much the way it is. Even the American Revolution, you think about the American Revolution, and we often think of that in pretty bloaty terms. If only there were a country also in North America, also founded by Britain, that didn't have a revolution. Didn't we see that our situation is quite different from their situation? Look at Canada. You have to say, kind of 200-some years later, the American Revolution made a lot of difference. I don't know. Even the Civil War that freed the slaves, most of the slaves, the initial jubilation. Oh, we're free! And then they began to look around and said, we're free to starve. And slavery was followed by Jim Crow. It was followed by another hundred years of oppression. And in fact, those situations continue. So these revolutions that are supposed to make everything better usually don't really fulfill all its promise. This morning we get to the part of the story where Jesus asks his disciples, after he's been doing miracles in the Galilee, after a lot of people have expressed their interest in Jesus, after he's taken the stage and gotten a lot of attention, and even the other political actors around him are thinking, boy, if he really wanted to advance these people, this people power, if he really wanted to gain an army, Jesus is in a real great position to do it. And so Jesus says to his disciples, as they raked into the villages around Caesarea and Philippi, on the way he asked them, who do people say I am? They replied, some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and still others one of the prophets. And Jesus says, but what about you? Peter, who many times is the spokesman for the group, probably the eldest, says, you're the Messiah! And they're all feeling quite optimistic and positive about the direction that this new Jesus thing has taken. Jesus has gathered great crowds and Jesus has a lot of popular support. And so Peter and the disciples are thinking, this is the new Messiah. This guy is going to bring real change. This guy has power, we've seen it in his miracles. This guy can speak to a crowd and they love him and they follow him. This is a wave that's going to ride us all the way into power. Jesus warned them not to tell anyone about him. And right away we get the first sense that something is different in Jesus' way. Because everybody in Hollywood wants us to retweet and post on Facebook their video of their little speech and their little agenda. But Jesus says, this Messiah thing, keep it down. Why? Because everybody has an idea about how this is supposed to work. Everybody has this idea. Jesus continues, This is one of, I think, the most illuminating stories in the history of the world. This is one of, I think, the most illuminating stories in the Gospel. Because Peter has just finished saying, you're the Messiah who's going to set everything right and tell us how to live it. And you're going to make everything right. And then Jesus says, okay, this is how it's going to go. And Peter says, now cut that out. Isn't this what we all do with God? Don't we say, Lord, you know everything. You have all power. Here's the script. And so Peter, Jesus, disciples have complained, you're always talking in parables. You're always saying things we don't understand. So Jesus says, you want to know the future? Here it is. And Peter says, the word here too, in Greek, is very strong one. Basically, in some ways, I love how we also say, before we say something offensive, we say, with all due respect, which is supposed to somehow wash everything that comes after it. So Peter, in a sense, says, Jesus, with all due respect, shut up. This is not the plan. Then Jesus looked at his disciples. Now notice the staging of this. So Peter takes him over and says, basically, Jesus, you've got to stop this death and dying thing. Jesus pulled it back amongst the disciples. Now he's going to publicly rebuke Peter. He rebuked Peter. Get behind me, Satan. He just called his number one in command, Satan. He said, you do not have in mind the concerns of God, but merely human concerns. Now I think the NIV does a disservice with this translation, because in the Greek, basically, Jesus is saying, Peter, you're looking at this from the eyes of humanity. You are standing, in a sense, on the Oscar stage and saying, I know how to fix the world. Let's fix it this way. So, but the implicit thing is, let's get everyone to agree, and I want you to all Facebook, send this to your friends on Facebook, and then we'll raise some money, and we'll start an organization, and we'll get a group together, and whether we vote people out of office or run people out of office with guns, or however we do one way or another, this is our agenda, and we're going to re-cape the world. And Peter says, you have the things of humanity in mind. You're approaching us like people. You're not approaching us like God. I would imagine if Peter could take back, take a step back from the shock of his rebuke and say, I don't like how God runs the world. Ah, well, now we're at the heart of it. Now Jesus not only rebukes Peter in front of his disciples, but takes another step back and addresses the entire crowd. And he calls the crowd to him. Along with his disciples it said, whoever wants me to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me. For whoever wants to take their, now this is a Greek word here, the word is psyche in Greek, and it can be translated soul, it can be translated life, it can be translated self. Whoever wants to save their self will lose it. But whoever loses their self for me and for the Gospel will save it. For what good is it if someone gains the whole world and then forfeits their self? Or can anyone give an exchange for their self? If anyone is ashamed of me and my words and this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will be ashamed of them when he comes in his father's glory with the angels. Now this business about being ashamed is really important here because it has everything to do with what he's saying about the cross. Now what's difficult about this passage for us here is so many of us have heard this verse so many times that the shock of it is blunted. You see, Jesus in fact uses the cross because the cross is the failed symbol of Messiahship. The cross is the absolute failure of this implicit agenda that everyone in the world has had. In fact there have been many Messiahs who have in fact been crucified by the Romans and Jesus says, I too will be crucified. But the disciples are like, you're giving up the game right here. The cross is the catastrophe of Jewish nationalism on the Roman stage. The cross is exactly opposite to what Peter and his disciples think will save the world. And the cross is where Jesus must go and where he invites his disciples to follow. It's as if Graham Moran has said, be mean to the weird so that they'll stop. Or if Patricia Arquette has said, a woman should only make half of what a man makes because she's a woman. Or if John Legend and Common has said, oh just go ahead and oppress those black folks. They don't know anything. Everyone in the room would have gasped. They would have called them traitors. They would have said, you're letting down the cause. This is exactly what Jesus says to his disciples. And they're in shock. See, this is the, if you read the Bible and you learn about Jesus from the Bible, this is a fact that most of us fail to appreciate. If you go out there and tell your friends who don't go to church or maybe even are anti-religious, if you talk about Jesus, they'll say, oh Jesus was a nice man, a moral teacher, and he was kind to people who were oppressed. Well, this is true. But if you read the text, Jesus frustrated his disciples and he infuriated the other people around him to the extent that they in fact killed him. That is the reaction people had to Jesus, to think Jesus, oh Jesus is just nice and kind and always agrees with me. Read the book. In fact, Jesus in many ways is anti-revolution. And this continues on through his disciples. In a tyrannical empire worse than the U.S. government, you have people complaining about the U.S. government from both sides, okay. But do you think the Roman emperor was any better than this? The Roman emperor did what he wanted, period. In a tyrannical empire worse than any U.S. government, Peter and Paul will say, obey the rulers and pray for them. And Peter and Paul will lose their lives at loose hand? This government is telling everyone to obey. In a world where the Roman head of the household is in dictatorial power, Paul says, submit to your husbands as to the Lord. If you listen to this today, it's like, that's horrible. And in a world of slavery, Peter and Paul say, obey your masters as to the Lord. And everybody says, we can't get rid of this. What on earth do they mean? See, the Christian faith says some things that are very strange. You see, in the ancient world, your status was determined by your birth. If you were born to a wealthy family, you had wealth. If you were born to a politically powerful family, you had power. If you were born to a family of poverty, you were poor. There you were. It's a good thing today that those things are no longer true, right? I mean, if you're born to a wealthy family, what? You're wealthy. If you've got the last name of Bush or Clinton or Kennedy, what? Status. You have status. Look at most of these people in this picture. You know, if you ever actually look at who Hollywood people are, some of them broke into the business because they look like Brad Pitt. But Angelina Jolie, anybody know who her father is? John Boyd. See, if you get old enough, and I'm just 50, so I'm still young, but some of you folks know better, you say, these are the kids and the grandkids of the wealthy and the powerful. In other words, even though in America we say, well, everybody's equal. Really? Are these people equal? The Gospel says you are united with Christ. Christ gives you new birth. Now, we all hear that and we think, well, that's kind of an interesting idea, new birth. Jesus tells Nicodemus, you are born from above. Peter tells the Christians he writes to, you are given new birth in Christ. Now, when the ancient heard that, they said, Now, I was born to a poor woman in a hut, but now I have new birth from Christ, which means I have a new status, which means Christ gives me his status, which means I am now a child of the king. I have a different status from God. I have an inheritance. You find this all the time in the New Testament. You have an inheritance laid out in the New Testament. You find this all the time in the New Testament. You have an inheritance laid out in the heavenlies for you. And when the ancients heard this, they said, because when I think about the inheritance I'll receive from my real parents, well, maybe it'll be something, maybe they won't. I don't know. But you will inherit the earth. And so Christians began to believe by what Christ has done to them. I am a new creation. I have an inheritance. I have a new birth. I am born from above. I am God's child and heir of the kingdom. Now, when we hear this, we begin to think, Oh, I want to use this new status the way these people use their status. How many of you went to the Oscars? You watched it on TV. Did you get a chance to go down to LA and get in that room? No, I'm not talking about it. I've been to a lot of the movies as well. Okay. Do you think they let you in if you went down to the theater? I mean, how do you speak other languages? Because, yeah, they might have let me. And this is just the point. We're not getting in that room. None of us. We can watch it on TV and we can clap and we can be their fans. But this is as close as we're getting. This is the way the world works. But Christ says, you have a new status. But then he goes on to say something really unusual. He says, with your new status, you will have a new life. Don't act like them. This is what your status should do. Act like Christ. Who being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage. Now, let's say you have good friends in the Hollywood community and you have good friends among those people. Let's say you were Oprah's friend. Why does everyone want to be Oprah's friend? Stop! Job? I mean, she gives cars away to the studio audience, for peace sake. And it doesn't impact her a bit. To be Oprah's friend would mean access and opportunity. And what Jesus says is, you are now a friend of God's. You think, yeah, but I'd rather be a friend of Oprah's. I'd get more from that. But Jesus says, I'm a God. Who being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage. Rather, he made himself nothing. By taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness, and being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death. Even death on a cross. Jesus says, embrace your cross. What does that mean? It means embrace, necessarily, your own annihilation. In me. This is what Jesus does. If you try to save your psyche, if you try to save your soul, if you try to save yourself, if you try to save your life, it'll slip through your fingers. But, therefore, because Jesus becomes nothing for us, therefore God exalted him to the highest of the highest. God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name. That in the name of Jesus, every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory and God to the power. Jesus says, this is my way. And all the disciples are thinking, no, no, no, wait. You're supposed to kick out the Romans or be elected emperor or just be emperor and you're supposed to make all the... We want to be Oprah's friends. And Jesus says, no, you're going to be my friends. And I'm going to the cross and they're like, no, I want to be Oprah's friend. And Jesus says, if you try to be Oprah's friend, you will lose your life because, well, maybe you'll get to be a Kardashian. What this is, is the world's set right. The really generous Jesus, the really generous in Jesus' way will in fact be glorified before the Father and all the creation for the sacrifices for others that are not seen nor made sense of in the world. In other words, there's nobody weirder than Jesus. And he in fact is exalted. And the name of generosity is superseded by the competition. The name of equality is superseded by the competition of generosity. If you were a kid and you had a piece of pie and you had to split it with your sister, how did you make it fair? Did you say, oh, I'll cut it and then I'll put my heaps. Why? There's never equal cutting it. Oh, you're all equal. There's never equal. But the name of equality is superseded by the competition of generosity. And the quest of justice finds fulfillment not in demand, but in love. T.S. Lewis makes this point in a book on the Psalms. He gives an example of a young Marxist who was one of his students. I had a pupil who was certainly a socialist, probably a Marxist. In him, the collective, the state was everything. The individual, nothing. Freedom, a bush-log illusion. And he went down and became a schoolmaster. A couple of years later to be in Oxford, and he gave me a visit. He said he had given up socialism. He was completely disillusioned about state control. The interference of the Ministry of Education with schools and schoolmasters were, he had found, arrogant, ignorant, and intolerant. Sheer tyranny. I could make lots of this, and the conversation would not matter. Then suddenly the real purpose of the visit was revealed. He was so ground up, I have no idea what that meant. That he wanted to give up schoolmastering, and could I, and I mean influence, and I mean pull any wires for getting a job in of all places, the Ministry of Education. Oh, the Ministry of Education is evil. Can you get me a job there? And this is how we are. Oh, Oprah. Oh, Oprah. She's just all in it for the money. Do you know Oprah? Could I get a job with her? This is how we are. We are failed saviors. The weird will not inherit the earth. We just keep changing the labels. And if you're fashionably weird today, well, the world will applaud you. But we still have ins and outs. Equality is a game that never satisfies. We always feel ourself disadvantaged one way or another, or if we feel advantaged, we have the right to preserve it. So Jesus comes, and he says this. On the night he was betrayed. Did you hear that? He was betrayed. He took bread, and he broke it. And he didn't say, this is the body of those who stand against me. I'll crush my enemies. He said, this is my body, broken for my enemies, and my friends. Whenever you eat this, remember me. This is the meal he starts. Because unlike everyone else in the world, who wants the power they don't have and desperately tries to keep the power they already possess, he had all power, and he gave it up for you. And so what this meal means is, you're not only embracing his gift to you, but you're embracing this way of life. The Bible says you're baptized into his death. And so if you've been baptized, this bread is for you. But when you take it, don't take it thinking, oh, now I'm going to get something from this. Take it knowing he gave everything for you. And what he's going from you is in fact to continue doing what he did. Giving himself for those who don't deserve. Giving himself for those who are in need. This is the meal he'd like to share with you. It's on the table for you. Thank you.