https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=B9ODXnxWUwE

 Religious liberty is one of the hottest topics that there is in our nation right now. In 2001, the Taliban, who were then ruling Afghanistan, dynamited two ancient statues built in the 7th century, two large Buddhas that were along the Silk Road, the ancient Silk Road through Afghanistan, and dynamited them. They dynamited them basically and said that they were idols and they should be destroyed as such, leaving them there with the courage and worship of them. They were a world antiquity site and most of the world protested, saying that whether or not whatever your religious convictions, these were significant cultural artifacts and they should be protected. ISIS has more recently been destroying artifacts in Syria and in Iraq and the areas that they control, and again, the world is disturbed. Why are they destroying these ancient artifacts? Are these things idols? Or do they have cultural or artistic value? After the Chattanooga shooting, Franklin Graham wrote this on his Facebook page, Four innocent marines killed and three others wounded in Chattanooga yesterday, including a policeman and another marine, all by a radical Muslim whose family was allowed to integrate to this country from Kuwait. We are under attack by Muslims at home and abroad. We should stop all integration of Muslims to the U.S. until this threat with Islam has been settled. Every Muslim that comes into this country has the potential to be radicalized and they do their killing to honor their religion and Muhammad. During World War II, we didn't allow Japanese to immigrate to America, nor did we allow Germans. Why are we allowing Muslims now? Do you agree? Let your Congressmen know that we've got to stop them. We've got to put a stop to this and close the blood games. That raised its own firestorm, especially the mention of the Japanese, considering what the United States did to the Japanese men and how many other camps from the G. Tell you that whole story from firsthand experience. So how do we guard religious liberty? Should we close the borders to Muslims and have a religion test on whether or not you can immigrate to the United States? Should we dynamite ancient Buddhas or other idols that were used with religious practices from today or in the past? Just recently, the Supreme Court decision on same-sex marriage has made a number of Christian and specifically evangelical colleges nervous because of the very real concern that these schools might have to change some of their behavioral policies with regard to faculty or staff or students. At the same time, we as a country have always, as a nation, valued religious liberty. We say that as this Norman Rockwell poster from World War II, each according to the dictates of his own conscience, right there where we say, by war bonds, isn't that what it means to be an Arab? So how do we answer these questions of religious liberty? This morning's text might make things even more complicated. When we read what God commands Israel to do through Moses and his swan song on the way to Israel, as I mentioned two weeks ago, if you read the book of Deuteronomy, you'll hear again and again, obey these laws. These are the decrees and laws you must be careful to follow in the land that the Lord, the God of your ancestors, has given you to possess, as long as you live in the land, destroy completely all the places on the high mountains, on the hills, and under every spreading tree, for the nations you are dispossessing worship their gods, break down their altars, smash their sacred stones, and burn their astral poles to the fire, cut down the idols of their gods, and wipe out their names from those places. You must not worship the Lord your God in their way, but you are to seek the place the Lord your God will show you from among all your tribes, to put his name there for his dwelling, to that place you must go. There bring your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes and your special gifts that you have vowed to give, and your free will offerings, and the first thorn of your herbs and your flocks. There is in the presence of the Lord your God, you and your family shall eat, and shall rejoice in everything you have put your hand to, because the Lord your God has blessed you. The Lord your God will cut off before you the nations you are about to invade and to dispossess, but when you are driven them out and settled in their land, and they have been destroyed before you, be careful not to be ensnared by inquiring about their gods, saying, how do these nations serve their gods? We will do the same. You must not worship the Lord your God in their way, because in worshiping their gods, they do all kinds of detestable things the Lord hates. They even burn their sons and daughters in the fire as sacrifices to their gods. And then jumping to chapter 13, if a prophet or one who foretells by dreams appears among you and announces to you a sign or a wonder, and if the sign or a wonder spoken of takes place, and the prophet says, let us follow other gods, gods you have not known, let us worship them, you must not listen to the words of that prophet or dreamer. The Lord your God is telling you to find out whether you love him or with all your heart and with all your soul. The Lord God is testing you to find out whether you love him with all your heart and with all your soul. It is the Lord your God you must follow, and he you must revere. Keep his commands and obey him. Serve him and hold him hold fast to him. That prophet or dreamer must be put to death for inciting rebellion against the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt as he redeemed you from the land of slavery. That prophet or dreamer tried to turn you from the way that the Lord your God commanded you to follow. He must purge the evil from among you. If your very brother or your son or daughter or wife you love or the closest friend secretly entices you, say, let us go and worship other gods, gods that neither you nor your ancestors have known, gods of the peoples around you whether near or far, from one end of the land to the other. Do not yield to them or listen to them. Show them no pity. Do not spare them or shield them. You must certainly put them to death. Your hand must be first in putting them to death. And then the hands of all the people. Stole them to death because they tried to turn you away from the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt out of the land of slavery. Then all Israel will hear and be afraid and no one among you will do such an evil thing again. What do you do with that? You know, a lot of times Christians kind of read the parts of the Bible they like for devotions. And these parts of the Bible, these are the ones your atheist friends are reading and saying, you still read that Bible? What do you do with this passage? Well, that's why I preach on that. One of the answers that we tend to instinctively give in our culture is really the progressivist answer. We say, oh, we don't do that anymore. That's barbaric and we are civilized. But the question is going to answer, well, isn't it still your Bible? How do you interpret it? How do you understand it? You can't just simply say, well, I believe in the Bible and then read a passage of the Bible. You can't just simply say, well, I believe in the Bible and then read a passage like this and just say, oh, well, we don't do that anymore. What really does the calendar have to do with it anyway? The irony in this is also that there are lots of things that we do that the ancients would look at and say, well, you guys are barbaric. Why on earth would you take all of your seniors and send them off to live in some strange building somewhere to be cared for by strangers? We love our parents and care for them in their old age. We moderns would look at them and say, oh, what do we do with that? Well, and I know that there are plenty who might say, well, see, this is the reason that we should act like the Taliban or like ISIS and we should take back our nation. Now, few you will find saying we should kill those who don't believe as we do. Yeah, the questions are going to be how does a Christian read Deuteronomy 12 and 13? Well, there are a number of things we should say right off the bat that we read this chapter and we read Deuteronomy in the context of the entire Bible. Part of the things that we notice right away is that Israel failed these laws. Israel not only failed to live up to them, but failed to embody them and embody what the laws were attempting to do. One of the things that's clear about this passage is that as the children of Israel are moving out of the desert into the promised land, one of the things God wants for them is to have them stop having their own little personal altars all over the place and have some degree of centralized teaching, centralized worship and have one place where they all will worship. And what this affords is that they then will have some hope of not having everyone believe any old thing of whatever pops into their mind. Yet centralized temple worship in Israel very quickly became corrupted. On Palm Sunday, Jesus symbolically destroys, fulfills and replaces the temple itself. And Jesus in fact was a religious outsider to which this stoning and these kinds of laws intended to kill. So in other words, if we're reading Deuteronomy as a Christian, we have to read it as a Christian. And not just read a passage like this and imagine we're viewing God as God is talking to Israel in its cultural context. I know that's difficult for some people, but in a passage like this, most of us don't stand up and say, my neighbor doesn't go to church. I'm going to die by his house. That's just not how we do things. But we should have an understanding of why we don't do things that way. What's important to notice that in this text is concerning questions of toleration of other religions, toleration of individual worship practice of the Lord. You notice that many times that, for example, when we meet Abraham in the Old Testament, Abraham doesn't have the temple to worship God at. Abraham worships God in a sense in the way that all of the other pagans were worshiping their gods. So here in this step, God is trying to take Israel a step in the right direction by saying, we're going to stop everyone just kind of worshiping God as they choose and bring some order to this. And so there's the creation of a centralized worship space. But we will notice that in Christian history, these iconoclastic movements have developed. In the Protestant period, in fact, a lot of Roman Catholic statuary was destroyed. And if you look at this sanctuary, within our tradition, we don't have statues or things on the wall that are necessary that someone might say, well, that's an idol or someone might be drawn to worship it. In fact, if we look at this text and we see that, in fact, God wanted Israel to have a centralized worship experience and that's centralized worship teaching, we might notice that denominations themselves fail the test of this passage. In denominations, what we tend to have is we think this way about God. They think that way about God. They have their doctrines over here. We have our doctrines over here. So denominations, in fact, fail the test of Deuteronomy 12 and 13. And in fact, after the Protestant Reformation, in the Protestant Reformation, we began a tradition that said every Christian should read their Bible. Well, you know what happens when you start doing that? Everyone does start reading their own Bible. And what do they discover? Well, I think the Bible says this. Well, I think the Bible says this. Well, I think the Bible says this. Well, can the Bible say one thing to all of us? Or are we offering just to read the Bible and draw our own interpretations and worship God in our own way depending on how we read the Bible? You see, these issues in Deuteronomy 12 are not just questions about, should we dynamite Buddhist statues? They're questions about how do we as a community worship together and read the Bible together and try to come to understanding and agreement together with respect to what God wants? And if there's anything you notice about being in church, this is a very difficult thing. Because if I were to hand, if I were to put a photocopy of the Bible passage and hand it out and say, Explain to me what this passage says. Depending on what Bible verse I give you, we might get just about as many interpretations as we have people in this kingdom. What does that mean in terms of our worship of God? To make it further complicated, in our culture we have this idea that religion is private. So in other words, whatever God feels God's saying to me is what I should do and whatever you feel God's saying to you is what you should do. Now that's a nice theory in practice, but as it tends to work out, it gets even more complicated because what I believe you might be doing is wrong and what you believe I might be doing is wrong and doing just that as a community say, everyone does whatever they want to do. We say, well that's okay for some things, but that's not okay for other things. And off we go. So in a secular state, religious beliefs become private. Moral arguments are imagined to be the domain of personal experience. Many Christians say, going to church doesn't make me a Christian. I don't need a church to have a personal relationship with Jesus. Well if you read Deuteronomy 12 and 13, God pretty clearly says to the Israelites, you should come and worship me in one space, in one way, as one people. To have an ancient Hebrew say, well I have a personal relationship with Yahweh so I don't need to go to the temple. The rest of the Hebrews would look at him and say, what does that mean? That makes no sense. Then of course there's the contemporary trap of spiritual but not religious. Well I believe God is a universal spirit that's moving through all kinds of living things and there are, what are they, Mitochloria in our VMA. If in fact you go to Google and type in Jediism, there is in fact churches in the United Kingdom and New Zealand where you can go to the Church of the Jedi. And you can take your theology from Star Wars. There's also in Detroit this, a couple of weeks ago, they put up a statue with a goat head from the Temple of Satan. And if you Google the Temple of Satan you will learn that these people actually don't believe in Satan. They're just basically making the claim. Religious matters are private. Everyone should believe what they want to and the government should stay out of it. Huge questions revolve around these things. But then the questions remain, what are God's concerns? If in fact a God exists, if in fact this God has ideas about how he would like to be worshiped, if in fact this God makes claims and demands on us, then those claims and demands aren't simply private feelings. I've used this example before. Mori has appeared today but I'll pick our man. If we would like to imagine that Mori Roos is a young African American woman, I suppose we are all free to imagine Mori as a young African American woman, but Mori Roos actually exists in reality and he's not a young African American woman. He's an 80 year old American man of Dutch descent. He exists in reality. And what God asks is that if we're actually going to have a personal relationship with him and not simply have an imaginary relationship with an imaginary friend or an imaginary God, it's going to mean something about what we do and what we try to reach out to do. See, private religions get shallow, imaginary, petty, and even dangerous. What if you want to be a member of the Church of the Jedi? As a culture we would say, as long as you don't hurt anybody. Okay, but what are you really looking for from a religion? If you believe that there really is no God or if you believe that God is indifferent and you believe that religion is really an imaginary thing, imaginary stories I just tell myself to make myself feel better, well, there you have it. But if in fact there is a God and if in fact he can be known and if in fact he has made a way for himself to be known, what do you need to do to know him? And how does that impinge on your own religious liberty? Private religion takes God out of public justice conversations. When we say black lives matter, why? I was having a Facebook discussion about abortion and one of my friends basically said, well I think only people with personal experience should talk about this thing. I said, what about black lives matter? Should only people with personal experience talk about that? You see, part of what gets figured into this is public justice. Why is it wrong to treat African Americans as second class citizens? It isn't right for me and wrong for you. It isn't right for these cops and wrong for other cops. We very clearly say that it is wrong, period. It is publicly wrong. And I think as Christians we would say it is publicly wrong because African Americans are image bearers of God. We would have a similar argument with respect to abortion. We would say, what is the status of that unborn child? Is, ought we to call that an unborn child? Ought we to call it the product of conception? All of these arguments are difficult. But they ask us to have a public justice perspective. The other thing is you cannot build a community. I'm trying to religion. If you go home and you have your own special books and you have your own little corner of your house where you devote yourself to God as you imagine it, well you'll be just fine with your own little corner. But does that God exist beyond you? Can you in fact have a community with which to talk about this God? Can you worship together? Can you share with one another? The most behind this passage in Deuteronomy is not simply, let's dynamite Buddhist statues or let's keep out Muslims or let's figure out who to kill in our neighborhood because they're looking for the wrong God. A lot of questions intersect with this chapter. And when God is asking Israel, saying basically, y'all have been doing lots of different things. I want you to stop and I want your religious life to actually have an objective component. I want you to, when you relate to me as God, honor my existence and not imagine that just because you feel a certain way is necessarily how I feel. This is in fact the difference between a real relationship with a real person and a romantic relationship that is of your imagination. Two people get married and begin to live together. What do they discover? Reality that someone else is making decisions. And here's the question you need to have with respect to your God. Is your God real? Because if your God is real, he's not simply going to be the product of your own wishes, desires or fears. And so when God in Deuteronomy 12 and 13 asks Israel to start coming together and worshiping as a nation, he's basically saying, I am real and I'm not going to simply be a figment of a million different imaginations, even though a million people are in one way or another going to see me differently. Part of what we fear, however, is tyranny. Because we understand the power of religious tyranny. And we in the Western world have seen hundreds and hundreds of years of hatred and violence. It's part of the reason that when the United States got started, the founding fathers decided we would have separation from church and state because Europe had been fighting religious wars for hundreds of years. So we have a lot of new morals, so we have a lot of new moral ideas and feelings for which we are increasingly demanding, however, that the state be forced with coercive power. In other words, sometimes it's a religion that we want the state to enforce, but sometimes it's an ideology. And there might not be a religious idea behind it, but we as a nation all agree things should be that way. And then you have problems with religious or ideological minorities. This author brings this out in this particular blog post that came out this week. This brutality is fueled by a sense of absolute moral righteousness. This brutality is fueled by a sense of absolute moral righteousness and by complete contempt for anyone who doesn't immediately fall in lockstep with one's own convictions. Perhaps the greatest weakness of the left, and has been also true of the right, is the increasing reliance on bullying tactics in order to silence those who disagree or even those who simply don't understand. The righteous warrior, the justice of cause is so self-evident that the only possible reason for failing to believe in it are obstinacy, privilege, entitlement, stupidity, or simply evil. The irony is that the lack of compassion is often promulgated in the name of compassion. It's as though mercy were a stiff capitalist commodity, one over which different marginalized groups vie for a monopoly. The result is that the disadvantage and the lack of privilege become the kind of swag that people show off in ridiculous contests of intersectional one-upmanship. Not only does this make social justice look stupid, petty, and barbaric to people on the right, it also creates a toxic environment for anyone who wants to try to advocate for marginal groups. You have all these warring groups of downtrodden, politically disempowered people fighting amongst themselves for the biggest piece of victimless pie. And if someone with privilege, influence, or power tries to enter seat on their behalf, that person can basically expect to be torn to pieces for having the infratory to enjoy power, privilege, and influence. This is written by a blogger who lived a lesbian lifestyle for a while and now is living in a traditional heterosexual marriage by a Roman Catholic. It will give you a sense of where the span in our culture is. Well, what do we need to do with any of this? When I say you have to read Deuteronomy 12 and 13 as a Christian, I mean you have to understand Deuteronomy 12 and 13 through Jesus. You see, what the law wasn't able to do, which was actually to accomplish that which the law pointed to, Jesus fulfills and succeeds. Because what we find in Jesus is what we often see in the Christian church, or at least try to see in the Christian church, which is these two ideas coming together at once. Because on one hand, when Jesus comes, he is a real person with real identity, with real ideas and real commands about do this and don't do this. He's not simply the product of an individual person's imagination. On the other hand, Jesus can also understand that we all come to God from different places and we do have ideas and wishes and we are trying to figure these things out. So when Jesus, Jesus basically allows us to say two things at once. We must come to Jesus because he is the only place to find life and rescue from sin and death. But we are also asked to come to him freely and hopefully rather than out of fear or under legal duress. This is the only thing obviously the law can do. And so what we see in Jesus is on one hand, Jesus has more clear ideas, as many clear ideas as the law, but Jesus also loves sinners and Jesus also eats with sinners. And Jesus also understands that people often need a process to come into truth. That these ideas which we have sometimes need to get swagged and that this process takes sometimes a long time. I think the best way to illustrate it is an illustration that I'm borrowing from an English preacher about coconuts, tomatoes and pears. Now a coconut has a, how many of you have tried to open a coconut? Okay. Try to open a coconut sometime. It's hard. It's really hard. That shell is hard. And the point of a coconut is that churches are often like coconuts. And in fact sometimes ideological morality groups in our culture are kind of like coconuts. They are demanding on the outside and they are saying until and unless you comply and get all of these things straight, you cannot be a part of our community. Once you penetrate the community, there are good things inside, but we're hard on the outside. A tomato is not hard at all. A tomato is soft all the way through. You can squish a tomato. The good stuff is immediately accessible, but there's nothing substantive to it. A peach, however, is soft on the outside, but hard on the inside. The point that this preacher makes is that in fact a lot of communities are like coconuts. And the church shouldn't be. A church should not be hard to get into. It's absolutely okay for someone to come to church and probably be in a church for a long time and have a lot of wacky ideas about God, have a lot of theology which is really kind of misshapen and off track, and a lot of ideas which probably aren't very terribly coherent. That's okay in terms of where they are in the process. A church should not be a coconut by saying unless you get everything straight today, you're out. There are many ideological groups in our culture that are like that. Unless you believe all these things now, you're out. You're a bigot or you're intolerant or you're all these other things. That's the problem with a coconut. The problem with the tomato basically says believe anything you want. Well, believing anything really doesn't get you anywhere. Believing anything just kind of means you're going to be by yourself and you're going to live in whatever fantasy world you imagine for yourself. That's the tomato. The peach. This particular preacher said that makes a great illustration. It's more like Jesus. Jesus in a way was accessible. Jesus was soft on the outside. People could immediately see the value of Jesus. But Jesus wasn't like that tomato. Jesus had identity. Jesus had ideas. Jesus had commands. And Jesus lived them. Here's the misery. If God gave you his law today and said, Turner, fulfill my law right now or stay away from me, none of us could measure up. The second misery is that if your idea of God is only your little private idea of who God is, then you just have a god of your imagination. And that god will not actually let you connect with that god or live in community with others with that god. The third part is that that laws tend to yield curing. The deliverance of course is Christ himself. Because we could not keep the law. He fulfills the law, taking upon himself the penalty. How do you understand it? In Oromans 12 and 13, you understand it by seeing Jesus. You understand it by saying Jesus fulfills this law. He is both the centralized focus of worship and the one who understands that the bruised reed, he does not break and the smoldering wick, he does not snap out. Where does that leave us? What does God want? Why do you come to church? Why do you, each of us has a million different religious ideas and it doesn't take much if I could gather two or three of you in a conversation, put the right question in you, you'd square off and say you're wrong, you're wrong. Even in this little church. Why do we come together? Why do we believe there is a truth? Why do we believe Jesus is Lord of heaven and earth? Are we saying that? Why do we believe that even though we've got lots of differences, we still come together and we still seek him together and we still desire to have him be Lord of our lives? We do this out of gratitude. What God wants is for us to seek him and seek him alone, not a pride in mythology of wishes or fears. But what does Jesus understand? He understands that we are confused. And unclear about truth. He understands that we are half-hearted and sometimes not really loving him enough. And he understands that we are weak. And so this is the reason he saves us. And this is the reason the Christian church comes together. You can see it in what he does at his table. Because on the night he was betrayed. Now why do I say he was betrayed? Because one of his disciples who spent years with him had a difference with him. We're not sure what difference he had, but at one point he basically looked at Deuteronomy and said, Jesus deserves to die. And a lot of the people could agree with that. And they said, Jesus is not God. On the night he was betrayed, Jesus pates bread and he breaks it. And he says, this is my body. How do you understand what God has to say in Deuteronomy 12 and 13? We say, you're wrong, I'm going to condemn you for it. Jesus says, you're wrong, I will be condemned for you. How does that change the conversation? What we're doing with this meal is basically saying, Lord, we've got lots of ideas that are not right. We've got theology that not only doesn't honor you, it's just crazy. We have personal feelings and imaginations of who you are that surely don't connect with you or in accordance with you. But by virtue of the gift of your son, we trust you and we trust you alone. That it's not our theology that saves us. It's not the correctness of our community that saves us. It's the love and the power of your son that rescues us from ourselves and begins to draw you in increasing measure to know you as you are, to love you as you are, to be gathered together as a community, to increasingly look like you as you are. So that is the meal that is before you. This is not a God that says, get everything right before you come to me. This is a God that says, I will be broken by you because you have hosts of things wrong. But as you break me, you will come to me and I will draw you to myself. The table is for you.