https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=iSueE9ihETo

 Yesterday I was helping Reggie clean the filter in his pool and he asked me about the Gospel of Judas. The Gospel of Judas appeared a few years ago in National Geographic and a couple years after that James Cameron came on TV and said that he had found a box that said Jesus son of Joseph and so he was pretty sure that these were the bones of Jesus. And it's usually around this time the TV networks try to find some angle on Easter and so that's usually when these stories appear. And they're all compassioned like, well look at this, now nobody will believe anymore or now there's proof or now there's a different angle. And these stories come and go and they don't change the world hardly at all. Why not? I think the reason is that for the most part people don't believe like this. There's a psychologist named Jonathan Hape who has this metaphor for how we are with respect to our beliefs and he talks about a rider and an elephant. Now don't imagine that you are the rider, you in fact are the rider and the elephant. The rider is your conscious mind, it's the you you experience all the time. It's the you you experience yourself as being that you're awake some of the day and asleep some of the day and you're kind of in control of things. But the elephant is really your unconscious self, your automatic self. You don't stop in the middle of the day and say, oh I've been forgetting to breathe today. Your body tells you to breathe and your heart beats and all of this stuff pretty much happens. And what Jonathan Hape notes is that a lot of the beliefs we have we kind of find ourselves believing and that's kind of like this elephant. And so for example every New Year's people say well this year I'm going to eat right, I'm going to go on a diet and I'm going to lose weight and I'm determined to do it. And that lasts what? One or two weeks and all of your old habits re-emerge. Jonathan Hape says that's basically the elephant. You can have all these great ideas about what you're going to do and how you're going to feel and how life's going to go. But for the most part the elephant pretty much determines what you do and how you do it. Now one of the funniest things about Easter that I've always noticed is that when you go to Bel Air or Nugget or Safeway or anywhere, places full of candy and we have all these bunnies and we have all these peeps and we have all this stuff going on and I always wonder where does this come from? All Easter bunnies and Easter rabbits and Easter eggs. And in fact it wasn't until this year and I've been a Christian minister now quite a while, it wasn't until this year that I actually heard someone ask the question, where does the word Easter come from? And I sat and I thought and I thought and I thought, I had no idea. So I looked it up. Why do we call it Easter? The fact of the matter is that no one knows for sure, which itself is rather funny. But our best bet comes from this old historian named P.E. the Venerable, a late 7th century historian and a scholar of Anglo-Saxon England. He said Easter's name comes from the Anglo-Saxon goddess Oestra associated with Scranton fertility and celebrated around the Bernal Equinox. So there you go. As Christmas was moved to coincide with the plant, the pagan celebrations of winter, Easter was likely moved to coincide with the pagan celebration of spring. And while we're at it, the Easter bunny comes from these pagan rites of spring as well. It's just like the Christmas tree. You don't find the Christmas tree in the Bible. The Christmas tree comes from Germany with pagan winter celebrations. And so the Easter bunny comes from pagan Germany too. 18th century German settlers brought the now the Osterhaus. We never knew that the Easter bunny had a name, but that's his name, to America. When the Pennsylvania Dutch, also known as the Amish, who thought we got this from the Amish, the Pennsylvania Dutch settlers prepared nests for him in the Gardner barn. On Easter Eve, a rabbit laid his colored eggs in the nest's impingement. In Germany, old Oster lays red eggs on Monday Thursday. If anyone knows why children from a rare age world would believe that a rabbit lays eggs, please tell us or a historian near you. We're all dying to know. And so that's where bunnies and Easter eggs come from. And I always found this very interesting because I knew we had bunnies and I knew we had Easter eggs and we always did this at Easter. But I always wondered what on earth does this have to do with Jesus' resurrection? Well, like Christmas, the monks who were trying to evangelize northern Germanic tribes tried to replace new practices with old practices and put new meanings into old meanings. And what's really interesting is that I grew up basically not knowing or thinking any of this. My good Christian parents, I looked for a picture of us with our Easter bunnies, but I couldn't. I could only find the birthday picture. But my good Christian parents, every Easter, we would wake up and what would we have on the counter but little chocolate bunnies. And now I'm hearing this other story, I think, oh, how pagan my good Christian parents were. But what's interesting is what my parents did was very clever because what they began to do was associate in my little elephant brain Easter with chocolate bunnies. Now, as you say, there's no religious connection between Easter and chocolate bunnies, but every year we as little children would always look forward to Easter. Why? Because we had some vivid idea of the resurrection? No. Why did we love Easter? We got candy and chocolate bunnies. And so suddenly in my brain, which as a little boy was mostly elephant and hardly any rider at all, I began to have warm, fuzzy associations between Easter and something good. Now that I'm an adult, usually about this time of the year in preparation for my sermon, like most good Americans, I go to YouTube to find answers. And you'll find all kinds of things on YouTube. You'll find things like James Cameron saying he found the grave of Easter, the grave of Jesus, even though any decent biblical historian would say finding a man named Jesus in first century Palestine is about as easy as finding a guy named Joseph Smith in 20th century America. There were many of them. There are other good YouTube demonstrations about the validity of the resurrection, and this one by Gary Habergots on the Veritas Forum I highly recommend. He goes through and gives evidence and shows why, in fact, many New Testament scholars who don't believe in the resurrection pretty definitively say that all strike from the beginning. This group of people believe that they saw Jesus in the flesh. That's almost undeniable even to liberal New Testament scholars today. But just hearing that in some funny ways doesn't move me like that little chocolate Easter bunny. Isn't that funny? I get moved the other way too. I thought about this little children's message this morning and I thought, how are we going to talk about death with children? But the truth is, these children do know about death. They have lost pets. They do see bananas right there. When they look at my balding gray head, they know what's going on. We all experience this. And so in many ways when it comes to Easter, the real challenge is, do I feel the power of the resurrection? We come to church and we dress up and it's fun to see old friends and new friends together and it's fun to do egg hunts and it's fun to munch on chocolate bunnies, which itself is a really very weird thing. But behind it is the grave. And that's why I always like to name names on Sunday morning, because that begins to engage my element. And I've been here long enough that I've done the services for many people. I don't know if I'll ever forget Lenore's funeral. And Don was so full of life and to have him pass so quickly and Morris almost at the same time. We get to the point where we look into that grave and we say, no Lord. And then suddenly our rider and our elephant are in conflict. Because our rider wants to say, I believe that Jesus will raise my loved one from the dead. But the elephant beneath says, dead men don't walk. I'm going to read John's version of the Easter story. And what I want you to pay attention as I read it is to how personal this story is. This does not come to it from above. It's an abstract resurrection. These are real people having real emotions and real experiences and experiencing it in a way that is alarming. Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb. Now Mary Magdalene was a woman who was from the area called Magdala. And now you might notice her name is Mary. Was she Jesus' mother? No. Again, just like with Jesus and Joseph, Mary was a very common name. In fact, there were some families that, like Joe Foreman, if this family had four daughters, they'd name them all Mary. And we look at them today and say, is that really a good idea? Joe Foreman thinks it's a good idea, but you can name all your daughters Mary? And then they give them big names. So there are a lot of Marys around. So this Mary, we know from where she's from, which was Magdala. And there's one other little story we know about her, was that she was possessed by seven demons and Jesus delivered her. The other thing that we know about Magdala, it was an area where tanning was practiced a lot of. And so like many commercial areas where you have men going in and out of, that it had a reputation for there being a lot of unseemly things, including prostitution. That might be why Mary Magdalene got this reputation. It might be because of the story of Luke that she's kind of colluded into but has no business being there. But the impression that we get of this woman, especially because she seems to have no children and no husband, is that this woman quite likely was someone who was tormented by inner demons, whether that be mental health or some other issue. And she quite likely found the only way she could make a living was with her body. And she was living her life this way until she met Jesus. And Jesus delivered her from those demons. And she was whole and well. And from then on, the only thing we know about her is that after this we find her with Jesus' group of people again and again. And everywhere that Jesus went, like the little lamb, Mary was sure to go. And at the cross when Jesus' male disciples fled, Mary stayed. It was like she would look down at a Roman soldier and say, There's nothing in this world that can separate you, that can separate me from this man. I will be with this man until the end. And so Mary Magdalene stood on Golgotha and saw this man who had rescued her brutalized, tortured, and killed. And she saw Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus take his body and seal him up in a tomb. And she knew because she was a Jew and there were Jews around that nobody could touch the tomb until maybe Sunday morning. And that's when she went to go to be with him, even if it meant just being by his grave. That's how attached she was to Jesus because he was the only good thing she had ever known. And so here it is Sunday morning, the first day of the week. While it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb. And to her amazement, her horror, she sees the tomb is open. Because she imagines it should be closed. It'll be closed and I can sit there and maybe if the other women come we can properly dress Jesus for burial. But we will at least be able to honor him after the Romans and the religious leaders have destroyed my world. I want to at least go be with him even if he's dead. And then the stone is removed. What you'll also notice in John's story is how much running there is. Now we have the kids up here and after church the kids will go running around. But once you become an adult, you know what you stop doing? Running. Unless you're a crazy American and you do this for exercise. No one else in the world does this. Adults don't run unless they have to. What do we see Mary doing? Running. She sees the empty tomb. She came running to Simon Peter and the other disciples, the one Jesus loved, and said, They have taken the Lord out of the tomb and we don't know where they have put him. So Peter and the other disciples started for the tomb. And how did they go? Oh yeah, maybe we should check that out. No. They ran. Both were running. But the other disciple outran Peter. That other disciple is likely John. He likely is a teenager. He could run. Peter is likely in his forties. He's huffing and puffing. John sprints down the road. He bent over and looked at the strips of linen lying there. But didn't go in. When Simon Peter came along behind him and went into the tomb, he saw the strips of linen lying there as well as the cloth that was wrapped around Jesus' head. The cloth was still lying in its place separated from the linen. And again you might ask, First we were talking about all this running. Now we're talking about all this cloth. Why do we keep talking about this cloth? Well, stop. The stone is rolled away. The tomb is empty. Jesus, and when they say empty they mean Jesus' body is not in it. What is the first thing that any rational person would think of? Someone has opened the tomb and taken Jesus out. Dead people don't rise. But here's the thing. Friday, Jesus underwent a whipping. The Roman soldiers took a flail with metal bars on it and whipped his back until it was raw and bloody. Then he took a crown of thorns and put it on his head. Then they took him and nailed his hands and feet to the cross. And after he was dead they stuck a spear in him. And after that, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus came and took cloth and wrapped him up. Now I ask you, what would that cloth be like? Bloody. Crusty. Crusty. Disgusting. If you were going to steal a man's body who had been brutalized, would you take it out of the cloth? You wouldn't want to touch it. You would grab the cloth and think, oh, you'd probably add more or wrap it up and then take it away. But the cloth is left in the tomb. Finally, the other disciples who had reached the tomb first also went inside. He saw and believed. They still did not understand from scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead. That the rider would catch up to the elephant, but it was beginning to dawn on the elephant that something had happened, that Jesus was alive, but the elephant can't believe it. Now Mary stood outside the tomb crying. You get the image here that this woman is overwrought. As she went, she bent over to look at the tomb. She saw two angels in white seated where Jesus' body had been, one at the head and the other at the foot. They asked her, woman, why are you crying? They have taken my Lord away, she said, and I don't know where they put him. This is the only part of the Bible you read and you think, oh, this is a normal conversation. Except every other time in the Bible when an angel shows up in white, everyone hits the floor and says, don't kill me! Mary is so distraught, these angels show up in white, she barely even notices. She's so torn up inside, she can't even think straight. So when the lights come on and angels are there, she's like, don't bother me. This is how disturbed she is. At this she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize it was Jesus. She's still even so distraught she can't see him. Then he asked her, woman, why are you crying? Who is it you are looking for? She's so distraught she can't even recognize him. She thinks he's the gardener and says, sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him and I will get him. And Jesus said to her, Mary. She turned towards him and cried out an aromatic, Ramoni, which means teacher. It isn't until she hears him say her name that she knows. Jesus said, do not hold on to me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. Go instead to my brothers and tell them, I am ascending to my Father and your Father. Isn't that beautiful? He doesn't say, I'm ascending to my Father, Mary, I'm leaving. No, Mary, I'm ascending to my Father and your Father. To my God and your God. He's saying, Mary, for a while we will be separated, but there will come a day when you will never have to leave me. That day is coming. Mary, I believe, went to the disciples with the news. I have seen the Lord, and she told them that he had said these things to her. And here's the question. How do you believe? When I was a little boy, did I believe in Easter? I just liked the chocolate bunnies. John Chrysostom makes the comment, miracles do not so much attract the heathen as the mode of life, and nothing so much causes a right life as love. A good psychologist or sociologist would say, well, of course you're a Christian, you're parents were Christians and they fed you chocolate, so therefore you believe. And there is definitely truth to that. The truth is, the elephant beneath is always looking for love. Nicholas Christoph, to my knowledge, is not a Christian. He's an opinion writer in the New York Times. And in the midst of all of our cultural controversy, he notes that Christians usually kind of get a bad reputation for being petty and mean-spirited and all kinds of things. One side of the landmark shift in public opinion, a poll last year found that Americans approved more of gays and lesbians than evangelical Christians. I don't know how you approve of classes of people, but apparently some pollsters decided to run these numbers, and evangelical Christians lost. But then Nicholas had met a man in Angola named Dr. Foster. On a recent trip to Angola, the country with the highest child mortality rate in the world, I came across a rural hospital run by Dr. Stephen Foster, 65, a white haired missionary surgeon who had lived there for 37 years, much of that in a period when the Angolan regime was Marxist and hostile to Christians. We were granted visas, he said, by the people who would tell us publicly, your churches are going to disappear in 20 years, but privately you are the only ones we know willing to serve in the midst of the fire. Foster, the son and grandson of missionaries, had survived tangles with a six foot cobra and angry soldiers. He had to make do with rudimentary supplies. Once he said he turned the tube of a vehicle's windshield washing fluid into a catheter to drain up patients and gorge flattens. Armed soldiers once tried to kidnap 25 of his nail nurses, and when Foster ordered the government off the property, he said they fired AK-47 rounds near his feet. He held firm and they eventually retreated without the nurses. One son contracted polio, he raised his family there. A daughter survived cerebral malaria, and the family nearly starved when the area was besieged during war, and Dr. Foster insisted on sharing the family rations with 100 vanished villagers. This created family tensions at the time, but today the kids speak lowingly of their dad. For a while I blamed my dad and his high risk dedication to others, said Rob Foster, the son of polio. Today I no longer feel that way. I'm no longer bitter or resentful. Because here's the thing, what's the relationship between Dr. Foster and the resurrection? What's the same relationship between Dr. Foster and the resurrection that there's always been with the Christian church? You see, most of us look at Dr. Foster and say, this is stupid. You've got a medical degree for Pete's sake. You could practice medicine in North America, make good money, have a secure place for your children, and what? Be happy. Instead, you insist on going over here to Angola in the midst of a civil war and doing what? Helping poor people with their basic medical needs? What an idiot! Because beneath that is the belief that the right way to spend your life is to maximize your pain and to minimize your discomfort and get through your 80 years optimizing that. But the resurrection posture is different. This is a tiny, difficult portion of a much larger life, says the resurrection. This is a tiny, difficult portion of a much larger life. And Dr. Foster says, yeah, for these next 80 years, things will be tough, but you know what really gives me joy? Serving my neighbor because Christ served me. And he might say, no, that's irresponsible. He says, what's irresponsible about it? I'm going to have 10,000 years and more to enjoy this amazing creation that God makes. Why not give this tiny little front end to those who are really in pain and suffering? Now, how does Dr. Foster believe this? Well, Dr. Foster believes this because he believes in the resurrection. Well, how do you believe in the resurrection? Because everything around me says, maximize my life. Well, you have to train your elephant. Well, how do you train your elephant? You train your elephant by the people around you because elephants are herd animals and they get trained by watching others do it. C.F. Lewis became a Christian in midlife after becoming an atheist first. And then when he became a Christian, he had to figure out how to be a Christian. So he'd often take questions from regular folks. And one of the questions someone asked him once is, is attendance at a place of worship or membership with the church community necessary to a Christian way of life? This is Lewis's answer. That's a question which I cannot answer. But then he goes on to answer. My own experience is that when I first became a Christian about 14 years ago, I thought that I could do it on my own. I retreated to my rooms and reading theology. I wouldn't go to churches and gospel halls. And then later I found out that the only way of flying the flag, and of course, I found that this meant being a target, it is extraordinary how inconvenient to your family it becomes for you to get up early and to go to church. It doesn't matter so much if you get up early for anything else, but if you get up early to go to church, it's very selfish of you and you upset the house. If there is anything in the teaching of the New Testament which is in the nature of the command, it is that you are obliged to take the sacrament. And you can't do this without going to church. I disliked very much their hymns, which I consider to be fifth grade poems set to sixth grade music. But as I went on, I saw the merit of it. I came up against different people of quite different outlooks and different education, and then gradually my conceit just began to peel off. I realized that the hymns, which were still sixth grade music, were nevertheless being sung with devotion and benefit by an old saint in elastic boots in the opposite pew. And then you realize that you aren't fit to clean those boots. It gets you out of your solitary conceit. It is not for me to lay down laws. I am only a layman, and I don't know much. What does Lewis realize? That if you want to train your elephant, if you want to believe that this crazy stuff is true, if you want to imagine deep in your heart that Christ will raise you from the dead, you need to be among people who not only say that, but live that. And the alarming thing is that those people you find in all kinds of wrappers and packages, sometimes with crazy ideas, sometimes with bad ideas, sometimes with awful habits. But here in the church, bit by bit, people get to practice it, usually quietly, usually when no one is looking. And we get to understand the Dr. Foster's that are among us. C.S. Lewis had it right, because he said, if you really want to train the elephant, well, my parents brought me chocolate bunnies. And for a little three-year-old me, that made me feel Easter. Jesus on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he said, this is my body, given for you. Jesus could have just said, I'm about to go to the cross, and then I'm going to die, and then I'm going to rise. And in fact, Jesus did tell them they were going to rise, but absolutely no one went to the tomb expecting him to be risen. Even Mary, who did go to the tomb, expected to find him dead. That's because the rider on top doesn't know what the elephant belief knows. And if you want to train the elephant, you've got to use real stuff. And so on the night Jesus was betrayed, he took bread. And what he told his churches, that from now until I come again, you are to take this bread and you are to eat it, and you are to take this juice and you are to drink it. And week by week, bit by bit, moment by moment, in the midst of bad music or annoying neighbors or hypocritical church people, I will train you to believe that you will rise from the dead. And you're not even going to know you're being trained. And it's going to be by eating this bread and drinking this juice and telling the stories that we believe. Now, in a minute, some of our dear saints are going to pass this out, and you don't have to eat it. In fact, if you don't believe any of this stuff, don't bother eating it. It's okay. No one will think any less of you. But if you do believe he rose from the dead, and if you have been baptized into his death, then this bread is your nourishment. It's here to feed you, to train your elephant, to help you to believe, and in that belief to become generous and gracious, and all of those things that Christ builds into our elephants, bit by bit, day by day, sacrifice by sacrifice, then this bread is for you. In the name of Jesus Christ, amen.