https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NUaq1I9I1lg

 I'm a bit of a news junkie and there's some huge stories going on in the world right now and I always think about my sermon as I'm reading the news and Russia and Ukraine. It's a scary situation and if you're thinking about the command out, shall not steal, it's easy to think about Russia stealing from India and other provinces away from Ukraine. China's drilling for oil and water's off of Vietnam and the conflict that's going there, both of these conflicts potentially causing war. The kidnapping of the schoolgirls in Nigeria, terrible story. Many scholars believe that the word that's used in the command, gosh, not steal, was primarily used in reference to kidnap. And of course there's the melting of the Antarctic ice shell and stealing the environmental health from our children in the future, something that we ponder. But perhaps the story that really caught my attention when I thought about stealing was, of all things, Justin Bieber being accused of robbery. And I read that and I thought, Justin Bieber being accused of robbery, why would Justin Bieber steal anything? He's got more money than anyone else. And so I read the story and apparently Justin Bieber in LA was over at some batting cages with his friends and as it seems Justin usually does, he got into some altercations with some other people in the batting cages and soon a crowd formed and he saw a woman with a cell phone with a camera on it and he went over her and demanded her phone because he thought she had taken pictures of him getting into it with these other people and then she refused and put it in her purse and he reaps in her purse and pulled it out but it was locked and so poor Justin was frustrated by that and she finally unlocked it for him to show she had not taken pictures. And so of course while there are many serious things in the world to consider, our minds go to Justin Bieber. And I thought, what a strange thing that this young man is from an early age having all of this fame, having all of this success, having all of this wealth and glory and he is so insecure that a woman would take a picture of him out in public behaving badly and so he's accused of robbery at this point still, the police in LA have not pressed charges on Justin Bieber. These are mugshots of a previous race that was made on Justin. Justin then goes to Twitter to defend himself. It's hard to defend myself and my privacy every moment of the day. Then to see rumors, the truth will set you free. And I noted Justin's quote in scripture. My mom raised me to be kind to others. I get judged, harassed and I try to take the high road. Not quite sure how pulling the phone out of the woman's purse was the high road. Sometimes it isn't easy but we keep trying. I continue to be the man my mother raised. I love people and I will try to be kind even when things are not fair. Don't believe rumors. I don't know what happened. I wasn't there. I suspect a lot of other people when Justin was doing this had their phones out and were taking pictures too. So we'll see what comes out. Is this stealing? What does it mean actually to steal? In the Ukraine it seems obvious that one nation taking the territory of another would be stealing. It seems obvious that taking the undersea resources off Vietnam would be stealing. But when I read the account I thought, how is this robbery? What did Justin take from the woman? He didn't leave with her phone. And in some ways what Justin is really accusing the woman of is stealing. Stealing his image. Stealing his reputation. Stealing his likeness. Which is something that Justin, not without good reason, is asking to have a certain amount of control over. You see, this business about stealing is really a lot more complicated than just a matter of someone breaking into your house and taking your stuff. Lou Smedes in his book, Mammorality, opens his chapter in this way. In the Eighth Commandment, the Lord invades the mysterious world of our personal relationship to things. Between persons and things is a bond we call ownership. And God tells all people to respect that bond. Behind thou shalt not steal must lie a permission to keep things. Respect for persons, the common thread we see running through all the commandments, here requires a particular attention to persons and their relationship to things. Which are truly their own and therefore bound up with their very selves. Things in fact possess a lot of our time and attention. If you look at the news when hurricanes or tornadoes run through and you see people, or fires here in California, and you see people devastated at the loss of their homes, they're weeping. And of course the canter crew will go right there and someone will say, I lost everything. And we understand what they need. We get attached to things. And the commandment doesn't say, thou shalt not be attached to things. But it's going to describe the respect that we have to have for each other and their things. This I think actually comes from the very first chapter to the Bible. Then God said, let us make mankind in our image, in our likeness, so that they may rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky, over the livestock and the wild animals and over all the creatures that move along the ground. So God made mankind in his own image. In the image of God he created them, male and female he created them. God blessed them and said to them, be fruitful and increase in number, fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky, over every living creature that moves on the ground. What God gives here in Genesis is basically saying, take control over this world, reign over it and rule over it as I would have you do. And that means that we have stuff and we have control and we in fact exercise ownership over these things. One of the most obvious things we recognize is of course the old saying, you can't take it with you. I was listening to a story of a situation in a family and as a pastor I see with families often in times of death, in this situation a beloved grandfather had died and some of the grandchildren were going into the house and taking his things. And I thought, this is actually pretty common. You can find families that get along quite well, but at the moment of death somehow we all understand when this person dies their stuff is up for grabs. And when that happens people start grabbing. If you were walking down the street and you saw $20 slip out of someone's hand, you might reach down, pick it up and say, excuse me, this is yours. But if you're walking down that same street and there's $20 on the ground and you look around and don't see anybody, then what? It's yours. Have you ever thought and contemplate how funny all of this is? That stuff is completely contingent on selfhood. You don't worry if you walk down the street and you find a $20 bill and you see a dog run by, you don't ask the dog, excuse me, did you drop this? If in fact you find the dog and there's no collar or anything on the dog, you might decide to take the dog because you'd say the dog has no owner. All of these things with stuff. There's also a funny thing that happens in churches. Come in some Sunday into a church you've never been before and sit down and just wait. Odds are someone might come in and take a look at you and then move on. In a used to church culture, what has happened? You took their seat. Now, there was no sign on the seat. There was no label that you should know, but to a certain degree one way or another, you pretty much kind of have your own seat, don't you? You sit there every week. You didn't buy the seat, but somehow deep inside of you, something inside says, it's your seat. And in fact, I know someone who once, I'm sure this has happened multiple times, left the church because they sat in someone's seat and that person got so offended by the fact that they would have the temerity to sit in their seat, they left. What is it with us and stuff? So in a strange way, we control stuff, but yet the stuff we can't take with us. Brian Bell is the Seventh-day Adventist, a pastor and teacher who a few months ago started his year without God. If you read him, it's not really a year without God, it's more of a defection. And so he wrote a blog post this week about faith and public trust, and he and many atheists like to make the statement that there's no evidence for belief in God. There's no evidence for any of this. And so then there was another article about another pastor who had given up the faith and walked away, and he kind of talked about the fact that there's no evidence for any of this, and what we need is public truth. And the more I thought about Ryan's blog and this other blog, I thought, consider for a moment money. I've got a dollar here in my pocket. That's all I've got. This, the United States government says, is worth a dollar. 200 years from now, will it be worth anything? Every time you receive money in payment, you're exhibiting faith. Faith in what? Faith that tomorrow you'll be able to take that same money and exchange it for food or gas or whatever. How many of you believe that this dollar will always have value from here on out to the end of time? I don't. We don't exchange Roman currency. We don't exchange Greek currency. All of us know that at some point this dollar will be worth nothing. And the fact that you embrace it today and take it and don't think anything of it is in fact an act of faith. You believe that tomorrow this dollar will be accepted. You have no evidence for it. In fact, all the evidence you have says someday it will be worth nothing. Yet all of us publicly, communally exchange in these things. And furthermore, if Bank of America says, I have $300 in my account, do I imagine that they have a cubby with 300 bills in it? And when I go and buy gas at AM, that someone runs over from Bank of America to give them? In fact, all this money that we all have are zeros and ones on file in the bank. That's what it is. That's all it is. Yet we all assume it, embrace it, believe it. This business of possession is a strange thing. Now the command is really not so much just about stuff. It's about relationships. Because in fact, the money I have in Bank of America is a relationship between me, Bank of America, and the United States government, and everyone else in the world. That's what that money actually is. It's more about our relationships than it is about the stuff. And in the age of decay, takes our stuff, but it usually takes us first. Jesus' resurrection, you probably never thought of it this way, Jesus' resurrection is a redemption of stuff. Because when Jesus comes out of the grave, they think he's a what? A ghost. And so what does Jesus do? He sits down and eats a fish and says, look, in my resurrection, I not only redeem yourself, which is an interior, but I redeem the stuff of the world. Jesus is going along and someone in a crowd shouts to him, Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me. What's probably happening is that this man's father died and he's the younger of at least two brothers, and the older brother is the executor of the state, and the older brother has not yet divvied up the father's stuff. And so Jesus being popular and Jesus walking around, this man decides to take his chance with Jesus and to say, Jesus, tell my brother to do what is right and divide the inheritance. Now, what do we know about Jesus? Jesus knows all things. Jesus could probably know the situation with him and his brother. What is right? What is probably right is that his older brother divide the inheritance. What would it take for Jesus just to say, bring me with your older brother and I'll tell him to do it? But what if the older brother still refuses to listen to Jesus? And you might say, well, who would refuse to listen to Jesus? And if you read the Gospels, almost everybody refused to listen to Jesus. So Jesus responds to the man. Man, which is very interesting. And it's kind of a Jesus in a sense chastises him. Jesus replied, man, who appointed me as a judge or arbiter between you? Some very interesting answer, because although there are judges around and although Jesus passes out as a judge regularly, he decides not to judge this case on the spot. Why? Jesus then, in fact, stops talking to the man and starts talking to the rest of the crowd. Then he said to them, watch out, be on your guard against all kinds of grief. Life does not consist in an abundance of possession. Now, given how Jesus lived, we would probably think he really believes this. And then he tells what is one of the most famous stories of the New Testament. Then he told them a parable. The land of a rich man produced abundantly. And he thought to himself, what should I do? For I have no place to store my crops. Then he said, I will do this. I will pull down my arms and build larger ones. And there I will store up all my grain and my goods. And I will say to my soul, soul, you have ample goods laid out for many years. Relax, eat, drink, be merry. But God said to him, you fool, this very night your life is being demanded of you. And the things you have prepared, whose will they be? So it is with those who store up treasures for themselves, but are not rich for its time. You can see by how I arranged the letters in this story that Jesus had told this story in a very particular way. The person, initially the barn-builder here, is completely possessed with himself. And in fact, he imagines that everything is about him. We would call him self-possessed. But the truth is, the abundance that he is now benefiting from is completely given to him. He didn't create the field. He didn't create the rain. He didn't create the plants. The abundance was a gift. And the point that Jesus is making is that our lives are a gift. And all of our relationship with this stuff is intended to serve a pen. One of the things that you will recognize is that just as if you're walking around, walking down the street, and you find $20 and you don't find anyone around, you say, this is mine. Because without a self, there is no possession. If there is no God, what does that mean for us and stuff? Doesn't it mean that, like the barn-builder, you can simply take what you can and use it how you want, and nobody can say anything to you about anything? Because after all, in the Dominican Republic, they called that the erosimbocio, money without a pocket. And Jesus then says he doesn't say the man should give his money to the poor, which would be something very in keeping with what Jesus would say. And certainly that's a valid interpretation of being rich towards God. The focus that Jesus made was we and our stuff are always in a triangular relationship with really the one who owns all things. What can you truly possess? The Bible famously says, naked you came into this world, naked you will go out. Possession is actually a function of power, and the truth is that when we get old enough to no longer be able to exert or instill our will over our stuff, well, then the kids take over, don't they? You want to see someone angry? Talk to someone whose kids have taken away their arm. Everything is a gift, even your DNA. We are all just recipients, and here, just for a moment. Walker Percy said, show me a man with his needs satisfied, and I'll show you a man in serious trouble. Think about that. Justin Bieber has power, he has fame, he has talent, he can do movies, he can do concerts. What can't Justin Bieber do? Yet he lives in terror of a soccer mom with an eye problem. What a strange world. For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life, for me, will find it. What good will it be for someone to gain the whole world, yet forfeit their self or their soul? What can anyone give in exchange for their self or their soul? A woman right now, Michelle Ben Loon, she's an author, she's just about ready to put out a book on regret. I think this will be an important book for a lot of people, because the truth is, most of the time when I talk with people, when they get to the end of their life, they seldom say, I wish I had worked more. I wish I had more stuff. What do they usually say? I wish I had invested more in the relationships around me. The barn builder was possessed by his possessions, and the irony of the story is of course he imagined himself a lovely future with him in control, and God comes to him and says, you've never been in control. Everything you have comes from me. What would have happened if the barn builder had been rich towards God, and if the barn builder, seeing this abundance, had said to the town, share in my abundance, the town likely would have given glory to God, given glory to him, and the barn builder quite likely would have enjoyed life in community with the town, instead of his little lonely self all by himself. When I think about the story of the barn builder, I think about Howard Hughes, locked up in a dark room, filled with jars of his own urine, dying by himself. The first question and answer of the catechism goes on to say a very radical thing for us, because I think we instinctively, like the barn builder, imagine, I am my own, I'm in charge of me, and whatever I want to do, I will do. The catechism in fact says we are not our own, we don't even own us. When we're children, our parents carried us around, made decisions for us. When we're elderly, our children get to return the favor. And I think what this question and answer basically says is that the only way to live is understanding and assuming that we are not little centers of the universe, that even the small amount of power we have to control the things around us is only there for a time, and that our hearts need to be placed somewhere else. Would you read this with me? Let's pray. Lord, we are not our own. We cannot take credit for our DNA. We cannot take credit for our circumstance. If we were born in another country or another place in time, we would not even be ourselves. Help us, Lord, to see beyond ourselves and our preoccupation with stuff and the way that that Mars destroys the relationships around us. May we first see ourselves as owned by you, you whose son poured out himself on our behalf. And in that light, Lord, may that make us free, free to own, free to control, free to use the things that you give to us into our management, free to manage those as you would have them managed, free to use them for your glory, for your goodness, and for the flourishing of the world that you love. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand? When I surveyed the wondrous world, On rich the rift of glory dying, By riches gained I count the bonds, And for contempt all my rise. See from his left his lands his feet, Sorrow and sorrow may go down. It is such love and sorrow be, For those come from so rich a ground. Oh, what a wonderful song, Oh, what a wonderful song, Give me love and I will find that I may truly be. Oh, what a wonderful song. Amen.