https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=eA2UpJ8wfIk

 Bruce is still figuring out the technical aspects of being an angle. Walking around with the phone, but I'll shut him down. He's still on, but if I don't turn off this camera, he'll be memorialized on YouTube. I don't know if that's exactly what he wants. As I'm always watching and listening to people, and listening for how we try to save ourselves, I basically find three approaches that we take to this world. The first is the religious hope that somehow God is going to fix this world. The second is the political hope that it's up to us, be it politics or science or something else, nobody's going to fix this world but us. And the third, which is probably the largest group, is the personal hope. The world is too big, life is too complex, I just have to focus on me and my loved ones and get for us what we need and want. If I can take care of that level, then things will be okay. And most of the time it's not truly one or the other. Most of us mix all of them together in one way or another. But it's usually some aspect of these three that people focus on and put their energy towards. Now the personal hope is, of all in a sense, the most fragile but the most common. In the movie 28 Days or Read That movie, Sandra Bullock's boyfriend makes this speech in the middle of the film. No one adult human being is happy. People are born, they have a limited amount of time going around thinking life is handy, but then inevitably tragedy strikes and they realize life equals loss. The whole point of the game is to minimize the pain caused by that equation. Now some people do it by having kids or making money or taking up coin collecting, and others do it by getting wasted. They make that little switch in the head, turn the light off, and the cool light, turn the hot light off, and the cool light on. And in that movie, Sandra Bullock gets to the point that doing that has made her life unmanageable, and she has to get sober. And so the personal hope switches to a more quasi-religious hope. Science and politics often seems promising. In the 20th century, we discovered antibiotics and vaccines, and diseases that plague much of humans throughout history seem to be on the verge of being conquered. Most of us don't know it, but at the beginning of the 20th century, there was a real question whether human population growth would end because of food supply. Despite all the talks about organics, most computations today said that if we needed strictly organic fertilizer, we could maybe feed 4 billion people. Given the fact that we're currently at 7 billion people, it's because we discovered how to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and create synthetic fertilizers, which have allowed us to feed a lot more people. And of course, there's the modern state with Social Security and all the things that have to offer us until we realize that each of these solutions came with their own problems. If you go, how many of you have heard of MRSA or C. diff? All of these superbugs that if you go into the hospital, you may get sicker than when you went in. We have vaccines, but there's anti-vaxxers who are suspicious about the properties of vaccinations. All of this development, all of this population continues to threaten the ecosystem that we are at the same time dependent upon. And while the modern nation state has developed and accumulated power, we both develop power to the degree that we can destroy ourselves, but also we see many places in the world, Syria, Iraq, Somalia, Yemen, the modern nation state has fallen apart, and these things are fomenting unrest that burns down buildings in our world. And so there's a lot of questions. Will this actually take us somewhere? The latest book I picked up, a very interesting book, Sapiens, A Brief History of Human Kind, traces homo sapiens and homo erectus and homo hodlis and the neanderthals and all of this discussion. His assertion is that basically we will be in the next, he doesn't think homo sapiens will last another thousand years, probably in the next 100 or 200 years we're going to figure out how to interface the brain and our consciousness and all of our memories with computer technology. Once you really solve a problem like brain computer interface, when brains and computers can interact directly, that is, that's the end of history, that's the end of biology as we know it. Nobody has a clue what will happen once you solve this. If life can break out of the organic ground into the vastness of the inorganic ground, you cannot even begin to imagine what the consequences will be, because your imagination at present is organic. So if there is a point of singularity by definition, we will have no way of ever imagining, have ever started to imagine what's happening beyond that. His assertion is that basically what we're seeing now in terms of haves and have-nots will increase. The tiny group of human beings that have access to most of the world's capital and most of the world's power will continue to grow stronger and more capable and leave the rest of humanity behind and see most of human population as superfluous, leading to I don't know what brain egg. So the irony of the science political thing is that every single projection of it means the end is always the same. The sun will run out of fuel, the universe will grow cold, all will be lost or forgotten. Which brings us to the religious hope. And you think, well, we're in church, pastor, isn't that what we're about? We're going to say personal, no, politics and science, no, religion is our hope. This is pastor David Hayward, who blogs under the moniker the Naked Pastor. Now that doesn't mean he's actually naked, but it means that he's trying to be transparent. This actually is a friend of my sister who was here a couple of weeks ago, and they worked together in a ministry in New Hampshire. And he makes cartoons and writes blogs basically about how the church has hurt and failed people. And this is the cartoon he wrote this week. How's my driving? 1-800-I-don't-care. A church on wheels basically leaving people in its wake. And he writes this. But I think the number one reason why the church fails to help those in wounds is its obsession with usefulness. That is, the church is interested in how useful we are to its agenda. One of my favorite quotes is in fact from Curtis. I had just moved here to Sacramento and Philip started to play on Curtis' soccer team. Curtis had already lived right down the road and I walked over and Curtis asked me, well what do you do for a living? I said I'm a pastor. And Curtis said, oh, you're a pastor. He said pastors are kingdom builders. They build their own kingdoms. And Curtis is right, because it's often the case that what is the pastor most interested in? Is the pastor most interested in you and your welfare? Is the pastor most interested in the kingdom of God? Or is the pastor most interested in building a large church for himself, building a name for himself, and building his own kingdom? And in fact we see this all the time. As David Mayworth points out, in the church, as within society, most organizations are interested in you to the degree that you are useful to the organization. And so if you have nothing to offer, the church doesn't care about you. Now, Pete this morning in the liturgy read from the book of Jeremiah. As soon as the Lord gives the tabernacle to the people of Israel, the tabernacle very quickly becomes a tool by which the people try to use it to manipulate God. In fact, almost any good thing that God gives us, we turn on its head and try to use it to get a handle on God. What happens then in the Old Testament and the prophets, is that the prophets begin to say things like Jeremiah said. You people think you can control God by manipulating the temple. You think you can control God by giving things or pledging allegiance or being obedient? You cannot control God. And so what develops then in the Old Testament is this imagery where we have the temple, but the Messiah will come and purify the temple. The difficulty is, however, that once the prophets write that, the Messiah will come to purify the temple. Anyone who wants to be Messiah knows where they have to stop. They have to go to the temple. So for example, Herod the Great, who was the Herod that's referred to at Jesus' birth, Herod the Great wanted to be hailed as Messiah for the Jewish people. So what does he do? He takes that second temple and he pours all kinds of money in it to remodel it in hopes that the Jews will say, oh Herod, you're our Messiah. Instead the Jews looked at him and said, Herod, you're a lousy Edomite, propped up by the Romans, but yes, we'll take your renovated temple. Thank you very much. And like many other Messiahs who came in Jesus' day would come to the temple and make statements about it, and say that they were purified. So when we see Jesus coming to the temple and clearing it out, on one hand he stands as fulfillment of prophecy, but on the other hand we have the question, Jesus, are you just like all the other Messiahs? So when it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, Jesus went up to Jerusalem. In the temple courts he found people selling cattle, sheep and ducks, and others sitting at tables exchanging money. He made a whip out of the courts and drove all from the temple courts, but the sheep and cattle, both sheep and cattle, he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables. To those who sold ducks he said, get these out of here. Stop turning my father's house into a market. I remember when I was a little boy we used to go to the Calvinist cadet court, and in our core our big fundraising thing was selling light bulbs. And so I would go to church on Sunday and sell light bulbs, and as a boy I always thought, I don't know why I should be selling light bulbs at church. Is that like violating Jesus' thing? My parents said, no, it would be fine. You may sell light bulbs for cadets at church. But what is the point of Jesus here? Why does he drive them out? One of the interesting things to note is that you can make a lot of money with religion. In fact, Christian commerce, that's Christian music, Christian books, Christian movies, all told in the United States, Christian labeled commerce is a $7 billion industry. $7 billion. Now, if you have a $7 billion industry, the rest of the marketplace, in fact, will pick up on it to the degree that now about 60% of all Christian publishing is owned by the big six. If you look at HarperCollins at the top there, you'll see Zondervents. If you look at the Qbible, your Qbibles were printed by Zondervents who owns the NIV. You'll see Thomas Nelson. Well, Thomas Nelson owns the New Revised Standard version, and I think also the New Living translation. Anybody know who owns HarperCollins? It's owned by News Corp. Anybody know who owns News Corp? You ever hear the name Rupert Murdoch? So every time you buy an NIV Bible, Rupert Murdoch gets a little piece of that action. Now, what does this mean? Should we not use Zondervents Bibles? Should we not use Thomas Nelson publishes? Or Waterbrook or Multnomah or Convergent or Faith Words or Howard or Penguin? I wouldn't say we shouldn't. Yet, when Jesus comes to the temple and sees the money changers in the temple, he's making a statement, and the statement is this. Either he can say, get out of here because I want Jesus branded stuff in the temple Bible bookstore, or he clears it out and says, what's happening in this place should not be the same as what's happening in the marketplace. He's not saying the marketplace is bad, but he's saying, my temple ought not to be a mercenary place. Paul, in fact, articulates what love should be. Love is patient. Love is kind. It does not envy. It does not boast. It is not proud. It does not dishonor others. It is not self-seeking. It is not easily angered. It keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil, but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hosts, always preserves. Love never fails. Now when we say this is a dog-eat-dog world, or when we say, I know what pastors do. Pastors are kingdom builders. What are we saying about the church? We're saying that everything we lay our hands on, we tend to corrupt. Once we see an opportunity for something, we try to say, how can I turn this to my advantage? How can I make this about me? How can I gain from the benefit of this? It is me, Jesus, the Cycle Tree. Remember that it was written, deal for your house will consume me. The Jesus' Son was there. What time can you show us to prove your authority to do this? Jesus answered them, destroy this temple and I will raise it again in three days. They replied, it has taken 46 years to build this temple and you are going to raise it in three days? The temple he had spoken of was the one that was defied. When he was raised from the dead, his disciples recalled what he had said. Then they believed the scripture and the words that Jesus had spoken. When Jesus goes to the temple, what's different about Jesus? What's different about Jesus from all these other Messiahs? Because again and again, a Messiah would come and say, I'd like to run things. I'd like to rule the world. I'd like to have things to walk my way. I'd really like God to give this to me. What they essentially say is, my power is on the screen above me. As we saw last week, this is the common world-saving strategy. Take the stage, declare a glorious vision, advance your myth, make your demands clear, amass some sort of power, financial, political, military or religious, and use this power to achieve your goals, usually at the expense of your adversary and their agenda. So Jesus comes into the temple and cleans out the temple and the authorities say, What gives you the right to do this? And Jesus says, give us a sign. Because if there's a miraculous sign, then we'll know for sure that this is from God. And Jesus says, I'll give you a sign. Destroy this temple. They probably heard this and thought, what is this? What do you mean, destroy this temple? Jesus was saying is, in his own body, he was embodying what the brick and mortar temple was for. In this temple, destroy this temple and I will raise it again in three days. You see, Jesus' kingdom works differently. When Jesus stopped and healed someone, was he thinking, boy, if I heal someone, they'll tell someone else and that'll make my ministry grow. Is that what Jesus was thinking when he healed someone? How do you know? And Jesus again and again and again say when he healed someone. Does anyone remember? Don't tell anybody. Now you say, now Jesus, if you're trying to grow a ministry, when you heal somebody, make sure everybody hears about it. Why? Because that will grow your ministry. Even better, Jesus, if you heal somebody, make sure you do it up here on stage. Because then everybody will see. But Jesus keeps moving in the other direction. You almost get the idea that when Jesus heals someone, what does he want? For them to be healed. I think. Well, where's the money in that? Well, there isn't that. And so you begin to see that Jesus' ministry flows in the opposite direction of so much religion and politics. Jesus' ministry flows in the opposite way because Jesus says, I am going to do this for you. I am looking for your well-being even at my expense. And so what Jesus says is what he said last week, take up your cross and follow me. And what he says this week, destroy this temple, destroy this holy of holies that is standing before you. And I'll raise it in three days. This is the sign. I remember it's now six years ago when President Obama was elected. And I watched the inauguration, or not the inauguration, but I watched the big party after he was elected. And I heard all of this change and everything's going to be great now. And I listened to this and I thought, they're just setting themselves up for disappointment. Why? How many different presidents do we have? We have a new one every four or eight years. Does any president ever fix anything? We conquer cancer. What's next? Do we run out of things that we need to fix? And in fact, let's imagine we conquer all of this stuff. Then will we be happy? And I think, have you ever met a human being? Because we ask and we need and we want and we plead and then we get it and then, well it's another thing and it's another thing and it's another thing. As much as I believe politics is important, I don't put my hope in politics for this work. Now we might say, well just stay personal, me and mine, but you know what? When it's all about me and it's all about mine, then it's all about using other people, deriding something at their expense so that I can enjoy, so that I can be secure, so that I can be preserved. And then in fact, we lack love for our neighbor. And if everybody in the room is being selfish, does that make the room a better place? No, it just puts you in a room full of selfish people. And religion ironically can almost be worse than both because we get self-righteous and then we take the things of God and say, Lord, you should be in service to me. And this is our misery. But Jesus comes and he flips it. He cleans out the temple and he says, I'm not cleaning this out to make a big show. In fact, it's because Jesus clears the temple that they kill him. And his disciples know this. In his death, destroy this temple. He undoes our selfish salvation schemes that use God and each other. And in his resurrection, I will raise it up. He promises that all sacrificial love towards others is not in vain or foolish or reckless, but rewarded mutuality in the light to come. And I think about Morris and I think about how you, his family, cared for him. When he was in that hospital, there was not a lot of sign that he was going to prove, that he was going to walk out of there, that he was going to be the kind of man and brother and husband and father that you all wanted. But what did you do? Did you say, well, can't get any more out of him. I'll go find someone else to move job on. No. You respected him, you cared for him, and you loved him until the end. What is that? That is love. Here's the thing. I read a story a few weeks ago about a woman whose husband was disabled by a car accident. And because of the disability, he was ornery and didn't recognize her and anxious. And again, we read those stories and we say, why would you stay with a person like this? What do you get out of this? You don't get anything out of this. That's why it's love. And so Jesus comes, and this is exactly what he did for us. Any political advisor would have told Jesus, Jesus, people are a bad bet. They're unfaithful, they're rebellious, and the minute they get a chance to benefit themselves at your expense, they'll hate you. And Jesus says, I know, I'll go anyway. And so he comes, and he lives among us, and he heals, and he forgives, and he teaches. And what do we do? We kill him. And God raises him to say exactly this. If you love me, if you pick up your cross and follow me, if you honor me before yourself, if you learn to love one another and you actually do it, then I will raise you up. Now what this means is that in fact, all of these other strategies or hopes now make sense. What is the kind of politician you really want? You really want someone who says, I'm going to get into office so that I can get mine, so that I can make a name for myself. Is that the politician you want? What politician do you want? You want someone who comes and says, I'm not important. What I really care about is the well-being of my city or my state or my country or even the world. What do we call them? We call them public servants. How can you be a public servant? Well, if you listen to Jesus, you can say, it's not about me, it's about your well-being. And if it takes political hits to get there, if it ends my political career to get there, I'm willing to do that. What about the personal? Well, it's the same thing. It's really funny because I meet lonely people and some people are like, I'm so lonely, I don't have any friends. Well, you know why some people don't have any friends? Because they only think about themselves. And they're the only person they have room for in their life. So then they're just bewildered, why don't I have any friends? And someone would say, it's because you're horrible to be with. Well, well, and you can tell someone, you're horrible to be with. Does that make sense? No, why? I'm not horrible to be with, why don't I have any friends? How does Jesus reverse that? You know the people who have lots of friends? People who actually live your well-being at my expense. People who will listen to your stories. People who will help you out. Those are the people that have all the friends in the world. But you say, boy, if I live like that, then everybody will be around me, looting off me. Yes. It's true. But what does Jesus say? Destroy this temple and in three days, I'll raise it up again. And it's also in this way that religion stops the evil. And it's also in this way that religion stops being a game of manipulation. And this is why, of all things, we should focus on so clearly in the church, is that this is not a place where when you walk through this door, we will all do it instinctively, I know we will, I do it myself. We will look at you and say, will this person be useful to our church? Jesus didn't do that. What should we say? Does God love this person? How would Jesus treat this person? Did Jesus die for this person? Will this person one day be a saint in glory, the likes of which we can barely imagine today? I will treat this person as a beloved child of God, even if this world finds no value in this person. Give me a sign, I will prove this. I'll give it to you. Destroy this temple and I'll build it in three days. That's correct. Lord, we all know how this world works. This world works by taking advantage, by manipulating, by manipulating, by the bait and switch. And so often Lord, at the church we work the same way. Forgive us. Jesus comes to cleanse the temple because the gifts given by you were turned into a tool of manipulation and oppression and coercion. And we regularly corrupt the things you give us. Please have mercy on us. Help us instead, Lord, to be and do exactly what Jesus did and was, to recognize that in His sacrifice on the cross we are forgiven. And in His resurrection we have a promise. Help us, Lord, to learn to love. Though it be costly, though we fail at it, though we stumble, help us to learn to love each other. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Will you stand?