https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1F2rlP7pswk

 A couple of months ago I introduced you to David Brooks' book, The Broken Character. It's an interesting book. He's got all these little, if you like biographies, it's kind of like a box of chocolates. Because he's got all these little biographies of famous people in American history and character. One of the things Brooks notes is that, in the early part of the 20th century and before, part of what dominated American culture was the idea that little things mattered. That the world was in some ways a spiritual, moral, dangerous place. And for people to live well, their biggest threat was not necessarily the people around them or the things in the culture in general, but their own character. He recognized that in many ways, most of us will not in the long run face our greatest threats from outside, but inside. And that the things that, the ways in our lives that we will stumble, and I'm sure many of you in this room have lived a lot of life, and you might agree with this. And I, even in my own life, that the places in my life where I stumble most were not brought by other people, but by myself. And in Brooks' contrast, this with the contemporary ethos that really took shape after World War II. That basically said that, no, we ought to live as autonomous individuals, our wills being free, unrestrained by forces around us, to go out and seek what we want, and get what we want, and do what we want. After World War II, control and restraint became the problem, and the enemies were external. One of the illustrations of this was Dwight Eisenhower, and this is a picture of him and his mother. And Brooks begins his story by talking about a situation. And one Halloween, Dwight Eisenhower was the youngest I think of four brothers, and the older brothers were allowed to go out trick-or-treating, and the parents did not want Dwight to go out. And he was furious. And one of the things that you probably don't know about Dwight Eisenhower was that he had a terrible temperament. And in fact, he would just become enraged by being crossed. And even as a young boy, when he was told he couldn't go out trick-or-treating, he threw a fit, and he went out into the front yard and started punching the tree until his fists were blunt. And so his parents reacted, but both in different ways. His father shook him, lashed him with a hickory switch, and sent him to bed. About an hour later, with ice sobbing into his pillow, who was like seven years old, his mother came up and sat silently rocking in the chair next to his bed. Eventually she quoted a verse from the Bible, He that conquereth his own soul is greater than he who taketh a city. And for Brooks, this story typifies a culture that has ceased. And for Eisenhower, this was fundamental, because if you know anything about Eisenhower's story, Eisenhower would of course become the supreme commander of the Allied forces in Europe. He would have to orchestrate D-Day, and a big part of his job was to try to balance all of the egos of the generals that were vying for supremacy in that area, and to try to keep all the Allies on a task. And this would make Ike furious at times. So one of the things he would do is he would write a list of names in his pocket that he was furious at, but knew he could never get away with lashing out. So he'd just write their names down, and eventually crumple up the paper and throw it away. That was how he learned to manage himself. The difficulty we have is that if today he told Ike, just be true to yourself and be who you really are, he probably would have been a drunk at some bar somewhere screaming about the politicians on his feet. This is in contrast with the next article I'm about to bring forward, which I picked up on the internet this week, entitled, Polyamory is Next, and I'm One Reason Why, and it's written by a woman named Sarah Burroughs, who tells a little bit of her story. Brad and I are not legally married, nor do we ever plan to be, but there aren't a lot of practical differences between us and the married couple. We've owned a home together, had a child together, and had every intention, although no promises, of staying together until death do us part. We are hoping polyamory can help make that happen. Four years into our relationship, we found ourselves in the typical rut of co-dependence, resentment, boredom, and fighting over the grocery bills. We had an unplanned baby, I quit my job to do attachment parenting full-time, and Brad was working long hours in the dungeon of a warehouse. I was stuck at home washing dishes, folding laundry, and having a two-year-old poured out of my mind. If we didn't have anything to fight about, we'd find something, just to make life a little more interesting. I freed myself from the grips of government, religion, and parents. The only chains left to throw off were those on my sexuality, particularly the chains of monogamy. The first authority I came to see as illegitimate was government, slowly after discovering Ron Paul in 2008. I don't think everyone who votes for Ron Paul goes this way, but she did. I stumbled into his campaign like a rabbit hole that led me to the question of all society's rules. Soon after, I started to question my religion, Christianity. How much of it had been made up, twisted into tribe, in collusion with the government, to support the powers that be? Along with the fear of God, I cast off any respect for parental authority I once had. Since the punitive authoritarian men in the clouds was no longer real to me, who wants to save children from their parents? You might think about this a little bit more when your child is a little older. I educated myself about peaceful parenting and became determined to treat my daughter as a free, autonomous person with inalienable rights, not as my property. Since we have discovered polyamory, we don't care about new houses or new cars or vacations. What's interesting about this line is she saw that there were idols in her heart that would drive her in different directions. And so now her new strategy is to contain those idols. What really makes us think is the idea of falling in love over and over and over again. Now we have the best of both worlds, the security of a steady, stable partner to have until old, and the sense of adventure and excitement at the thought of the unknown, the possibility of new romance around every corner, the butterflies in our stomachs we never thought we'd get the chance to feel again. We've gotten a lot of warnings and admonitions from well-attentioned friends and family members that we're going to destroy our relationship and hurt our daughter. But we feel exactly the opposite. For us, this is the perfect opportunity to save our relationship, spare our daughter from the heartbreak of a broken family, and give her the blessing of happy parents and extended family. Wish us luck. Now I know some of you have lived some life and you read this and you say, yeah, I understand that you don't know a lot about life. You don't know a lot about this world. And again, in a sense, what may be true for some of us, some of us might read Sarah Burroughs' thing and say, yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Others of us look at it and say, that sounds foolish and reckless. And right there again, we are on the cusp of David Brooks' two ways of looking at life. Are our problems fundamentally inside of ourselves or are our problems fundamentally circumstantial? And by rearranging circumstances, can we create for ourselves the lives that we want? There's a passage in the Bible that probably exemplifies the kind of religion Sarah Burroughs is fleeing from. It's this passage from the book of Numbers. If you remember last week, we talked about Balaam and Baalek and the talking donkey and how Baalek wants Israel cursed. And what's interesting about this story is this next story comes right after in the sense what the text is saying is there's no power on earth that can defeat Israel except Israel. When Israel welled and chipped, the people began to prostitute themselves with the daughters of Moab. Because if you open your NIV and you look at this verse, what the verse would probably say, the men of Israel began to have sexual immorality with the daughters of Moab. Now, that's not the best translation. This particular translation is the closest to the Hebrew. And it essentially says what the text says is that the men of Israel began to prostitute themselves with the daughters of Moab. So it's like the end of the verse. So what's interesting about this is that the men of Israel began to prostitute themselves with the daughters of Moab. That's okay, Daniel. The language is very specific actually in Hebrew. And the language that's used is almost always the same language that's used when Israel went after foreign gods. And the imagery of prostituting oneself is very vivid in a sense what it's saying is the men of Israel began to sell themselves via the daughters of Moab to the gods of Moab. In other words, what the men of Israel saw was an opportunity where they could have more children, more lives, more land. And what the Baals, which were some of the common gods in Canaan at the time, what the Baals essentially promised were fertility and prosperity. And that's what's behind that world. The people began to prostitute themselves with the daughters of Moab. They invited the people to the sacrifices of their gods, and the people ate and worshiped their gods. So Israel was joined together to bail Peor, and Yahweh became angry with Israel. Yahweh said to Moses, take all the leaders of the people and kill them before the Son, so that the fierce anger of Yahweh may turn from Israel. Now the language again, I left the very literalistic language of the Hebrew text in here, and it essentially says what this ancient relief that the Baals had in the past, what this ancient relief demonstrates, which was take the leaders of the people and impale them on poles to stop the wrath of God. So Moses said to the judges of Israel, who were the ones that the Lord had just told, to put them on poles. Each of you killed his men who were joined together with the people. So notice for a moment here, God gives this order, impale all your leaders and judges, put them up on poles, expose them to the Son dead, and my wrath will stop against this rebellious people. Moses ignores God's command and says to the leaders that have just been exiled to death, get out your swords and kill all the evildoers, the ones who are actually doing it. Now if we pause here for a moment, we might remember a number of weeks ago when the Lord told Moses, go speak to the Rock, and Moses struck the Rock, and Moses was now allowed into the promised land. What's interesting about this passage here is, Moses completely ignores God's command, and God says nothing. There's no judgment against Moses, and Moses changes the command to another command where the leaders are not responsible, oh Moses, how convenient. And they're going to push down the punishment to the people who are doing it. And behold, a man from the Israelites came and brought his brothers, and brought his brother, and Midianite woman before the eyes of Moses, and put the eyes of all the community of Israelites, they were sleeping at the doorway of the tent of the assembly. Now the text here had a little bit of problem with this translation here, because essentially the Hebrews are doing a pun on words here. But what happens is, right while the leaders are deliberating this catastrophe, figuring out what to do, a guy comes through, and he's a prominent prince of one of the tribes of Israel, and he comes through with a princess of one of the tribes of Midianite, and they go to a special tent. And the special tent was the place that now in the ancient world, if you consummate a marriage, it was a very important public thing. So often what they had was a special tent for it. And so if a man and a woman get married, they have the big wedding celebration. And you know when we have a wedding, yeah, I'm looking at YouTube because that's coming up soon. When we have a wedding, we have all of these slightly gaudy ceremonies like the groom takes off the garter, and these are all these groggy ways that we like to say, oh boy, something big is going to happen. Well, in the ancient world, they all knew what happened after a wedding, and consummating the marriage was an important thing. And so there were a variety of traditions that involved. Well, one of the traditions was there was a special tent that everyone knew where it was so the wedding could be consummated. And of course, it's a tent, and everyone's around outside. They can't see anything, but they're listening. And so this Hebrew prince and his Midianite princess go into this special tent, and everybody knows what this means. But now what does it mean? What essentially is happening is, Baal in the chapter before looked down from the mountain and all the Israelites and says, they're going to destroy my nation. There was also some Jewish Midrash that developed. Now, Midrash was commentaries and other stories that rabbis developed. Some of the stories said things like, well, Balaam wasn't allowed to curse them, and so he came to Balaam and said, ah, I know how you can snare the Israelites. Send in the girls. But this Midrash basically blamed the women and made them property of the king. What the text actually has is much more subtle. It was the men of Israel who prostituted themselves with the women of Midian. And when this man takes this Midianite princess and they go into the tent, it's a public declaration that we're creating an alliance with Moab and with Midian. That we are joining our peoples. There's a lot of discussion, obviously, about the purpose of marriage. Well, in the ancient world, no one was confused by the purpose of marriage. Marriage is the only way to actually make family out of strangers. And the purpose of this union in this tent was, in fact, to join Israel with Moab and Midian and to say, we are all one people and we will all serve under the Veils. And we will all be one big happy family. And they did this so brazenly in front of Moab and the high priests that everything stops. Verse 7. When Phineas, son of Eleazar, son of Aaron, the priest saw this, he got up in the midst of the community, took a spear in his hand, and went after the man of Israel into the woman's section of the tent. See, again, this text is a little fuzzy. And he drove the two of them, the man of Israel and the woman, into their belly. And the plague among the Israelites stopped. And the ones who died in the plague were 24,000. Now, again, this text is a little murky and a lot of modern texts will try to clean it up, but they'll also kind of christenate it. What the Hebrew pretty much literally says is that in this tent, Phineas walks, takes his spear, and while the two are in the middle of the act, drives the spear through both of them, through their genitals, into the ground. So why on earth do you think of this story? Isn't this exactly the kind of story we have in the Old Testament that we look and say, this shouldn't be in a holy book. Maybe a story like this shouldn't be in any book. Because first of all, God rains down and says, kill all the leaders, put them on hold. Moses ignores them and says, kill all the people who do the bad stuff and save the leaders who are my friends. And then Phineas, in this one thing, takes a spear and does something that is difficult to describe in polite company. And you came to church this morning hoping for a nice little story so you could feel spiritually uplifted and good about yourself. Well, you're in the wrong church. So, and then the next verse basically explains who these people were. The name of the man of Israel who was struck with the Midianite woman was Zemres, son of Zelu, the leader of the family of the Sinianites. And the name of the Midianite woman who was struck was Chosky, daughter of Zer, a leader of the tribe of the family of Midian. Now this raises for us all kinds of difficult questions. One of which is, why does God fly off the handle and give a command like this? The next is, why does Moses completely ignore God and God doesn't say anything? And then the third thing is, Phineas, in a sense flies off the handle, takes this spear, does this thing, and then a flame that we heard nothing about suddenly stops. So 24,000 people have been killed. Well, if you read the entire book of Numbers, one of the things that you realize is that the entire book is set up to discuss rebellion. And the major rebellion of the book is the major rebellion of Israel that essentially does not believe God. And so the book is about 40 years in the desert because Israel doesn't believe and so a new generation will come up and take over. So that helps with some questions. Oh, what about God? I thought when we opened the Bible, God was supposed to be clear and brilliant and we'd read this God and we'd say, oh, this is exactly the kind of God I want. Because we talked about last week with Bala, this is part of our difficulty. Because if you've ever noticed, the most difficult thing about, I remember having a conversation with my guy, he was up there in years, we were talking a little bit, and he said, yeah, my wife died a couple of years ago. He said, my dog died two months ago. I sure do miss my dog. What do you mean? The wife was more difficult than the dog. Why was the wife more difficult than the dog? Because the wife is a human being. The wife has a will of her own. The wife isn't a projection of your needs and your desires. The wife is a flesh and blood image bearer of God himself. How much more difficult will God be than even the one person that you've chosen out of everyone else that you desire to live with? You see, God in the Bible is, as C.S. Lewis said, not a safe liar. And so we're left to wonder, well, why is it, first of all, the Lord brings down and gives us dramatic penalty, put him on all the pipes. Moses completely ignores him, tries to do kind of a leadership, you know, damage control thing, he'll cut her out, he'll kill all the people who are doing it, and Phineas acts with decision and then the plate stops. One of the things that you notice is that this is not the only story in the Old Testament like this. In fact, many of the stories where God is intimately connected with someone, God and the person he's connected with are almost always caught in exchange of ideas, and often God plays the heavy. Again and again in the desert labyrinths, the Lord is sick. In fact, this story mirrors the story that happened in Exodus of the Golden Cap. And the Lord sees this and says, step out of the way, Moses, I'm going to blast them and I'm going to make a new nation out of you. What does Moses do? He stands in the way and says, Lord, don't touch them. If you blast them, I'm not going to work with you. What does that mean, Moses? Moses becomes an intercessor. Moses becomes the voice of mercy, and so the Lord listens to Moses and relents. The same story happens with Abraham and Sodom and Gomorrah, when Abraham is bargaining with God about Sodom and Gomorrah. If there are 50 righteous people, will you spare the sea? And he comes to the Lord and says, will you sweep away the righteous with the unrighteous? And so I think what we see here in this moment is the Lord says something about the seriousness of sin. Moses completely ignores it and tries something else, and Moses isn't judged for it. Another thing that we notice about the Bible is that, you see this especially with Jesus, miracles in the New Testament are almost always tricks of time. Multiplication of the loaves and the fishes, the stilling of the storm, the water to wine. In a sense, what many of the miracles God does is speeds up redemptive history and fulfills in a moment with Jesus what will come in the age to come. We see this again and again with Jesus. The sick are laid, the sick are made whole, the lame dance, even the dead are raised. We also see this in the punishment of God. So there's this plague moving through, killing lots of people. What does that plague mean? I often reflect on the fact that, you know, there's a plague that's happening 24-7 all over this world. That all of us, and I'm going to stay attentive to it because we're all completely used to it. And that's just like the age of decay. Every one of you is growing older. Young men are cut down in the final of their life by violence in the street. Wars are raging all over this world. How many of you expect to survive the age of decay? Will you avoid the grave? Plagues, in a sense, like miracles are sped up redemption, plagues are sped up death. And when in a sense, God says, when he says, voice the leaders on poles as they're offering to me to stop it. I was just saying, look at the way the world is. Because this plague is rampaging this world and it's taking us all. And the question is, how can the plague be stopped? What's at risk in this story is that Balaam couldn't destroy Israel. Israel can only destroy itself. The apostle Paul says the wages of sin is death. Which means that all of these things that you and I do, all of these things that maybe have public sanctions, maybe don't. All of these ways that we try to make life work are actually spinning death for ourselves in small tiny little increments. And we don't even realize it. This plague is a sped up death which will take us anyway and the options given are all grand. You see, what I think David Brooks recognizes is that that older view of the world had something to be said for it. That life is in fact dangerous. And most of you who have lived a little while in this world know. You know what, I made a decision 50 years ago that I am still paying for today. And you think, I tripped myself up and I am paying for this for the rest of my life. The old version of the world I think was true. This world is not a safe place. This world is a dangerous place. And this world, even if you think, well if I am really smart, if I manage things well, you think that until something bad happens. Usually after your 20s or 30s you begin to realize, I can't secure my life. I can't control this world. In fact, this plague is going to take me. Sarah Murdoch also had a point. Because in a sense, some of what the old view of the world said was, if you are really careful, if you are really moral, if you are really religious, then everything will work out fine for you. That is a true theory. So what are you left with? Sarah's problem is that she tends to be naive. Because what is required is actually what the Lord said. The leaders are responsible for this disaster in Israel. They should have seen this coming. They watched it happen and they said nothing. They deserved to pay. Moses was right. Moses said basically the people doing it, they deserve to have the ax fall on them. Phineas, in a sense, in a strange sense, was the most merciful. Because instead of killing all of the leaders, or instead of killing all of the evildoers, Phineas just makes an example of one couple who were leaders in the evildoers vote. But that doesn't solve our problem. Because the thing is, we need a deliverer who is our leader. And if you want to read about this, how to work on it because I'm spelling it out. We need a deliverer who is our leader. We need a deliverer who is spotless, but we can't find one. We need a leader who in fact does everything for us. He did for us, but we can't repay him. And so in a sense what we see in this passage is that when God says, To have him stop the plague, and Moses doesn't carry it out, Jesus thousands of years later will be hoisted on a pole by us, mocked by us. And Jesus will in a sense say, this is where the plague stops. This is where death ends. This is where life begins. And it will cost me everything. You see what Moses doesn't do in this incident is what he did do at the Golden Caps, where he stands and places the people and says, Lord, keep me for that. Because that's what Jesus does. Now again, Sarah is partially right. Freedom is important. And Ike's world was right. And that our greatest threat to freedom is in fact ourselves. And Jesus says, if my sacrifice frees you to live and to love, and then the question is, what will you do with your freedom? Will you continue to live my well-being at the world's expense? Will you continue to imagine yourself as sovereign of your own soul? Or will you say, what is my only comfort in life and in death that I am not my own, but the unbinding soul in life and in death is my faithful Savior Jesus Christ, who has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. In fact, he watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head without the will of my Father in heaven. And what this does is make me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on freely to live for him. And the only way you can do this is the resurrection. And the food you need for this is this food. Because on the night Jesus was betrayed, and betrayed to have what happened to him, so as our leader, as our Savior, as our model, as our Redeemer, says to us, I am going to give myself on your behalf. No other leader can be put on hold to save you. And so I will do it. On the night he was betrayed, he took bread and looked at him. And he said, this is my body, given for you. As often as you eat this, remember me on the whole. Amen.