https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AD7OQ8NVZHA

 Thanks for helping your good friend Marshall this morning. I'm also going to talk to you today. The big fight this week was over... The big fight this week was over Ken Davis, the Kentucky County clerk who has refused to give a same-sex couple a marriage license. And this of course has dominated all kinds of yelling on Facebook, Twitter, and the news. Is she a bigot? Is she a crusader? Is this a fight about religious liberty? And I'll give you a quiz, I'll give you the answer later. What California official in 2004 broke the law in ordering same-sex marriage licenses? Just keep that in mind and you'll have the answer later at the sermon. Throughout history, groups in power, through law or power, try to bring changes to an established cultural group in the name of progress. And this in fact happens all the time throughout human history. And conflicts develop around these things and everybody has a take from one side or another who's right, who's wrong, and why. Usually the recipients of these changes often have religious, cultural, economic, or social objections to these changes and then you have to figure out how to respond. In fact, if you read the Gospels for the first time, it's not uncommon to recognize that the Gospels talk about all kinds of things that we never talk about in our culture. Hand washing before eating, not because of health, but because of religion. Whether or not you can heal on the Sabbath. What foods to eat and what foods not to eat. If you read the Gospels, you'll find all kinds of discussions about these things. And I remember as a younger person reading the Gospels and thinking, why do they spend so much time talking about these issues? Well, because these were the cultural issues of Jesus' day that groups fought over. And they fought over them because of the Greeks. You see, long before Jesus was born in Bethlehem, Alexander the Great, known as a son of God, conquered the Eastern Mediterranean world. And Alexander the Great, as demonstrated by his amazing military superiority, demonstrated to the world that not only was his military superior, but his culture was superior. His culture was more enlightened. His culture was more erudite. His culture was more educated. And what the Greeks everywhere they went tried to do, in fact, was to convince native peoples of the superiority of their culture. And most native peoples agreed. They said, surely the Greek way of life is better than our way of life. And so we're going to get with the times and become Greek. In fact, the Greeks were so successful that even when the Romans conquered the Greeks militarily, the Greeks conquered the Romans culturally. The Romans regarded themselves as kind of strong and good an organization. But the Greeks had all of these great stories and education. So increasingly, Roman ways looked pretty much like Greek ways. Before me in the ointment, as they were often, were the Jews. I'm currently reading a book on Jewish history and this author makes the point that the Jews are in fact the most tenacious group in human history. They are obnoxious. They are offensive. They are stubborn and they don't like to give in. And so when the Greeks conquered Jerusalem, they came in and they were ready to offer all of the benefits and wisdom and majesty of Greek civilization. And the main, one of the main cultural institutions of Greek civilization was the gymnasium. Because the Greeks now came into Palestine and said, we will build a gymnasium and we will teach you Greek ways. We will teach you Greek warfare. We will teach you Greek arts. We will teach you Greek culture, Greek drama, Greek philosophy. We will give you all of the welfare and riches of our highly advanced civilization. And we'd love to share this with you. If you know anything about the Greek gymnasium, it was for men only. And they did what they did obviously in the nude. Now this offended the Jews. And it wasn't just the nudity of the gymnasium. It was all of the Greek elements that they brought to the Jews. And the Jews were offended by this and upset by this until one Jewish family named the Maccabees finally had had enough. And in a moment when the Greeks that were in control of Judea were weak, the Maccabees rose up, took them on and took them down. And kicked out the Greek cultural influences and established what for them was once again a pure Judean culture and their lands. The Maccabees were brave, desperate, fanatical, strong-minded and violent men. They saw themselves as reliving the book of Joshua, reconquering the promised land from the pagans with the Lord at their elbow. They lived by the sword and died by it in a spirit of ruthless piety. Most of them met violent deaths. Simon, Simon Maccabees, who is the youngest of the first sons of Maccabees, was no exception, being treacherously murdered by the colonies, who were some of the Greeks in charge of Egypt. Along with two of his sons, Simon was a man of blood but honorable in his fashion, not self-seeking. Despite his triumphant installation as high priest and ethnarch, he retained the spirit of religious guerrilla leaders. He had the charisma of heroic piety. Now why are we talking about Ken Davis, state of Clark in Kentucky, and the Maccabees in Jerusalem when we're supposed to be talking about the book of Joshua? Because the book of Joshua for many of these groups became the touchstone and chapters 5 and 6 in the book of Joshua are all about how to take the land. Now if you read chapters 5 and 6 in the book of Joshua, you'll find some very surprising things about how to take the land. Because the book of Joshua chapters 5 and 6 does not talk about military strategy. It doesn't talk about warfare technology. The three elements in these two chapters are the circumcision of Israel, needing the commander of the armies of the Lord, and then finally the taking of Jericho. Chapter 5 begins, at the time the Lord told Joshua, make foot knives and circumcise Israelites once again. Now I'll give you another little pop quiz. Only half of Israel got circumcised at that point, not all. Which half? The men. I thought it was an obvious question. If you understand what circumcision is, the men. Now again I ask you, if you're on the eve of a violent confrontation with an indigenous people, do you take all of your soldiers up to a hill, henceforth named the Hill of Forest Gems, and have them circumcise themselves and each other? In fact, the sons of Jacob used that act at Shechem to in fact annihilate the indigenous population of Shechem in the book of Genesis. But this is in fact the first step of conquering the land. And you must have to ask from a military standpoint, how does this make sense? But the story continues. So the Israelites camped at Gilgal and celebrated the Passover in the evening of the 14th day of the month on the plains of Jericho. They ate some of the produce from the land after the Passover, including unleavened bread and roasted grain. The manna stopped appearing the day they ate some of the produce of the land, and the Israelites never ate manna again. So another point being that Israel now has transferred out of the wilderness. Actually in the trans-York they weren't technically in the wilderness, but there's a sense in the book of Joshua that there's the promised land and the really promised land, which is this promised land that will be known as Judea. And so they have the Passover celebrating, kind of putting a book end on the whole Exodus thing after the circumcision. And then Joshua was near Jericho. He looked up and saw a man standing in front of him, holding a drawn sword. Joshua approached him and asked him, Are you on our side or allied with our enemies? He answered, Truly, I am the commander of the Lord's army. Now I have arrived. And Joshua bowed down with his face to the ground and asked, What does my master want to say to the servant? And the commander of the Lord's army answered, Joshua, remove your sandals from your feet, because the place where you stand is holy. And Joshua did so. Now again, another strange little story, because surely what we expect to hear is that, You're on your side, Joshua. But instead, the commander of the Lord's army, which seems to be an angel or perhaps even the angel of the Lord, in a sense says to Joshua, I'm on nobody's side. If there are signs here, mine is the only one. And Joshua stops, recognizes it, bows down. And if you remember the story of Moses and the burning bush, this story also in a sense echoes that story. More book edits. Now Jericho was shut tightly because of the Israelites. No one was allowed to leave or enter. The Lord told Joshua, See, I am about to defeat Jericho for you. Pay attention. I'm about to defeat Jericho for you. Along with its king and its warriors. And so this in fact happens in Chapter 6. And then afterwards, but they burned the city and all that was it, except for the silver, the gold, the bronze, and the iron items that they put in the treasury of the Lord's house. Yet Joshua spared Rahab the prostitute, her father's family, and all who belonged to her. She shared it. She lives in Israel to this very day. It's a very interesting comment that scholars look at and say, When was this book written? To this very day. What I lost a doubt. To this very day. I know. I can't find it. I'm like, I can't find it. 26. Oh, thank you. At that time, Joshua made the solemn declaration. The man who attempts to rebuild the city of Jericho will stand condemned before the Lord. He will lose his firstborn son when he lays its foundations and his eldest and youngest son when he erects its gates. The Lord is with Joshua and he became famous throughout all the land. Why such a strange declaration? The first thing to understand about Israel invading the land is how militarily unsophisticated they were. We're probably around the year 1200. And there's a little fact about the Israelite army that you probably don't know. They probably don't have much besides bows and arrows, pointed sticks, and clubs. Because they didn't have metal weapons. Now it sounds a little crazy to us, but the truth is what Jericho was was a fort and its walls were high. And if all you have are maybe some bows and arrows, some pointed sticks, and some clubs, what are you going to do to a wall? The point is you can't do anything to the wall. Militarily, when Israel comes up to Jericho, Israel has no recourse. Israel has no resources. Israel has no siege weapons, no battering ramps, none of this technology. They've got nothing. And so the point of the story is that, in fact, if you remember the old movie Independence Day, with the horse fields over the ships, Israel can walk up to that wall, do all the yelling it wants, but it will never take Jericho because it doesn't have the technology to defeat, of all things, a wall. And so the point of the entire story is who gives Jericho and the land into the hands of Israel? God. Well, now suddenly the circumcision makes sense because that's dedication to the Lord. And the incident with the commander of the army makes sense because the point is only the Lord will take this land. Israel isn't capable of taking the land. And now at the end, when the fort is taken, Joshua makes a declaration, the walls here will not be rebuilt. Now pay attention to that detail. But you know how things go. And some of you are old enough to remember the Who, and one of the most famous songs of the Who is Won't Get Fooled Again. And this song of the Who is all about the fact that, you know what? There's always another revolutionary with always another revolution, and they come into the land and what do they do? Meet the new boss, same as the old boss. This is how revolutions go. In fact, if you look at the Maccabees, the sons of Maccabees that were so determined to be pious for the Lord and get rid of those naked Greeks in their gymnasium and scrub the land of all that cultural contamination from the Greeks. What did the Maccabees go on to do? John Heracanus, one of the descendants of the original Maccabees, was immune with the fundamentalist notion that it was God's will he should restore the Libidic kingdom. He was the first Jew to seek military inspiration and geopolitical guidance from the ancient historical texts of the Bible, telescoping the books of Joshua and Samuel. He accepted as literal truth that the whole Palestine was the divine inheritance of the Jewish nation and that it was not merely his right but his duty to conquer it. To do this, he created a modern army of mercenaries. If you remember, they started as guerrillas. Now they have the higher soldiers in Pagan. Moreover, the conquest, like Joshua's, had to expurgate the foreign cults and heterodox sects and if necessary, slaughter those who clung to them. John's army trampled down Samaria and razed the Samaritan temple at Mount Gerizan. He stormed after a year's siege the city of Samaria itself. He demolished it entirely and brought the streams to it to drown it. And he dug ditches to turn it into floods and water meadows. He even took away the very marks which show that the city had been there. In the same way he pillaged and burned the Greek city of Cytopolis, John's war of fire and sword were marked by the massacres of city populations whose only crime was that they were Greek-speaking. The province of Edunia was conquered and its inhabitants of its two main cities, Adora and Marissa, were forcibly converted to Judaism or slaughtered if they refused. Meet the new boss, same as the old boss. It's the Greeks, or it's the Jews, or it's the Romans, or it's the Persians, or it's the Babylonians. One takes the other. Once you're in power, it all happens again. And of course everyone in the street cries, we won't be fooled again. Of course it's all right. Now, so what we have with Kim Davis is everyone playing the victim. For those of you who knew the answer to the quiz, who in 2004 broke California state law by mandating same-sex marriages, it's, anybody recognize this guy? Anybody know his job now? Lieutenant Governor. And the Senate's saying, ah, history is written by the victors. We won't be fooled again. So I ask you about the way of the world. What does this mean? One culture takes another, establishes its hegemony, decrees its will on the masses, and round and round and round we go. Christians cry persecution. I know lots of secularists that cry theocracy. And the cynics say, winners write history, don't they? What does this have to do with the book of Joshua? One of the points of chapters five and six of the book of Joshua is precisely this. The earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof, and he can do with it as he pleases. Now this troubles us deeply, because even if we imagine we are on God's side, often in our minds it implicitly slips to God is on our side. The other item of the story that we should pay a lot of attention to is the fact that Jericho must not be rebuilt. Now for us today to hear that, it just sounds like kind of a weird thing to say, because we don't understand the economic or political implications of not rebuilding Jericho. You see, Jericho stood on one of the most important nexuses in the world in terms of trade routes. You had all of this wealth in China and India and Persia, and it all would be flooding later up to Italy and Rome and this entire world commercial system that in Africa, Europe and Asia, and you know what sits at the nexus point of that whole thing? Jericho. Jericho is one of the sites that archaeologists tell us in the world has the oldest record of human habitation. As they drill down in Jericho, they can find the city 7,000 years ago, maybe even 11,000 years ago. There is always a city at Jericho, and that city always has walls. Because how does this world work? It works by power. And the walls of Jericho mean power. And if you have Jericho, if you have a fort there, probably with a nice little saloon with an adabroose running the constitution ring, if you have Jericho, you get to control these trade routes. And you get to decide, oh, you want to bring these goods from point A to point B, I'll let you, but you must pay a what? A tax. And so Jericho, in fact, was a key point. If Israel is to become a nation, if Israel is to become a kingdom, if Israel is to become an empire, they must have Jericho, and it must collect taxes, and it must produce money, and it must produce strength, and for that you need walls. And God says, you shall not produce, you shall not put up walls at Jericho again. When you set the foundation, it'll cost you your oldest son, and when you set up the gates, in other words, finishing the walls, it will cost you your youngest son. Why? Why would God set Israel into the land and say, no walls at Jericho? It makes no sense. Just like circumcising before an invasion makes no sense. Just like God saying, I'm not on your side, before an invasion makes no sense. There's Jericho. Entry into the land, which connects you to the seaport, which connects you to all the rest of the Mediterranean. Because in fact, Jesus is Jericho. You see, Jesus comes with powers and rights. He declares himself to be the son of God. And he demonstrates it by stealing a storm, by raising the dead, by healing the sick. And anybody who can steal a storm can make a storm. And anybody who can heal the sick can make people sick, and anybody who can raise the dead can make people dead. And with that kind of power, why doesn't Jesus fix what's wrong in the land? In fact, the people of the land said Roman power and money are making our daughters into prostitutes. And making our sons into tax collectors. And making our sons, worst of all, into Greeks. Why doesn't Jesus do anything about it? See, his contemporaries wanted Jesus to be a Maccabee. And in fact, quite likely when his disciples were angling up to him, they were thinking, Jesus is going to be the new Maccabee, and I'm going to be his lieutenant. Lieutenant governor maybe. And then of course, Jesus says, I'm going to Jerusalem, and I'm going to be handed over into the hands of Gentiles, and I'm going to be killed. And his disciples said, over my dead body. And Jesus said, get behind me, Satan. Jesus also said, and I'll be raised again, but once he said he'd be killed, they stopped listening. And that's the story. And here we are. Now, here we have a question. What should Kim Davis do? Now many will say, if she wants her job, she will do as the law says. Am I right? Should she resign? Should she go to jail? A pastor, last year in Texas, because of racism, protestant racism, decided to light himself on fire and die at a parking lot. Should she do that? What should she do? Well, what we have here is the Jericho plundering. Because both sides want to secure an outcome. And both sides want to have a fight. But the Jericho quandary is actually this. You shall not rebuild Jericho. Lord, are you sane? How will Israel function without that necessary income? He's king of the world, but he's going to the cross. Are you sane? How does getting killed by the Romans fix anything? Oh, the resurrection. So after he rises from the dead, then he goes and kills Romans. So then he ascends. And his disciples start marching around, talking about his death and resurrection, and hosting everyone for a meal. You see, the who had a point. Because all of our revolutions just produced more revolutions. And God comes into our revolution and says, If anybody's blood is going to be shed, it will be mine. Now I ask you, was Jesus successful? Well, what do you mean by success? Well, can Davis be successful? I don't know. What do you mean by success? Was Gavinoosum successful? I don't know. What do you mean by success? Was Characro successful? Was Joshua successful? Well, I ask you, what is your definition of success? Because Jesus starts his revolution this way. On the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he said, This is my body broken for you. I will do this in remembrance of me. Because what you have right here are the tools not of revolutions, but of recreation. Now, you might go home today and say, Well, the pastor talked about Kim Davis. I'm not sure where he stands. Then we can talk about that sometime. But that's exactly what happened to Jesus. Jesus, should we pay taxes to Caesar? Jesus, how should we feel about Herod? What kinds of things did Jesus say? Open your Bible and read that. Because on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it and said, This is my answer to your culture, Judea. I am not a Maccabees. Here is my body. Take, eat, remember, and believe this bread is for you. And if you take this bread, you aren't his kind of warrior. Now that leaves a lot of questions. And I know we can talk about it a long time. But this is what I want to put before you. This is what I want to challenge us with.