https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TJXywWQz3e4

 Any ideas when this famous picture was taken? Guess which war? World War II. World War II. Any ideas where? It's a place called the Eagle's Nest. Hitler built a chalet up in the mountains. It was given to him in the 30s and was a place where he would go to relax. There's interesting footage of Eva Braun was his mistress and her sister got married up there. There's a lot of interesting color footage of Goebbels and Goering and all of Hitler's friends. Well, after the Allies invaded Europe, the Third Army made it into Germany and one of the assignments was to take the Eagle's Nest. And so here's a picture of American soldiers drinking Hitler's wine. And of course, for a war-weary nation and a war-weary world, this was good news. And this was a happy moment. Any idea where these pictures are from? These are much more recent. Iraq. The war in Iraq. And what are these pictures of? Hussein's Palace and the US troops coming into Baghdad. And now that Hussein's gone, what are you going to do with all this building space? I just won't make it barracks and offices for the troops. So there they are enjoying the swimming pool, lounging on this chair. Should we enjoy these pictures? That same day, King Xerxes gave Queen Esther the estate of Haman, the enemy of the Jews. And Mordecai came into the presence of the king, for Esther had told him how he was related to her. The king took out his signet ring, which he had reclaimed from Haman, and presented it to Mordecai, and Esther appointed him over Haman's estate. Haman was an enormously wealthy man. If you read earlier in the book, you'll find that in fact, Haman had offered Xerxes something like the equivalent of two-thirds of the national income of the Empire of Persia, to agree to his plan to destroy the Jews. The problem was, even after Haman's death, and even after Mordecai was now given the kingly power that Haman had had, the law still stood that the Jews could be exterminated on this day, and people could plunder them and take their wealth. So the three of them had to decide how to approach this. So they said to Edith, granting the Jews in every city the right to assemble and protect themselves, to destroy, kill, and annihilate the armed men of any nationality or province who might attack them, and their women and children, and to plunder the property of their enemies. And in fact, if you continue to read in the book of Esther, this is part of the celebration of the book. The Jewish celebration of Puren comes from the word Pur, which means lot, which would let Haman pass to decide the day for the annihilation of the Jewish people. When Mordecai left the king's presence, he was wearing a royal garment of blue and white, and a large crown of gold and a purple robe of fine linen. And the city of Susa held a joyous celebration. For the Jews it was a time of happiness and joy, gladness and honor. In every province and in every city to which the Edith of the king came, there was joy and gladness among the Jews, with feasting and celebrating. And many people of other nationalities became Jews because fear of the Jews had seized them. What an amazing story. You can imagine the celebration. In the book of Esther it goes to tell how in fact there was a small civil war that happened in the Persian Empire, and the Jews and the enemies fought, and the Jews prevailed. But while they were given legal authority to plunder their enemies, the Jews did not plunder their enemies. They just killed the soldiers that were trying to kill them. It's really a fulfillment of Barry's song that we read last week, where from generation to generation he is merciful to those who fear him. He has demonstrated power with his arm. He has scattered those whose pride wells up from the sheer arrogance of their harvest. He has brought down the mighty from their thrones, and has lifted up those of low deposition. He has filled the hungry with good things, and sent the rich away empty. These kinds of scenes are in our history. I was thinking about different ones that are in the movies. I remember in the movie Forest County, remember Baba Gap's Mama. After Forest makes all the money from the shrimp and business, he gives, even though Lieutenant Dan said it was a dumb idea, Forest gave half of the money to Baba Gap, to Baba's Mama. There is just one quick scene of about three seconds where Baba's Mama is sitting in this lovely room, and a white maid comes in and serves her. I love the scene of the Big Lord of the Rings fan. Every year at this time, I play the whole Lord of the Rings trilogy. The extended version takes about 13 hours. I watch it with my kids. I love that scene after Sarabat is overthrown by the Ents, and the hobbits are sitting on his cache of wealth. They are eating his food, and smoking his pipe weed, and just having a glorious celebration. This is the story of the Book of Esther. It ends with a great feast because the Jews who thought everything was going to be lost now discover that no, their enemies will be put down, and they will be rescued. This is the story now. The irony, of course, is do we think, should we celebrate this? And there were shepherds living out in the fields keeping watch over their flocks at night. An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified. But the angel said to them, do not be afraid. I bring you good news that will cause great joy for all the people. Today, in the town of David, a Savior has been born to you. He is the Messiah, the Lord. This will be a sign to you. You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger. Suddenly, a great company of the heavenly host appeared to the angel. Praise you, God, and say, glory to God in the highest heaven, and on earth peace to those on whom his Savior rests. When the angels have left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, let us go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about. I played you the song from Bono, and every time I get to this time of year, on one hand I try to listen to Handel's Messiah as often as I can, but also whenever I hear these words, peace on earth, I hear Bono's haunting, pleading voice asking those hard questions. You said peace on earth, and you know Bono comes out of Ireland, then up until recently the nation of Ireland was wracked with bombing after bombing and this endless war between the Irish Republican Army in North Ireland and the British who continue to have control over it. On and on it goes, and so you hear Bono asking these hard questions. Heaven on earth, we need it now. I'm sick of all of this hanging around. I'm sick of sorrow. I'm sick of the pain. I'm sick of hearing again and again that it's going to be peace on earth. This week getting two emails from two close friends, both of whom just writing out of their pain. One who is in the middle of a, well he's not really in the middle of the divorce, but it's in the process and there's fighting over the children and there's just pain. Another writing from a family situation that there's all kinds of illness and brokenness and to walk away means abandoning people and their pain. To stay means enduring the pain with them and they look around and they realize there's no solution. And I know many of you feel that. I know many of you are in situations where maybe it's an illness, maybe it's just old age, maybe it's a relationship, maybe it's a job, maybe it's something, but you look around and you say, there's no answer to my pain. The angels sang peace on earth, but there's no peace. There's no fix. And that's kind of what makes offing Christmas the hardest time of the year for people because there's all this joy, but the truth around that is, there's pain. And what good has Jesus done when I'm in the middle of this suffering? Jesus, can you take the time to throw a drowning man alive? Peace on earth. To those, to tell the ones who hear no sound, the sons are living in the ground. Peace on earth. Jesus, in the song you wrote, the words are sticking in my throat. Peace on earth. Hear every Christmas song, but hope and history won't rhyme. So what's at work is peace on earth. Folks, go back one round. You know, the book of Esther begins, and commentators and critics aren't happy with it because Xerxes is a misogynist, and Esther is a plaything, and Mordecai just caves in, and then that moment when Haman gets overthrown, there's some happiness there, but then in the second part of the book, the Jews take up arms and slaughter their enemies. Is this peace on earth? This week, the big talk on the internet was the old Phil Robertson story. And back and forth people go, and peace on earth. Is this bringing peace on earth? We do not cheer, do we not cheer when our side in any conflict wins points? Our stories are full of cheering, but we feel guilty about the violence, yet we still enjoy the security of it. Where is there peace on earth? And is there even peace in the story? On one hand, we have Jesus on the cross. Two other men, both criminals, were also let out to be executed. When they came out to the place called the Skull, they crucified him. There along with the criminals, one on his right and one on his left, and Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing. And they divided up his clothes by casting the lots. So on one hand, we have the cross where Jesus prays, Forgive my enemies. The same cross seen in the book of Colossians as triumph. And having disarmed the powers and authorities, he made a public spectacle of them. Triumphate over them by the cross. So we see in this moment where Jesus is forgiving enemies, the principalities and powers, which are the spiritual forces in the heavenlies, are being dragged in triumphal procession behind Jesus, the reigning and victorious king. To those who is it, to the one who is victorious and does my will to the end, I will give authority over the nations. That one will rule them with an iron scepter and will dash them to pieces like pottery. Again, in the words of the Messiah, there is the refrain, and I will dash them to pieces as a broken vessel. On and on it goes. And so I think, how can I make sense of this? On one hand, we have the Jesus who lays down his life for his enemies. On the other hand, we have the Jesus who takes up the iron scepter and finally crushes his foes. And we celebrate. Is that peace on earth? How can we bring these two sides together? Revelation 21. Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any sea. I saw the holy city of the good Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride, beautifully dressed for her husband. And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, Look, God's dwelling place is now among the people, and he will dwell with them. They will be his people, and God himself will be with them and will be their God. And he will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away. And I read this, and it's like water to a thirsty soul. And I believe that this day is coming. But when? He who was seated on the throne said, I am making everything due. And he said, Write this down, for these words are trustworthy and true. He said to me, It is done. I am the Alpha and the Omega, and the Him and the Ant, to the thirsty I will give water without cost, from the spring of the water of life. Those who are victorious will inherit all of this, and I will be their God, and they will be my children. And again, I listen to this, and I'm filled with this vision, and I see it, and I hunger and thirst for it, and I say, Lord, when, when, when will this come? And often I stop reading the passage at this point. But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters, and all liars, they will be consigned into the fiery lake of burning sulfur. This is the second death. And on one hand, I can sit with the third army, in Hitler's eagle's nest, and enjoy his wine and celebrate. And I can sit with the U.S. troops that sit in Saddam's palace, and I can sing with Mary, and again, I can sit with Haman and Esther, and say, This is wonderful. But when I look at this list, I'm on that list. Are you on this list? In fact, when I look at this list, powers, you mean like the Apostle Peter, he trained his Lord? Unbelieving, like Thomas, who didn't believe he was raised from the dead? The vile, like the lepers that Jesus healed? The murderers, like the Apostle Paul, who holds the garments as their stoning statement? The sexually immoral, like King David, who takes Bathsheba and kills her husband? Those who practice magic arts, the idolaters, and liars. Dr. House says everyone lies, and he's right. So, can there be peace on Earth? One of the great movies of our time is The Dark Knight, with Batman and Heath Ledger playing the Joker. One of the things many people want from The Joker is that different scenes in the movie when he's threatening to do evil to someone, he'll talk about his backstory. How do you think I got these scars? And each time he says a different story. And so everyone's wondering, How did the Joker become so evil? How did the Joker become so awful? We want the backstory. In fact, I haven't seen it, but I've heard about this Broadway show, Wicked, that basically is the story of one of the wicked witches of Oz. And it's the story, well, she's only wicked because her sister was mean to her. And so somehow, if we always give a backstory to evil, then somehow evil, but we understand it better, and it kind of domesticates it. Christopher Nolan, who I think is really one of the geniuses in Hollywood today, did an interview about The Joker, and everyone's asking, Where's the backstory for The Joker? And he basically said, If I give The Joker a backstory, he won't be terrifying anymore, because you'll think you understand him. But we don't understand evil. It's beyond us. A backstory helps us sympathize with the character, but the struggle of the story for Batman is so much more difficult than the story for Batman, and it's not that he needs to sympathize with The Joker. He needs to overcome him. This creates an enormous conflict for Batman, repeatedly, because there are moments when he's able to kill The Joker, and you see this in the movie where Batman has a chance to just murder him, and he doesn't. Well, why doesn't Batman just kill him? Because if Batman just kills him, then he's a murderer. And so he stops, and The Joker laughs at him, because, See? You can't be good and destroy me at the same time. And The Joker wants him to, but Batman knows he would kill The Joker at the cost of his own integrity, at the cost of his own self. Our problem with evil, like Batman's problem with The Joker, like God's problem with us, is that we are all balled together. Alexander Solzhenitsyn says, you know, we want to draw these lines between good and evil, and we want to put people on one side or the other. But Solzhenitsyn makes the comment, after years spent in the gulag, the line of good and evil runs in every one of our hearts. And so God's problem is how can evil be overcome when we're evil? How can he save us from the evil that's inside of us, and that we do to each other? And will it be overcome? Some of you might have noticed, I hear it every Christmas time, but hope and history won't rhyme. Bono is riffing off Mark Twain, because Mark Twain made the comment, history doesn't repeat itself, but it does rhyme. What does he mean by that? It means that when we see Esther and Mordecai and their triumphant, and Mordecai is wearing royal robes, and when we see the soldiers in the evil's nest, and when we see Baba's mama sitting at that glorious table with the white-veined disherner out of soup, that history is rhyming, that we're understanding something of Mary's song, that the Lord raises up the lowly and brings down the crowd. But this is what God does. But Bono's crying out and saying, hope and history aren't rhyming. Jesus, the angels declared peace on earth, but where's the peace? How do we understand Jesus' cross and Jesus' iron scepter? The truth is, we won't explain it. We won't give an answer that will all say, oh, okay, now I get it. Because that's really not the kinds of answers the Bible gives. The Bible is much more a story we're asked to live into. At the end of the age, God doesn't hand out a multiplication, a standardized test for you to bubble in answers on things. We're being asked to live out this story in the here and now, and so then the questions are much more, how do our stories rhyme with the story of stories? How will the harmonies be found in how we live out the agony that each of you are living in right now? When you're in that place where there is no answer, what do you do? Do you kill? Do you abandon? Do you suffer? Do you pray? They say hurt people hurt people, and there's a reason for that. We live our way into this story, and then the question is, where are we in this story? And in many ways, we live where Jesus is in the age of decay. The church has always been a cruciform community where sometimes the Lord delivers us with miracles, but most of the time we suffer together, while he suffered alone on the cross. And you say, yeah, pastor, that's really hard. Yeah, it is. I don't have words to describe how hard it is, but many of you know how hard it is, because you're living it, or you have lived it, and all of us will live it. That's the misery. But the Gospel says, it is out of this misery that joy comes. He disarmed the powers and the authorities. He made a public spectacle of them, while in fact he was suffering. No one around him saw it. His enemies mocked him. His disciples abandoned him. But the Bible says that at that moment, the evil that had been plaguing us for centuries became undone. The spiritual powers that are above the earth became disarmed. And in that moment of suffering, Jesus' triumph was seen. A number of weeks ago I told you about stories and talked about the fact that if someone gives a story of everything always being rosy, we don't pay any attention. We don't value the person. But it's when someone suffers greatly. It's when the spouse stays with the Alzheimer's victim. It's when the parent stays with the special needs child. It's when you don't abandon because it's easy, but you endure because of love. That evil is broken. Evil isn't broken by killing the joker. Evil is challenged by refusing to be the joker. You see, one greater than Mordecai is seen in Mordecai's image. One greater than Mordecai, who left everything and became an infant vulnerable to all that we're vulnerable to, and then became our victim. He came and designed the principalities and powers. He suffered. He didn't have to, but he wanted us. I looked and a loud voice from the throne said, Look, God's dwelling place is now among the people. And He will dwell with them, and they will be His people, and God Himself will be with them and be their God. He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or mourning or crime or pain. And here's the thing. How can you endure suffering? How can you not cut and run? How can you not take the easy way out? How can you resist doing what we see all the time in the world of people either running away or hitting back? If you have a vision that this day will come, you can say, Okay, I suffer now, but only for a time. I suffer now, but only for a moment. Why did Jesus stay on that cross? Why? His people around Him said, Ah, He can't get down. He could get down in a moment. Why did He stay on the cross? Because He knew He must endure it, for the principalities and powers to be disarmed and for the resurrection to come. He knew He must die, so His love keeps Him on the cross. And He wears the spittle of His enemies, and He endures their lacqueries. And one thief of the two looks at Him, and begins to dawn on Him. What is really happening? And asks the question, Lord, remember me when you come into Your Kingdom, and Jesus says, What to Him? Surely, this day, You will be with me in Paradise. You are on the cross now, but Your rescue is coming, so endure. The Christian life is these two things. It's gratitude for the victory that has been won, but it's also endurance. Because there is no answer right now, but the answer is coming. I love Bono's song, and I love how he speaks of it. The one thing that the song needs to lean into is that hope and history will rhyme. Mordecai and Esther triumph over Haman. Hitler is vanquished. Every empire that rises crumbles. And there will be a day when empire and death and the age of decay will crumble to rise no more. Do you believe peace on earth? Can you endure what you are being asked to endure? I believe you can. I believe He will give you the strength. And when you stumble, He will forgive, and you'll probably be given the challenge to endure again. Let's pray. Lord, we long for peace on earth. We long for the hunger and the war and the abuse and the strife and the suffering and the decay to be over with. And we sing with Bono, where is that Lord? We need peace on earth. And so we cry out, Maranatha, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. But we believe that you are building a house. And you are tearing down the walls. And you are knocking things about. But you are building a palace. We see that in Jesus' story. We are being asked to live into Jesus' story. We are being asked to rhyme Jesus' story. We do so with our pain and our suffering. And we are awaiting the victory. So come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.