https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qYxhmXP8hJY

 I first came across this idea in a Philip Yancey book. Philip Yancey is known for asking these kinds of hard questions. He asked the question, what kind of friend is God? And he said that if he imagines himself as a friend, if he had the kind of power that God has, and a friend came to him needing this or that, needing money or a job or healing, how could he as a friend not reach out and fix things? As a pastor, I often work with people who have serious needs, and so often there's little I can I pray for them, I work with them, but so often my heart just longs to resolve their difficulty, and we bring it before the Lord and it isn't resolved. A lot of times when I read things on the internet, on blogs of people deconverting, this sometimes people present as a new idea. Actually, when I read the book of Isaiah, we've been all year actually in the book of Isaiah in our adult Sunday school class. When I read the book of Isaiah, I find this in fact to be a very old idea, that this idea of where is God? Why isn't he listening? Why are things so difficult? Why doesn't God just act and resolve my problem, my situation, my crisis? Why doesn't God intervene? This is an idea that the people of God have been wrestling with for as long as there's been a people of God. One of the things I notice with those who walk away from the faith is that I find their path ironic because on one hand many say God didn't act or God isn't acting. And so I'm going to walk away and leave it behind. And part of me wants to say, well, that's kind of irrational, isn't it? Let's imagine you had a very wealthy and powerful friend. You were friends with Bill Gates and you had a crisis and you sent him a note and you sent him another note. Would you send him a third note and say, I hate you Bill, because you didn't read the first ones and walk away? Or would you swallow your pride and say, maybe one of these days Bill Gates will hear my plea? I guess it depends a lot on how we're wired internally. But often people get to a point and they say, enough. It's better to imagine there is no God than to imagine that there is a God and he willfully isn't listening or acting on my behalf. In a sense, it's the reverse of Shakespeare's note. It's better to have loved and lost. And these people say, no, it isn't better. But if you read the book of Isaiah, you'll find these longings and these wishes and these questions come through chapter after chapter as Israel is in lonely exile in Babylon or has come back from Babylon and all of the prophecies of the restoration of Jerusalem just haven't come to be. Look down from heaven and sea, from your lofty throne, holy and glorious. Where are your zeal and your light? Your tenderness and compassion are withheld from us. Have you ever felt that way? But you are our Father. This is one of the few places in the Old Testament where the Lord is called their Father. You are our Father. Though Abraham does not know us or Israel acknowledges us. In other words, the prophet is saying to the Lord, you are our Father. Even if Abraham our patriarch or Israel, Jacob our patriarch, disinherit us, you still are our Father. You Lord are our Father. Our Redeemer from of old is your name. Why Lord, do you make us wander from your ways and harden our hearts so we do not revere you? You get a sense of these verses of the struggling, of kind of saying to the Lord, you know, why haven't you cleared it up so we believe that our relationship with you is clean and easy? Return for the sake of your servants, the tribes that are your inheritance. For a while your people possessed your holy place, but now our enemies have trampled down your sanctuary. We are yours from of old, but you have not pulled over them. They have not been called by your name. This is my favorite verse of the passage. Oh, that you would rend the heavens and come down. That the mountain would tremble before you. We've been going through Exodus and we've had this vision of God coming out of the sky and coming on to Mount Zion. Everyone sees him, so the prophet says, Lord, won't you just raise the heavens open and come down? Come down! As when fire sets twins ablaze and causes water to boil, come down and make your name known to your enemies and cause the nations to quake before you. In a sense, Israel is saying, we've been believing in you, we've been trusting in you, we've been following with you, but the nations mock us and say, where is your God? What kind of God can you have when your dwelling is so pitiful? When you are weak and you are abused and abused by every passing empire? What God can possibly own you? And so the prophet says, Lord, vindicate yourself, come down! For when you did awesome things that we did not expect, you came down and the mountain trembled before you. And here you have the sense of it. It's one thing if it's like Santa Claus and you say it's wishful thinking, but Lord, you acted in the past, why not act now? Of course, today we live in a skeptical, secular society. And there are questions like, does God tear the sky apart? And there are churches that will say, well, these are images of good things happening and no wishes of people. But I don't have the prophet. I don't hear the prophet having that sense. And I don't value that sense either. What good is a God that can't rend the skies apart and can't save and deliver? Does God reach in and rescue? Is Christianity the story of God's rescue of us? Or is it just a set of ideas to help us feel better by adjusting our own behavior? The prophet continues. Since ancient times, no one has heard, no ear has perceived, no eye has seen any God beside you who acts on behalf of those who wait for him. Here the prophet gives us a statement of faith and says, you're the only God. You are it. No one has ever known a God like you. You come to help those who gladly do right, who remember your ways. But when we continue to sin against them, you are angry. How then can we be saved? All of us have become like one who is unclean. And all our righteous acts are like filthy rags. We all shrivel up like a leaf and like the winds our sins sweep us away. No one calls on your name or strives to lay hold of you, for you have hidden your face from us and have given us over to our sins. Yet you, O Lord, are our Father. We are the clay. You are the potter. We are all the work of your hands. Do not be angry beyond measure, Lord. Do not remember our sins forever. Oh, look on us, we pray, for we are all your people. Your sacred cities have become a wasteland. Even Zion is a wasteland, Jerusalem a desolation. Our holy and glorious temple where our ancestors praised you has been burned with fire and all that we treasure lies in ruins. After all this, Lord, will you hold yourself back? Will you keep silent and punish us beyond measure? Can you see the posture of the prophet? He has all of these questions that we have. Lord, why do you stay away? Why are you far off? Why let your name be defiled? Why don't you rend open the heavens and act? But then he moves on and says, But you will I trust instill, because what other God can we find? Where else can we turn? Advent. In Advent, we pray for God to rend the skies. We pray for God to swoop in and act. We're not satisfied with ideas like, well, these are just important thoughts to inspire us or motivate us. No! The magnitude of what we suffer demands nothing less than the skies be open and the earth be redeemed. It's a call to the people to not give up their faith. It's a call to the people who are suffering and who have endured loss to say, hang on, hold on, this God will come. And the people one to another say, but how long? When? Can I still believe? Can I still hold on? Can I still trust? And it's a confession of faith. You saw that right there. On one hand, Isaiah says, Lord, rend the skies. On the other hand, he knows and says, but if you come down, what does that mean for me? On one hand, when I look at my problems, I say, Lord, I want you to fix my problems. But in the areas of my life where I have a problem, do I want God that close? Do I want to look at him face to face? Do I want him inside my message? Do I want him to say, this needs to change? I probably don't. See, I'm a quintessential American. I want my problems solved and I want my needs met, but I basically want God to butt out of the spaces of my life where I want him to leave me alone in my life. I want him to leave me alone in my mess. And so what then does that mean? Do we want you to come or not? Does it depend how we're feeling that day? The clear call for the Lord to tear apart the sky and come down is made by us and our fear and pain. In this emotional state, we imagine we are innocent and our adversary guilty. Our hearts naturally isolate this cry and this pain and we isolate this cry in verse 1 in our self-righteous indulging in a revenge fantasy that culminates in the slaughter of our adversaries. A more sober assessment of our complicity and the chaos around us however might suggest we pause on the please act now demand. Those ideas are also in this section although our fearful and hungry hearts are not as quick to grab onto them. If God does act now, how will we know we will be on the vindicated side of this judgment? John the Baptist rings through this section in the Book of Isaiah. This is the description of John and Matthew. But when he saw many of the Pharisees and the Sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them you rude of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath? Produce fruit in keeping with repentance and do not think you can say to yourselves we had Abraham as our father. I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham. The axe is already at the root of the tree and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. John missed no words. John said come to the river you are dirty and a mess and be clean once more and you had better get ready now because when God steps in if you are looking like you look now you will be toast! John said I baptize you with water for repentance but after me comes one who is more powerful than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. His winnowing fork is in his hand and he will clear his threshing floor gathering his wheat into the barn and burning up the chaff with unquenchable fire. John had the people rapture and then this happens then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John but John tried to deter him saying I need to be baptized by you and do you come to me? Jesus replied let it be so it is proper for us to do this to fulfill all righteousness that John consented as soon as Jesus was baptized he went up out of the water at that moment what happened? God opened the heavens God turned the prayer of Isaiah up and parted the sky at that moment the water was filled and he was filled at that moment the heaven was open and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him and a voice from heaven saying this is my son whom I love with whom I am well pleased think of the movie the Avengers where how many other movies where some hole opens up in the sky and aliens and monsters come through here the hole opens and what does God say and do? Out comes a dragon out comes an alien spaceship out comes a monster out comes a dove and a voice saying this is my son whom I love with him I am well pleased now I would imagine John was thinking this is just a preamble that Jesus is going to make a whip and he is going to clear out the chaff and he is going to wield the axe that is laid at the root of the tree and Jesus is going to chop it down but John waited and then John continued to do the denouncing he did until finally he poked his finger in Herod's eye once too often and Herod said I will show you how power works and he put him in prison and he was amused by John and so he thought he would keep him around in prison for a while but John in a sense was confused by both Isaiah and Jesus because with Isaiah John said why don't you rent open the sky and clean up this mess God rent open the skies and sent in a dove when John was in prison heard about the deeds of the Messiah he sent his disciples to ask him are you the one to come or is there someone else we are kind of thinking someone like Iron Man or the Hulk Jesus replied go back and report to John what you hear and see the blind receive sight the lame walk those who have ever seen are cleansed the dead appear the dead are raised and the good news is proclaimed to the poor blessed is the one who does not stumble by the count of Maine can you see why John stumbled can you feel why John stumbled do we stumble at this Jesus too do we say Jesus why don't you stop the nice stuff and get down to business with Isaiah we call on God to act in that act the world cries out for relief from the burden we have placed on the earth and its people oh that God would send remedy soon and all of us are at our breaking points with Isaiah we encourage each other not to give up hope while in our secular age it is easy to dismiss this as wishful thinking or pretty metaphor as a community we will continue to maintain the Christian story as we first in the apostles creed we believe that Jesus for our call is to deliver us from our enemies but to do the harder work of delivering us from ourselves because the anxiety that Isaiah had about what if God comes yes please, God come and deliver us from our adversaries and fix our problems and crush those who are brutal and violent and hateful and wrong but Jesus must come first because if God crushes all sin we get crushed too so Jesus comes first and says before you are ready for the full coming of God you need to know who God is and what God wants and you need to see my face we believe that Jesus heard our call not just to deliver us from our enemies but to do the harder work of delivering us from ourselves we await his return we long for it we believe in it and we have confidence in it because why? because he was crushed he was condemned he was forsaken he was judged when John says the axe is laid to the root of the tree we didn't know that Jesus would get the axe when John said the Lord is ready to clean out his storehouse we didn't know that Jesus would be swept away but he was for us in the meantime because of the resurrection we can in gratitude surrender ourselves to God many of you know the song we sing sometimes the potter and the clay this is where it's from when I've been going through both Revelation and Isaiah and Sunday School so often people will stop and say oh this sounds like our songs these are where our songs come from when we say to the Lord I am the clay you are the potter we're inviting him into our lives to mold it and shape it and we take a step back from that other voice we just heard where we demand that God do this and that and such and we begin to say Lord, if you don't wear the disguise today in the way we anticipate or demand I will be with you still I will trust you still I will endure because your son endured I will love because your son loved I will live because he died we saw that in Jesus even though he was crushed and the world considered him the in the resurrection he reigns and in his new flesh and in his new body he embodies the life of the age to come we follow his path trust in God's wisdom not in a mercenary way but in a sacrificial one Lord, you are the potter and we have always been clay and we have always been clay what's difficult is our hearts on one hand we like you on one hand we like you long to see a world we have never seen we like you long to see death undone and the separation that it has brought to many of our lives laid to rest we long to see your adversaries put away and we long to see a kingdom where love reigns and never ends but Lord, this is something we can barely believe in we can hardly trust it and in our pain and our misery we cry out to you and we say Lord, red disguise and come to our aid and you answered that call in Christ and he came to us with exactly what we needed even though we didn't know it and he comes to us today in the same way still may we grow in trust may we grow in belief may we receive your Holy Spirit that from the inside out we might in increasing measure be like him may we know for sure that even though the skies are dark and even though evil seems strong that you in fact are the ruler still and may we know in Jesus resurrection that the end has already begun and it is a happy joyful good ending and a beginning help us Lord to believe and may we express our belief and love to each other hear our prayer in the name of Jesus Amen Would you stand?