https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=v8oO0MhXRQs

 You notice that we usually do hangouts for people at church and check out people into that. We're also playing with Periscope, which is a social media thing through Twitter, and people will randomly join us through that as well. Let's do that little softball. We'll see how that goes. This week I was, I noticed on my blog, you get these search queries that people sometimes they search on Google and then they ask questions. And one of the questions that came up that someone had put into Google or something and went through to my blog was the question, why doesn't religion work? And it's not hard to imagine where this question would come up. There was probably someone who had a need, and so they prayed and God didn't give them what they asked for. Or they in fact invested themselves more and they decided that stuff is a mess in their life. In fact, I knew a man like this. I've told this story before, how I was an elder in a church in Grand Rapids and a young man started coming to the church and he was completely out on the street. He was in my elder district so we got to know each other and I asked him, how did you get here? He said, I was bribed by the church on Sunday and when church would let out people came out and they were smiling and they looked happy. And he said, I wanted to be happy. And those people were happy so I decided to come. He came and he joined the church and he did all the steps and about six months later he stopped coming. So I followed up with him and said, what happened? He said, the church didn't make me happy. Why doesn't religion work? Now this is an interesting question because actually it goes a lot of different ways. One of the things you hear often from people is I can't believe in God because there's so much pain and loss and suffering in the world. And we call that the problem of evil. If there's all this pain and loss and suffering, surely there can't be a God who lets this happen. And so there's a group of people that feel that way. But then we also have this phrase that says there's no atheist in Poxholtz which essentially implies that you know what, when times get tough, when we go off the tracks, we look up to God and say, Lord help me. So we have these two contradictory ideas on one hand when times are hard. I can't believe in a God when times are hard. But then when times get so bad we have no other options and say, Lord help me. And we believe both of these contradictory things at once. There's a saying that I think came from Spurgeon, the great English preacher. He said, the same sun that melts wax hardens clay. It's the idea that the good times or bad times sometimes make us want to run away from God. But sometimes they draw us to God. And what we really want is in the blog, as in the search engine query, was I want something that works. I want a God that when I call these answers and when I say I need this, it gets delivered. Because you know what, if Amazon.com will tell me something and I type it in, I hit this order button, and I'm a prime member, you know, it's not there in two days. That's for you Amazon, I'll go to Best Buy or I'll go to Walmart. And I bring that to God. And I say, Lord my relationship with you will be dependent and contingent upon how well you deliver for me. We're going to be in the book of Judges. And one of the things that I don't think they ever thought about with respect to the book of Judges is how much the book of Judges is really about this question of whether religion works. Because what we're going to see in the book of Judges is a pattern that occurs again and again and again between Israel and God. And we'll see it this week with two judges. One judge is named Ehud and one judge is named Deborah, a man judge and a woman judge. First, Ehud. Again the Israelites did evil in the eyes of the Lord. And because they did this evil the Lord gave Edwan the power over Israel. I remember talking to one very Christian woman who told me, I cannot believe in a God that brings bad things into my life. And I thought, I understand what you're saying, but I wonder if you've ever read the book of Judges. Because in the book of Judges basically what happens is the Lord doesn't know what to do with Israel and so the Lord says, okay Moab, have your way with my people. Let's see where this goes. And so Moab, who Israel had dominated earlier in the migration over, we read about that in the book of Numbers. And we read about Moab's king Balaam. Balaam wanted to get prophet Balaam to curse Israel and how Moab was afraid of Israel. Apparently a powerful king grows up in Moab and he was subjugating Israel. One of the things we should remember about the ancient world was basically how things worked. If you had military power you would go and take the crops, take the wives, take the children and kill the men of your neighbors. And that's how you became powerful. And so Israel moved into the land and Israel didn't complete the job God had given them. So the Lord said, okay, you're a minor nation, you're not a powerful people, you don't have the strong walls, later in the next story, you don't have the iron chariots, go ahead and live on your own. Go ahead and look after these other gods and see what they get you. And so Moab rose up. Getting the Ammonites or the Amalekites to join him, Avon came and attacked Israel and they took possession of the city of Pahos. We quite likely believe that's Jericho. If you remember in Joshua when Israel comes into the land, Jericho is this key strategic point. So essentially the king of Moab is flexing his muscle and coming into Israel and dominating them, probably stealing their crops, stealing their children, enslaving their people. And they began to cry again for the Lord. The Israelites were subject to Avon, king of Moab, for 18 years. Again the Israelites cried to the Lord and he gave them a deliverer, Ehud, a light handed man, the son of Gerah the Benjamite. And I'll kind of skip through the story quickly for you. Ehud, this judge, this rescuer comes in and because he's left handed, everyone's bringing their tribute to Eglon over at the city of Pahos. And Ehud manages to sneak in at night because it's on the other leg. And Eglon is kind of a Java pot type figure and he's so fat, you should read about it this afternoon when you come home in Judges chapter 3. Some of these stories I remember so vividly from my childhood because as a boy with their violence and their drama they fascinated me. And so basically Ehud tricks Eglon and says, I have a secret message for you. And Eglon's thinking, oh I'm going to get extra riches or whatever. Sends out his servant and Eglon stands up and Ehud takes his knife and sticks it into Eglon so far his guts come out the back side and because he's so fat, this is all in the Bible, this son, he's so fat the folds roll over the knife. And then Ehud sneaks out the back window, goes back over to Israel, marshals the people and they all rise up and they kick out, mow out and everything's great again. Verse 29, at that time they struck down ten thousand Moabites, all vicarious and young, not one escaped. That day Moab was made subject to Israel and the land had peace for eighty years. Now again we as modern people we read this and we think, no, I don't know. But I think part of that is the fact that many of us live in the kind of society where there are laws and police and law enforcement. But if someone is threatening your life or someone is stealing family members and making them their slaves or someone is coming into your bank account and taking all of your money, things get very brutal and very simple. And that's what we see in this story. And so Israel looks at Ehud as a savior because they were being raped and pillaged by Moab and now through Ehud they get to have peace. And now the biblical word there in the Hebrew is shalom. It's a feeling of welfare. It's a feeling of, and life was built for eighty years. See what's interesting is this is an example of religion that works. Israel was in a bad space. They prayed to the Lord. God sent Ehud, Ehud helped rescue them, killed the king, organized them, there was a rise up. Moab was defeated. They had eighty good years. See, religion worked. But then the story goes on. Again, the Israelites did evil in the eyes of the Lord. Now that Ehud was dead. What does that mean? You see their working religion was essentially self-centered and they said, you know, I want a religion that works so as long as the Lord sends guys like Ehud to rescue me, I'll go with him. But after a few years things settle down and the neighbors say, hey, my crops are growing better than yours. You know why? I sacrifice to fail. You know, I don't know what kind of situation Jack has with his fertilizer vendors or his seed vendors, but I care that there are multiple vendors and some vendors will come along and say, you know what Jack, if you plant our seed and you use our fertilizer, your rice will grow better than the other guys using the competitors. Does that happen? And so in the ancient world it was, my wife had seven sons. How many did your wife have? Three. Well, we use Baal. And in a sense Israel was all about religion that worked. And so while Ehud could rescue them, well they're going to be down for Yahweh, but when they wanted their wife to have seven sons or their calves to multiply, well Baal is kind of the guy for calves, so we're going to go with Baal. So again Israel did what's evil in the eyes of the Lord now that Ehud was dead. So the Lord sold them into the hands of Japheth, king of Canaan, who reigned in Hazel. And again if you go back to the book of Joshua you'll see that in fact Israel had already taken out Hazel, but Israel didn't continue with the mission that God had given them. And so God says, let's raise up Hazor again. And Hazor in fact we know from our theology was one of the major cities in the north of Israel. Sisera, the commander of the army, was based at Arisath-Einion. Because he had 900 chariots fitted with iron and had cruelly oppressed the Israelites for 20 years, they cried to the Lord for help. So here again we see he has, and in the ancient world it would be like tanks, he has chariots. What does Israel have? Stones and clubs and bows and arrows. They couldn't stand up to these chariots so Sisera dominated that. Now Deborah, a prophet, the wife of Lapidoth, was leading Israel at the time. She held court under the palm of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in the hill country of Ephraim. And the Israelites went up to her to have their disputes decided. She sent for Baruch son of Abinue from Kedesh in Naphtali and said to him, The Lord the God of Israel commands you. Go kick with you 10,000 men from Naphtali and Zebulon and lead them out from Mount Cavor. I will leave Sisera, the commander of Jaden's army, with his chariots and his troops to the Kishon River and give them into your hands. But Baruch said to her, if you go with me I will go, but if you don't go with me I won't go. And Baruch kind of epitomizes Israel at this time. How do I know Deborah that you're down for this? How do I know that I can trust the Lord and listen and believe? Certainly I will go with you said Deborah, but because of the course you are taking the honor will not be yours for the Lord will deliver Sisera into the hands of a woman. So Deborah went with Baruch to Kedesh. So Baruch pursues them and again read about this in Judges chapter 4 this afternoon. It's a great story because they attack and Sisera's army falls apart and so the chariots go in one direction and Sisera tries to escape going in the other direction and he winds up with this group of people called Kenites or actually kind of cousins of Israel. Moses' wife came from the Kenites who were up in the desert. They're kind of a nomadic people and a group of them they were metal workers and probably been working with Azor and Sisera. And so Sisera goes and finds a woman in a tent and says can I hide in your tent? And there's all kinds of echoes of radon and spies and echoes of the eastward story and the woman says yeah you can hide in my tent. Come on in and he comes in and she covers him up and he says if anybody asks tell them there's no man here. And you can almost imagine everyone snickering as this story was retold throughout the century. And then she's there and he's all settled down and can I have some water? And she's just buttering him up and then once he's laying down and he's asleep and he falls asleep she who's supposed to be an ally of him takes a hammer and a tent peg and puts it through his head into the ground and the man who was dominated by Israel by flying around in the chariot is now literally staked to the earth. And again we read this and we say should this be in the bible? But again it's a situation where Israel is being devastated by this people and here God uses this woman to basically destroy this high and mighty general and bring him low. But again as what happened before on that day God subdued Jabin king of Canaan before the Israelites and the hand of the Israelites pressed harder and harder against Jabin king of Canaan until they destroyed them. Then the land had peace for 40 years. But again we see religion at work. So on one hand God said to the Israelites oh we have a problem with the Canaanites. Lord won't you rescue us? And God does through dramatic and brutal means and I can imagine all of Israel just rejoice when they were no longer being persecuted by Sisera and his chariots. So they called on the Lord and the Lord delivered them and they had peace for 40 or 80 years. But did it really work? Because if all Israel was really in or was themselves then they never loved God. Then they didn't serve him. And the cycle just continues. And I think about that young man in Grand Rapids and he came and he joined the church and in the end he said the church didn't make me happy. What do you think happened after that? He looked for something else. Well maybe a girlfriend will make me happy. Maybe a wife will make me happy. Maybe a job will make me happy. Maybe a new car will make me happy. Maybe, maybe, maybe and so don't we see this is how life goes one thing to another. If this is religion or life that seems to work. But it doesn't. What we wind up being are religious consumers. We're consumers of God, we're consumers of people, we're consumers of things. And we evaluate everything basically on whether it works for me now. Does this sound like a good strategy? If I am the center of the universe but suppose you're in a relationship with someone and they look at you and say no when we got together this was working for me. But I saw someone the other day and I think that'll work for me better so, so long. How does that feel? How does that work? Now when it comes to religion that works Jesus becomes an interesting character. Because really in our culture right now there's two dominant themes that people seem to have two dominant replications that people have of Jesus. One is that we saw kind of with this visit from Pope Francis that Jesus is there for the dispossessed. That Jesus speaks up for the poor and Jesus speaks up for the down and out and Jesus cares about the lowly and that's exactly right. Read the Gospels and you will see Jesus cares for the lowly and the weak. The other theme which doesn't tend to be in the media as much is Jesus answers cries for help. But I hear this all the time. I talk to people and people sometimes come into the church when they're desperate and they'll confess, I'm a pastor, I don't really go to church and there's a lot of issues in my life. When things really got bad I cried out for Jesus. And that's in the Gospel too. Because we see Jesus casting out demons and healing the sick and raising the dead and what we learn from the New Testament is that there is power in Jesus name and this gets into the culture and people hear about it. So whether or not they go to church, whether or not they grew up religious, whether or not they have anything, if they get desperate enough, some people will cry out for Jesus and you know what happens sometimes? Jesus saves them. He intervenes and he rescues them. And it's just like the book of Judges. But then the question is, after he rescues you, what will he do about you? Will you be like Israel in Judges and getting amnesia about the rescue and just kind of sliding back? One of the other reputations of Jesus that you read in the New Testament comes from the book of Revelation. And this one our culture really doesn't care because we think well Jesus is nice and Jesus is kind and Jesus is merciful. We never understand that Jesus can be scary and terrible. But the ancient world got this. That's from the book of Revelation. Then the kings of the earth, the princes and the generals, the rich, the mighty and everyone else, both slave and free, hidden in caves and among the rocks of the earth. They call to the mountains and the rocks, fall on us and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb. And here we get the image of Jesus like Ehi or Jesus like Deborah or Jehova. Jesus rushes in and if someone is persecuting you, if someone is making your life miserable, I know a story told by, I'm not going to repeat any of the details, but I know a story told by someone and she talked about the fact that this other woman had taken up with her husband and they were doing stuff and bad stuff was going on and she was angry and she prayed to the Lord. She said, Lord that woman is my enemy and Lord I want you to do something. This woman told me the story that within a week that other woman was dead. And she said, oh, now I'm not going to draw the story out any further than I should. I'm just telling you the incidences and the facts. But here's the question, if you ask Jesus to rescue you and Jesus does, well there might be consequences along the way. When Ehud rescued Israel from Moab, Eilam, a bunch of Moabites died. And when Jehova rescued Israel from Sisera, a bunch of Canaanites died. And God, if he rescues, won't play games. And so here we have the question, who is this Jesus? Is he Lord? Is he Master? Can we read the book of Revelation and imagine that this lamb is also a lion and when he comes to rescue, there might very well be winners and losers. Another friend of mine tells me a story of someone who ripped him off and the guy told him, you know, you're going to slash my tires. I'm going to lose more tires. And his tires were slashed, not by him. He told me this story to the effect of, hey, my God is real. Don't treat him lightly. But we tend to be in this religious consumers. I just lost connection. Raj, do you want to put this forward? Thanks. The religion that works is often religion that gets us into trouble. Because again, when we're mercenary with God, when we say, Lord, I will work with you as long as you work for me, what we essentially say is that I am the center of my universe. And we treat God and we usually treat others in ways that truly offends us. Just like I said, if someone says to you, if your child was saying, you know, you raised me, you sent me to school, you bought me clothes, you put food in my mouth, you know what? I don't really need you anymore, mom and dad. I'm going to go off on my own and be my own person and don't expect any phone calls for me because I'm done with you. What would you say about a kid like that? Isn't this how we treat God? We treat God and others in ways that truly offend us. And what that usually boils down to is it works for us at the expense of others. And when it's done to us, we cry out. And Jesus comes in as judge. But Jesus offers out a temporary deliverance as we talked about last week with a permanent one. He doesn't just pay off the credit card bill, the monthly minimum payment this month, kind of like E-hug did, kind of like Deborah did. But Jesus comes and pays the whole balance and gives us his credit score and says, I will rescue you. Now, how will you respond? If he rescues you and says, no strings attached. Let's imagine you've worked out a big credit card debt and you can't pay it off. And someone comes in and says, I'm not just going to make your monthly payment. I'm going to clean up. I'm going to pay off your bills and I'm going to clean up your credit score now. Go. No strings attached. How do you respond? Gratitude? Or do you just walk away and say, thanks sucker. Give me my cards back. I'll start all over again. You see, we must be delivered from ourselves. And Jesus doesn't just topple a dictator. What we see Jesus doing in the book of Revelation is toppling the whole world and the whole system of violence. So, how do we respond? Do we respond with religion that works? Or do we stop and say, now look, if such a God could see me, if such a God would put out for me, if such a God would send his son to rescue me, not just at the risk of his life, but at the cost of his life, how should I respond to that? See, that in some ways doesn't work in the same way. It asks us, in fact, to do to others as Jesus has done for us. Because that's actually how we like to be treated. That's actually something that we affirm and recognize and aspire to. And that is the gospel. So, I'll ask you next time you're pondering religion and say, I want religion that works. Maybe you should decide, maybe I'll have religion that doesn't work. Maybe because, in fact, what I want is a God who rescues me and then I, in turn, become like him. Faithful, reliable, trustworthy, generous, giving to others even if they can't give to me. Let's pray. Lord, you didn't save us because it worked for you. In fact, saving us didn't work for you. Saving us cost you, and continuing to be in relationship with us continues to cost you. Help us, Lord, to learn to become more like you instead of like ourselves. Mercenary, pragmatic, in it for what we can get. Help us to recognize that you are, in fact, a rescuer. May we, in fact, when we're in a fix, call on Jesus' name and look for you to rescue us. But may we, unlike Israel, after we are rescued, not just repeat the cycle again, but instead stop and say, I want to be like my rescuer. Give me your Holy Spirit. Rescue others through me. Help me to be like you, and may I join you in your mission and your glory. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Would you stand? Amen.