https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sI2XzhucOxA

 I think that's... This week or last week I think, maybe about a week ago. Oprah started... You know all these gadgets and they're not working. Go ahead and put the first slide up right. You can let that video roll. No, the second slide. There's personal video. Oprah had this show on called Believe. And it was kind of neutral to Omaha's wild kingdom. Because she... Because she went all over the world and looked at lots of different beliefs. People were a little apprehensive about how she would do it. But the production values were amazing. The storytelling was compelling. And so she just showed lots of different beliefs in action. Orthodox Jews, Christians, Muslims, Hindus, all over the world. If you want to see the cold bit of her, you go ahead to the second slide. And, Roger, you can start that at about 1.35. She explained a little bit about what she believes faith is. And where she has some of her inspiration for this show. You should usually just mouse over to the right. And you should see the video. You should usually just mouse over and hit play there, Roger. And it'll start and just jump up at 1.35. And it won't let you up. Can you move the mouse to this screen? There we go. Okay. As we were talking more about the series called Belief, is there a difference between faith and belief? Yeah, there is. Because there are a lot of people who don't believe in their faith. There are a lot of people who have beliefs. You cannot be in the world without believing in something. Even if you don't call it a deity. So there are people who believe in working hard and striving for the best. And don't call that, don't have that other necessary religious belief. And faith is very different. I think faith is knowing that no matter what you're going to be okay. And I've always been a part of that faith rule. I used to be a real preacher. So when I was a little, I'm talking like 7, 8, 9, 12, 15. And yeah, when I was in third grade, they used to call me a preacher girl. You were a preacher to the gospel? I was a preacher to the gospel. Yes I was. I remember the Bible verses in the past. Do you have a favorite passage in the Bible? Yes I do. Do you? I do. Okay, let's hear yours. So I like Matthew. I like that Jesus says, so I say do not worry. I don't want you to worry about the chains that get on his head. Or attitude that he's having. What I like about him is that it's a commandment not to worry. I'll go with that. I can't live it. I can't do it. It's not like you're trying not to worry. So I say do not worry. So if you worry, you're a famous sookie. That's right. You're a famous sookie. Exactly. Mine is a song so he said before. Delight thyself. I love the word delight. Don't you? I'm so glad that David knew. Oh David was into delighting himself. Perfect. I want to be story. Delight thyself in the Lord. He will give you the desires of your heart. Now like I said today, the Lord has a wide range. What's the word? Compassion, love, kindness. So you delight yourself in those virtues. You will see the virtues where the character of the Lord is revealed. Delight thyself in goodness. Delight thyself in love. Kindness of thing. And you will see the desires of your heart. Do you like that? Yes. If you focus on being a force of good, goodness will come. Which is also the third law of motion. Which is also the karma. Which is also the secret. Which is also the secret of the secret too. Okay. You can go ahead and push to the next slide, Rod. What's interesting about Oprah and a lot of what she does, she's pretty consistent. And she embraces an approach to religious pluralism that initially often seems like a pretty good idea. Because what we know about religious people is that that tends to be conflict. The Middle East right now is really being pulled apart by a conflict between often Muslims. Shia and Sunni fighting each other over religious belief. Part of what founded our nation, the United States, was an attempt to get away from the 30 years war and the cross and Catholicism. The 30 years war and the cross and Catholic fused that, just tore up Europe. And so part of the way we try to get at that often is to switch to very generic language. So we talk about faith and hope and love. And we keep terms as generic as possible. And so we hope to embrace generic language and to be accommodating for one another. And then to employ very broad ideas. If you heard her, she kind of put karma and the golden rule together, which really helped it. But karma, do good to others, and a number of these things, put them together. And if we kind of agree to this front door, then we can all get along. Then our religious disputes will end. And then we can somehow do good and kindness and love and put to rest all of this duty. One of the things that we don't often recognize is that for most of the world, the approach of religious inclusivism has been the norm. And in fact, as we're looking in the book of Judges, Israel was probably never more inclusive as they were in the book of Judges. You have here that they served, meaning the children of Israel, they served the Baals and the Aschirists and the gods of Aram, the gods of Simon, the gods of Moab, the gods of the Ammonites, and the gods of the ballistics. Israel was being very pluralistic in their approach to deities. And this in fact was the pattern in the ancient Near East that has in fact been the pattern for most of the world's population, for most of human history. Because if one god is good, two gods are better, and how can I be good to my neighbors and be in harmony with them? If they go to their temple and I go to mine, sometimes I can take some of what their god has and they can take some of what my god has, and all the gods can live together in peace and harmony. And this in fact has been the practice of all of humanity for much of human existence, that individuals will basically be non-confrontational and be accepting of each other's gods and use them and serve them. And so what you might imagine is that here in this little excerpt from the book of Judges, that this kind of religious inclusivism would create in the area peace and harmony and everyone would get along. But I was a little tricky there, I actually took only a little bit of the passage. The rest of the passage says this, Now if you see this passage, a number of other issues arise. First of all, many today will look at this passage and say, well this is precisely what I object to when I read the Old Testament. Because here this god, the Lord Yahweh, was upset with Israel because they were being inclusive in their religious practice. And he was upset with them, but this text makes another step to say that this god being upset with them led to the kinds of warfare that we were trying to avoid in the first place. Because the Philistines and the Ammonites were now raiding Israel, probably stealing women and children, taking them as slaves, stealing their food, stealing their animals, this kind of raiding society that was pretty common in that time. Now part of the question I think I'd love to sit down and ask Oprah if I had a chance to talk with her would be, do you really think the Lord is calm? Because when you read the Bible, you're not really going to get that impression from her. Oprah says do good and you'll be rewarded. But wasn't Israel and its religious inclusivism doing good? Were they rewarded for embracing Baal and the other gods of the region? The text says actually they were punished for this. The Ammonites, who I think Oprah would agree were doing wrong by raiding their neighbors and taking them as slaves and taking their animals and their food stuff, they were doing wrong. Were the Ammonites rewarded for doing wrong? Because here in the text it basically says the Lord sent them and the Lord gave them superiority over Israel. In other words, karma has an idea that if I only do what's right I'll be rewarded. I find it breaks it down. In fact, in talking to many of you, I'll talk to a number of you and you'll say, you know, I went to work and I saw something wrong going on and I spoke up, I did the right thing and what happened? I got punished. In fact, kids will often learn that frustration. They'll try to do the right thing and they'll discover actually in this world you're not rewarded for doing the right thing. You are often in fact penalized for doing the right thing. And so how really is all of this supposed to work? And it gets even more complex because if we're evaluating God, let's read this passage and see what we think of him. God replied, And part of us probably hears this and says, yes, God is finally drawing the line. He's finally giving them a cup of tea. He's finally saying, look, you made a promise to me that you broke. Now, since you broke it, it'd be like someone saying, it'd be like a spouse that's been cheated on saying, hey, look, you cheated on me. You sought these other lovers. Why don't you go get your comfort for them? I won't have anything to do with you. And part of us will listen to God and say, yes, the Lord is finally drawing a line. He's finally holding them accountable. He is finally saying, look, Israel, I bailed you out how many times? I'm done bailing you out. You're dead to me. Some of us might say, yeah, that's what the Lord should do. Draw a line, hold them accountable, make them pay for what they've done. But Israel said to the Lord, we have sinned. Do with us whatever you think best, but please rescue us now. And they have already dethroned gods among them and served the Lord. And he could bear Israel's misery no longer. OK, so which is it? On one hand, we want God to be hard and say, hey, look, I'm a god about rules. If you violate the rules, you're done. But we like that if we're on the rules side here. But if we're over on the other side and say, oh, but he's the god of second chances. He, you know, they made up, they got rid of the gods. And part of us in the back of our mind are saying, yeah, they got rid of the gods now. But we're halfway through the book of Judges and we've seen the pattern because we know what's going to happen, right? They're going to get rid of the gods and God's going to rescue them. And then they'll be looking for another generation of what's going to happen after that. Cycle's going to repeat. It's like Israel's an addict and God is a doofus. And around and around we go. And then we're about to get into probably one of the most disturbing stories of the book of Judges, a book full of disturbing stories. It's the story of Jepha. Now, I'm not going to read the whole story again after church this afternoon or this week. If you want to read Judges 10, 11 and 12, you can read the story of Jepha. Jepha's story begins with his birth. His father was Gilead, an important man in the tribe, named after a whole group of towns, the Gileadites who were in this whole region. So his father was Gilead, but his mother was a prostitute. And so he was born to this prostitute. But then Gilead got married and had legitimate sons. And what did the legitimate family think of this son of the prostitute? Any guess? So they put him out and they exiled him. But Jepha was smart and Jepha was strong. So Jepha attracted around him essentially a gang. And Jepha became the chief gang banger. He was like one of the baddest guys around. And he kind of lived in the hinterlands. And he made his life by stealing and by raiding and by carving out an existence at the fringe of society. And then the Ammonites came in. And the Ammonites were oppressing these same towns that had kicked out Jepha. And the leaders of the towns didn't know what to do. So they said, we need a junkyard dog. We need someone who knows how to kill. We need someone who the Ammonites will be afraid of. Let's get Jepha. So they went up to Jepha and they're like, Jepha, why didn't you come and rescue us? And Jepha's like, why should I rescue you? You kicked me out. Because of what? Because I was born to a prostitute. That wasn't my fault. That was Gilead's fault. And the leaders of the town said, oh, but Jepha, we're in a mess. I'll tell you what, if you save us from the Ammonites, then we'll all follow you. Does any of this sound familiar? Isn't the relationship between God and Israel a lot? Is there a lot of the relationship between Israel, Gilead, and Jepha? So Jepha says, okay, I'll try. And so Jepha comes in and Jepha becomes basically their chieftain, their strong man. And Jepha negotiates with the Ammonites. The negotiations break down because it's a zero-sum game. It's simple. And then, but Jepha knows what has to be done. He knows that he has to rally everyone from Israel. He has to raise an army. They have to fight the Ammonites and they have to kill them. But Jepha's been doing this for years. He's a hardened warrior. And so he does. What else? Judges 11 and 29. Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jepha. Now this you'll find often in the Old Testament and often in the book of Judges. It's when in a sense, God equips Jepha, and you don't think about this in nice religious terms. God equips Jepha to do what he needs to do. And the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jepha and he crossed Gilead and Manasseh and passed through Misfa of Gilead. And from there he advanced against the Ammonites. And he will go on to victory. But Jepha has been raised and formed in a context. Jepha has been raised and formed in a world that basically says, this world is tit for tat. I was born to a prostitute so I was exiled. And when they were in need they called to me. So I understand how power works in this world. It works by bargain. Because if I find out what God wants and if I give God what he wants, then God will bless me. Do good, you'll receive good. But if I do evil, I'll be cursed. So Jepha learns this and has figured this out and is so deeply within him. And now he's going to go to battle against the Ammonite and he knows he needs something. He knows he needs a bargain agent. He knows he somehow has to get God on his side. So how do you get someone on your side? You give them what they want. What does Jepha want from Gilead and his people? He wanted acceptance. He wanted to be embraced. And so they said, look Jepha, we'll cut you a deal. If you beat the Ammonites, you get to be king over us. Sounds good. What can Jepha give to God? And Jepha made a vow to the Lord. If you give the Ammonites into my hands, whatever comes out of the door of my house to meet me, when I return and triumph from the Ammonites, will be the Lord's. In other words, will be a sacrifice, a burnt offering. And I will sacrifice it as a burnt offering. Because Jepha understands how the world works. You want something, you need to pay to get it. And he thinks, I'll need to offer something really big to get the Lord's attention. Whatever comes out of my house, first Lord, I'll offer it as a burnt offering. Then Jepha went over to fight the Ammonites and the Lord gave them into his hands. He devastated twenty pounds from Error to the victory of Minnet as far as Gable-Tirami. Thus Israel subdued Ammon. And when Jepha returned to his house in Misphah, who comes out to meet him? But his daughter, dancing to the sound of the timbrels. Dancing to the sound of the timbrels. She was an only child. Except for her, he had neither son nor daughter. When he saw her, he tore his clothes and cried, Oh no, my daughter, you have brought me down and I am devastated. I have made a vow to the Lord that I cannot rape. Here we have Jepha. Someone exiled his child because his mother was a prostitute. The only thing he loved in the world, probably sheltered from all of his gang banging, all of his robbing, all of his stealing, was his daughter. And here his daughter comes out and he goes, he made a bargain. And now he has to follow through. What do you do? If spirituality is fundamentally a bargain, this is where it goes. We have to look at God and say, God, what can I give you? What if to our horror we learn, God has no needs? If spirituality is fundamentally a bargain, exchange of goods, there is always winners and losers. According to power, morality, or fortune. Oprah's story is a very interesting one. Her career started in the late 70s in Baltimore. She first started as a cub reporter, just barely 20 years old, and very quickly rose fast. And here we see 1980, she's got her own show with Richard Shear. How many of you have ever heard of Richard Shear? This is Richard Shear, the fifth wealthiest self-made person in America. When Richard Shear talks about books, do people buy them? Was Richard Shear somehow morally bankrupt that Oprah rose and Richard didn't? Does the law of attraction work here? Who wins and why? So Jephthah comes home and his daughter comes out. And what's he going to do? And what's she going to say? And then probably the most graceful speech of the entire book of judges comes next. My father, she replied, you have given your word to the Lord. Do to me just as you promised. Now that the Lord has avenged you of your enemies, the Canaanites. But grant me one request. Give me two months to roam the hills and week with my friends, because I will never marry. You may go, he said. And he let her go for two months. And she and her friends were bidden to the hills and rest, because she would never marry. After two months, she returned to her father and he did to her as he had vowed. And she was a virgin. And from this comes a tradition where the young girls of Israel remembered Jephthah's daughter. Now what's amazing is Jephthah's daughter here. Because she gives her life for her father's pagan, stupid vow. Where does love like this come from? This is Reformation Sunday. And what Reformation Sunday reminds us of is this idea that Christianity has, which is called grace. You see, grace is not the enabling spouse that just simply takes the added back. That's not grace. Grace is different. Grace is what the daughter expresses. In a sense by saying, we would rather have her say, my father, the stupid, stupid man, you don't know anything. But I will save you from yourself. Because what we see in the story of Jephthah is the story of Christ. Because what Christianity says is that the God of the universe who sees us as a bad risk, who is constantly trying to make deals with him, constantly trying to bribe him, and actually somehow one way or another, even through our moral behavior or whatever way to get a handle on him, to make him bless us, the God of the universe comes and says, you are such a mess, there is nothing I can do to rescue you from yourself. Accept. Give myself to you completely. It will be at my expense that you will be saved and I will do it freely. The gospel says that Jesus gets what we deserve, which is death, and we get what he deserves, which is life. Now here's the thing. If you only give in order to get, if I look across and I see someone that I actually love and I want to hate them, but I think, oh, I've got to be good to them, because if I'm good to them, then I can actually get from God. Am I really being good? Or am I just being selfish in a roundabout way? Because what Christ gives to us, he just gives. Not because we need him, but because we need him. So if you give freely, because you've been freely given, you will actually learn the grace and the joy of God's plan. And this again is the gospel. Jesus doesn't come to me, doesn't come to us and say, if you're good, I'll give you heaven. But he actually comes and says, you cannot earn heaven. You cannot kind of bargain with me. You cannot say, oh Lord, I'll give you the life of my firstborn son Philip if you give me what I want. How does that bargain sound, Philip? The chapter's daughter comes and says, Father, she doesn't say, foolish, stupid man, but she should. I will give my life for yours. And she does. That's exactly what Christ does for us. Now if we hear this this way, if we understand that there is no good we can give to God in order to secure our good, that we have no capacity to do this on ourself, but we learn that out of his free grace, he comes and does it for us. How then can we respond? And this is what the Christian life is. Because you see, the meal doesn't go and the disciples did good and right, so Jesus rewarded them. It goes like this. On the night that he was betrayed, did you hear that word? On the night that his friend Judas, one of the twelve, was going to kiss the temple guard to surrender him over to be arrested, to be handed over to the Romans, to be spread naked on a cross for the mockery of his enemies, he took bread and he broke it. And in a sense, just like Jebka's daughter said, this is my body broken for you. So what are we doing here this morning? We are here because this man gave everything for us. And he invites us to be like him. And so as this bread goes out to you, you don't have to eat it, there's no compulsion here, but you're invited to this table, if you've been baptized, you're invited to this table, and you're invited to partake, to accept his gift that was given to us, and to live our lives as a gift, like his life was to us. And this is our joy. On the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it and said, this is my body given for you. As often as you eat this, you remember. And that means not just we think about it, as often as we eat this, we become Christ to each other. Will the elders come forward? Thank you.