https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3-8eveHJKaA

 Why should the life, death, and even the possible resurrection of one man 2,000 years ago matter in my life today? I know for some of us who are committed Christians who go to church regularly, who have been working on Christ in our lives for years now, this might seem a surface question. But I find for many others, and some of you perhaps today too, this is a very rare question. Because Christianity asserts that in fact this man's life 2,000 years ago changed the world. Now you can look at a historical level and say of course it changed the world. Christianity impacted world history in a way that is pretty significant. But what Christianity says is that his life, death, and especially his resurrection, which people may or may not be able to believe, this impacts all of our life now. Now we've been talking, I've been using this illustration of the rider and the elephant. And actually after church last week, Neil said, now let me see if I can, I don't get this rider and this elephant thing. Basically it's a model or it's an image of how to understand these two natures we tend to have with ourselves. It's what Paul talks about in 1 Corinthians 7 when he says something like, the good that I would do I don't do, and the evil that I do I can't stop myself. It's the idea that on top when we think about ourselves as kind of a rider and an elephant, we try to stop ourselves, the rider thinks, okay, I'm going to lose weight. The doctor says to eat this, to not eat this, and to exercise more, I'm going to do all these things because I know these things are good for me. And then the next day comes and that cake that's sitting in the fridge is calling your name. And when you go to the supermarket you see all those Ben and Jerry things, they're just small. And then you see it in the freezer, you take it out, you take the top off, you think, well one spoon is not a big deal, but then if one isn't a big deal, two isn't too much, and before you know it you've eaten the whole thing. This is the rider and the elephant. The rider says, that Ben and Jerry's, that doesn't have power over me, and the elephant says, I like the Ben and Jerry's, give it to me now. And this is the struggle that we're always in. And this is part of what we get into the question of is Jesus in the resurrection? Because if you were raised in a Christian home or if you're part of the Christian community, or if you're the member of a Christian church, you might say, yes I believe Jesus rose from the dead. But the elephant underneath says, yeah that rider does a lot of talking. When it comes down to life and death issues, I've got to watch out for me. Because you see, the rider is like us. It can be rational, it can think in certain ways, but the elephant underneath looks at each other, and if everyone is doing something, the elephant says, better do that. Why is it that when kids go to school we tell kids, be careful what friends you make? And the kids will often say, well I know myself, I know what's right and wrong, but the parent knows that the rider on top might be saying, yeah I don't right from wrong, but the elephant underneath follows the herd. Elephants are herd animals, this is what we do. And so the rider on top says, Jesus rose from the dead. But the elephant underneath says, dead people don't rise. And even if something weird happened 2000 years ago, what is that to me? Now where is Reggie? Reggie's not here. Well I guess we have a good picture of him this morning. Because a couple of weeks ago when we looked at the resurrection of Lazarus, I asked the question and kind of ran through it with you. What if in fact, Reggie, who we all know and love, Reggie had suddenly died of an illness, had been buried for four days, and then a man named Jesus came and raised him from the dead. What would that do? We talked about how everybody would want to see Reggie, and everybody would be talking about Jesus, and everyone would be trying to get an angle on how can I get to know this Jesus, and how can I get this Jesus to do things for me? How can I get this Jesus to heal me? How can I get this Jesus to maybe raise a dead loved one? How can I get this Jesus to fix my problems? And we can recognize that this would be truly a monumental event. And even if there were medical records that said Reggie was dead, Reggie was buried, but then four days later Reggie was alive, a lot of people would say, yeah, there's a trick. He wasn't really dead. Something else happened. And this again is the elephant to the rider. You can prove stuff to the rider, but the elephant underneath is skeptical and says, I've been fooled by other things, and I'm not going to be fooled too quickly. But the resurrection of Jesus is different from the resurrection of Reggie, because the resurrection of Jesus meant that Jesus shows up, and that Jesus doesn't die again. Lazarus was raised and died, but Jesus' resurrection is something wholly different. Now last week we talked about the Easter Sunday morning situation, where you had Mary Magdalene coming to the tomb, and we've been following this in the Gospel of John. Mary Magdalene coming to the tomb, finding the tomb empty, falling into despair, goes back to the disciples, John and Peter run back, they both find the tomb empty, but then Jesus appears to Mary who is so grief-stricken she doesn't see him right away, but then Jesus says her name and tells her a few things, and Mary believes and goes to the disciples, but the disciples still haven't seen him. So on the evening of that first day of the week when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the Jewish leaders, Jesus came and stood among them and said, Peace be with you. Now it's very specific that Jesus gives them this kind of salutation, because he's trying to tell them that if you're associated with someone that's not Jewish, and you're associated with someone that they decide is dangerous, it's very easy for them to think you are dangerous, so they keep the doors locked and they're trying to hang low, and first they were in grief because of the crucifixion, and now they get this story from Mary Magdalene, and there's something in mind. From what we talked about last week, Mary Magdalene was a woman that Jesus rescued from demons, and for whatever else we think in terms of demon possession or mental illness, there are a lot of reasons, cultural and realistic and medical, for which the disciples here in Mary's story will be able to understand the need for the Lord. We saw the empty tomb, but she's telling us a story. Should we believe her? And then Jesus shows up in their midst with the door locked. Well, if that happened to you, what would you do? You'd probably scream and not know what to do. So Jesus comes into the room and the first thing he says is, Peace be with you. Settle down. After he said this, he showed them his hands and side, and the disciples were overjoyed when they saw the Lord. And just like I told the kids, the first question is, there's this weird thing with the post-resurrection appearances of Jesus. And this would certainly be the case if anyone we knew showed up at our doorstep. As I mentioned, my father died a couple of years ago. If I opened the door one day to see a man standing there that looked exactly like my father, the first thing on my mind would not be, oh, hi, Dad. Why? Because the elephant below says, dead people stay dead. So if someone came to my door and looked exactly like my father, the elephant would have a number of emotions underneath, and I would look and think, boy, you look like my father, but I put my father in the ground. Now, if you claim to be my father, I'm not sure what this will mean. So Jesus shows up, and the thing he shows them are his wounds. Why? Well, obviously. Jesus is wanting to communicate, I am Jesus, I was killed, and now I'm alive, and as I talk with the children, I'm not a ghost. To have a ghost show up, you know, I, as a pastor, I'm often a part of the conversation in terms of loss. People will come to me after a loved one has passed, and they'll say, pastor, my loved one came to me in a dream, or pastor, my loved one was in the room with me, and these kinds of things are not uncommon at all. But I've never had anyone say, pastor, my dead father showed up, and I hugged him, and he was there. That, I've never had. So Jesus comes to them and says, here I am. Touch me. Now again, all of our riders inside are, yep, yep, I've heard this story, I'm thinking about this story, but our elephants beneath are saying, I don't know about this. This is kind of hard to swallow. But Jesus goes on, and Jesus said, Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, I am sending you. And with that, he breathed on them and said, Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive anyone's sins, their sins are forgiven. If you do not forgive them, they are not forgiven. Now if you've read the Gospel of John, Jesus is more verbose in the Gospel of John than any of the other Gospels. Jesus has some seriously long speeches in the Gospel of John. But what's amazing in this little package, in just a few words, Jesus gives them a whole bunch of stuff. The first thing he says is, now you're on a mission. The second thing he says is, I'm making you into a new creation. The word that's used in the Greek here, when Jesus breathes on them, is a very unusual word in the Greek version of the Old Testament. It's used twice. The first time it's used is in the creation story, where God makes the man out of the dust, and he breathes in him, and the man becomes a living being. The second place in the Old Testament where that Greek word is used is in the book of Ezekiel, where Ezekiel has this vision of these dry bones, and there's a whole valley full of dry bones. And the Lord breathes on these bones, and these bones begin to come together, and they become an entire army. And so when Jesus says this to his disciples, what he's saying to them is, he says, I'm making you into a new creation. Receive my Holy Spirit. So you're going on a mission. I'm making you into a new creation. Receive the Holy Spirit. And then he tells them this. If you forgive anyone's sins, now the Greek is a little bit more specific. If you release anyone's sins, their sins are released. And if you bind them, they are bound. Now, this is a saying of tremendous authority, because back when Jesus was walking around, and everyone's trying to get at Jesus, and you know the story of they make a hole in the roof, and they drop a man down, and Jesus says, your sins are forgiven. And all the teachers of the law stand around and say, now, wait a minute. You can't forgive sins. Only God can forgive sins. And Jesus says to the people around him, tell me which is easier, to forgive someone's sins or to say, get up and walk, and the man gets up. So when Jesus tells his disciples about their power to either release sins or bind sins, everyone's paying attention. And so, okay, Jesus, what on earth does this mean? Now, a week later, we're going to come back to this. A week later, Thomas, also known as Didymus, he was likely a twin, who was one of the twelve who sat with the disciples when Jesus came. And this has been the launching of many theology jokes about not missing meetings and such, because ten are there and Thomas misses. So other disciples told him, we have seen the Lord. Now, the elephant within Thomas says, you've seen the Lord. First it was Mary, and now you, you're all nuts. But he said to them, unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand in his side, I will not believe. One of the beautiful things about the Internet is that lots of people are writing on a lot of things. And in this particular blog, I think he's a theology teacher, he wrote a very interesting little blog post, which basically said, we give Thomas a hard time for not believing. We're probably giving Thomas too hard of a time. Consider this. Thomas didn't believe because the disciples didn't act differently. Jesus tells them, you're on a mission, you are a new creation. I'm giving you the Holy Spirit and go and forgive sins. Thomas sees the disciples a week later, and what does he discover? They're not doing anything different. They're not on a mission, they don't look like a new creation, they don't seem to be filled with anything but what they were filled with before, and they're just a bunch of guys talking like they always have. And now they come and say, we've seen Jesus and he's alive. The elephant within Thomas looks at the disciples and says, Yeah, kind of like that. You're all, it all looks the same to me. So then a week later, his disciples were in the house again, and Thomas was with them. Though the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, Peace be with you. Then he said to Thomas, put your finger here. Now pay attention here. Does Jesus showing up in the room again know something? What does he know? Thomas has been doubting. Well, how does he know this? How does he know this? Then he said to Thomas, put your finger here. See my hands. Reach out your hand and put it on my side. Stop doubting and believe. What else is interesting here about this doubting word that is used here in John is that there's another post-resurrection scene in Matthew, and in Matthew, Jesus shows up to 500 people at once. And what the Gospel of Matthew says, and they worshiped him and some doubted, but the particular reconstruction in Matthew basically means to say while they were worshiping, they were also doubting. Which means what? Which means on one level the rider was saying, Okay, Jesus, here you are. You must be God. You're risen from the dead. But the elephants and beasts were saying, Yeah, we're doing this, but we're not quite sure about everything that's going on. Can you relate? Thomas then says to him, My Lord and my God, Thomas gives a profession of belief. So why should the life of death and even possible resurrection of one man 2000 years ago matter in my life today? And you immediately begin to realize this is a very complicated question. Because I'm already split in terms of what I believe, and even those in the room who had spent three years with him, who were seeing him, who were touching his hands and putting their hand on their side, they on one hand were saying, Wow, it's Jesus. He's alive. And on the other hand, everything they said to him, everything he said to them, it's gone right over their heads. It's kind of like when the police officer stops at the door bringing awful news that some loved one has been killed in an accident in fire. And every cop I know that has done that duty, you'll go to the door and you'll ring the door. And the person who is watching this is a loved one. And the person who is watching this is a loved one. And the person who is watching this is a loved one. This is what's happening with the disabled. But is Jesus a liar? Hasn't he just told them, You're a new creation? Hasn't he just told them, Receive the Holy Spirit? Hasn't he just told them, You have authority and power and go out into the world with this authority and power? And they're all hanging in Jerusalem just kind of doing what they've done before. Now again, we think that the way we should work is like Rogers think that we should work. That this message should just kind of be some rational thing. And C.S. Lewis put it in a great way. We, with our modern democratic, arithmetical presuppositions, would so likely and expected all men to start equal in their search for God. One is the picture of grates and triple roads coming from all directions, with well-disposed people all meeting the same thing and getting closer and closer together. How shockingly opposite is that? That is to the Christian story. Because here's the thing. How do you believe Jesus is risen from the dead? Well, because the pastor told me so. One of the little fellows before church came up to me and said to me, Are you the Lord? And I said, No, I'm just the pastor. But in a sense, we're all like that little boy. We're all figuring this stuff out. We've all got riders and elephants and it's all a chuckle. And we think, No, we should be more rational. Why do we think that? Don't we know ourselves? We're not rational at all. We're riders and elephants and we're in a mixture of all of that. So how can we believe in Jesus? Here's one of the shocking things about Jesus. He shows up to the 12. He shows up to Mary. He shows up to 500. And you might say, Lord, would it be so hard to come into this room and walk in our midst and let us feel your hands? If you did this, we would believe. We have to read the Gospel of John and say, We probably wouldn't. We would leave this room saying, You won't believe what happened in church on Sunday. And there would be five times as many people here next week as there would be today because you'd all go home and say, Well, maybe it'll happen next week. And then we'd be like, Lord, give us another sign. Do it again. And we think this will resolve anything, everything. But the more we realize it didn't resolve it for the disciples, it won't resolve it for us. And in fact, we don't work this way. Then Jesus told them, Because you have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed. And so then we should stop and say, How do we believe if we haven't seen him? Should we believe? Jesus performed many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book. But these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name. Why should the life, death, and even possible resurrection of one man 2,000 years ago matter in my life today? That depends if you know him or not. And you might say, Well, well, well, he should come to me and show himself to me. But how is it that millions and even billions of people have come to believe and never laid eyes on him? Maybe it's the Holy Spirit. This depends on whether you've met him or not. Ross Duthon is a columnist in the New York Times, at Harvard Education, I just very fast forward a little YouTube with him talking. Very interesting because in this particular YouTube, he talked about growing up. His parents were nice, wealthy Connecticut liberals, and he was there. He was there. He was their son. And his mother had an illness that the doctors could not address. And so she went into all kinds of ways to try and get her illness fixed. She went to new age type things and herbal type things and faith healers and all these kinds of things. And I don't know what ever happened to her illness. He really didn't go into a story. But what actually happened with her and his family is through all of this rumbling, what they managed to do was meet Jesus. And I thought, this is the story of John 20. That here now, 2000 years ago, people who come from very different places in this world, skeptical, doubting, whatever, come and become to the profession that says, I don't know a lot, but I really think he lives. And I really think he's alive. And if he popped up in my bedroom, I would probably freak out. But I believe it's true. What does that mean? The esteemed Yale Church historian Yaroslav Pelikin's music has been related shortly after his death by his friend Martin Marty comes to mind. Professor Pelikin is rewarded to have confided, if the resurrection of Jesus actually happened, then nothing else really matters. If the resurrection of Jesus did not happen, then nothing else really matters. And that's right. Because if this man rose from the dead, if death has been conquered, if it's true, everything should be different. But the elephant beneath me says, I'm just going to follow the herd. Why should the life, death, and even possible resurrection of one man 2,000 years ago matter to my life today? Really, it depends if your elephant starts believing. And most of what I find, not unlike Ross Duthonk's story, is one of two things, which usually becomes one thing. Either, and there are more stories around like this than you can probably imagine, especially if you're a middle class American skeptic, I know a number of stories where Jesus comes to people, and it just happens. And people don't talk about it because people would think they're nuts, but it happens. That's the unusual case. The second is more usual, that one way or another we get backed into a corner and we discover that all of the wisdom of this world can't resolve anything in my life. And through the Holy Spirit, it might be through what we've learned as children, might be what we've come to it as adults, might be we find it in the church, might be we wind up looking at it through some other means. We begin to believe that although my elephant has its doubts, I believe this is truly the only way to live, the only way the major questions of this world will be settled, and the only way I can possibly move forward in my life. And so we stand with Thomas and we say, I got more questions than you can imagine, but Jesus, my Lord and my God, and we go from there. Let's pray. Lord, we have so many questions that the Bible doesn't answer. And we like to imagine that if you showed up right here and right now, everything would be different for us. But we see, Lord, in the life of the disciples is that so often you work slowly, so often you work quietly, so often you draw us to yourself in ways we cannot imagine, through people we do not expect, through often hard things in our life that we wish we never had to go through. But you draw us to yourself and you make us your own, and bit by bit you whisper in our hearts and increasingly we believe. And we come to the place in life where we, like the disciples, decide, all of the stuff this world cares about doesn't really matter. It's Jesus that matters, and I live for him. Help us, Lord, to walk in your light. In the name of Jesus, amen. Amen. Would you stand? Would you stand? And I survey the world.