https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A2TbUgii6yE

 I've been reading some books. The latest book I finished, 12 Years of Slaying, which is out in movie form. It's really a... I haven't seen the movie, but it's really a powerful book. Also, the book I'm reading right now... I can't remember the title of this book. I have no idea why I listened to the thing. The warmth of other suns. I mentioned it in San Francisco. The warmth of other suns. It's about the migration. At the beginning of the 20th century, almost all African Americans lived in the former slave states. And by the 1970s, almost half of that population had relocated to the north and the west. And this was the Pulitzer Prize-winning book, not fiction, in 2010. And it's a story wonderfully told, so I'm sure it'll creep into some sermons at some point. Warmth of Other Suns by Isabel Wilkerson. If I want to pick it up, I'm going to pick up a copy for the library, and I'll probably have it here next week. This is a picture of a bathroom in San Francisco. And I found it on a webpage discussion board asking the question, should you put a Buddha in the bathroom? And the responses to the question were quite interesting. Some said, well, it's offensive to Buddhists. Others said, would you put Jesus in the bathroom? And others still said, it's your bathroom, put in it what you want. But when I saw it, it struck me how prevalent religious statuary has become for ornamental reasons. And not only for ornamental reasons, but increasingly when I am in homes in northern California, there will be shrines of various sorts with statues of various things and candles or herbs or things of the like. And I always kind of look at that and think about it when I see it. I remember one Home and Garden TV show with a bickering young couple who had what seemed to be quite a nice apartment and a fair number of Buddhist statues around it, arguing quite vehemently that they needed a far nicer apartment. And I thought, this seems to be a very strange complaint following a person who made the observation that suffering comes from desire. And so you're going to sit down and contemplate on the teachings of the Buddha that say that suffering comes from desire, while you're loudly clamoring because you need a much nicer, more comfy space? All of these kinds of issues I listen to and I think, it's strange, isn't it? In our world of all God, no God, which God, growing up in a rather stark, austere, Protestant upbringing, of all the commandments, I thought the second was the one that we see to have lived. The second commandment, you shall have no other gods before me. I was raised and telling that that meant no statues of God. And in a sanctuary such as this one, there might be symbolism of various sorts, but you won't find a shrine or an altar or a statue that says, this is Yahweh and we bow before Him. This had, for the most part, passed away from us. But part of what's difficult for us then sometimes to get at here a lot is the context of this commandment. So I did a little bit of Googling this week and I found one Facebook group that said, Hindus have statues, not idols. But I found quite a few more Hindu websites that were saying, yes, we worship idols and this is why we do so. One Hindu website had ten reasons why Hindus worship idols. And some of the reasons were, idols are the easiest way to install faith in a person. And idols help the devotee become deeply religious. Idols help to aid concentration and teaching. And idol worship, the true worshiper becomes God, and the worship of God is worship of self. And these things are all very much in keeping with Hindu theology. And so I was struck by the fact that, in fact, if you want to promote a religion, and if you want to promote religious piety and loyalty in people, idols are very, very useful. And for the most part, human history bears this out. And in... ...in... ...there you go. Okay, whoops. I need to go back. There we go. These little figures are called Judean pillar figurines. And in fact, they found a great many of these in and around the area of Jerusalem from about the 7th and 8th century BC. And scholars have always wondered, why so many of these little statues? They're of women, obviously, and they seem to be connected with first philatony. But if you read the Old Testament, you'll find out that, in fact, there's a lot of talk about idols in the Old Testament. Rachel, the wife of Jacob, and Plebe Laban stole Laban's household gods and then hid them from him. And in fact, if you read the book of Kings or the book of Prodigals and the book of Samuel, you'll find that the Hebrews often had idols and used them for worship. If you read the New Testament, there's artemis of Ephesus. And there was the riot that Paul was saying that these were idols and they should be put away. And those who were constructing these idols were very upset because the growing number of Christians in Ephesus meant that fewer and fewer people were, in fact, buying these idols. The commandment goes like this. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself an image in the form of anything in heaven above or on the earth beneath or in the waters below. You shall not bow down to them or worship them, for I the Lord your God am a jealous God, punishing the children for the sins of parents to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing love to a thousand generations for those who love me and keep my commandments. By chapter 34, in fact, not long after Moses will come down from the mountain, you will see that the Israelites will be gathered around the golden calf. And you might wonder why worship a golden calf? Well, in the ancient world, cows were banks. And if you put your money in cattle, if you remember Myron and Andrea used to go here. Myron goes in the vet school at UC Davis, and he always told me how horses are finicky animals that can get sick often, but cows are hardy. Cows are hard to kill. So in the ancient world, if you had some extra money, you would buy a cow. You could get milk from the cow. The cows would have young. In fact, even in Africa today and many other places in Asia and South America, cattle are far better and more reliable than banks. And so for the Israelites to say, this is how we imagine Yahweh should be to us, a cow who keeps us financially secure, well, I would imagine even for our culture, with this statue of New York City, that shouldn't seem like such a great stretch. This business about Yahweh not allowing any image to be made of Him from anything in the heavens above or in the earth beneath or in the water under the earth seems like an enormous disadvantage in the competitive religious marketplace. Many, many years later, Isaiah would go to the temple, and Yahweh showed up. And the near king Uzziah died, and I saw the Lord, high and exalted, seated on a throne, and the train of His robe filled the temple. Now what's missing here again is any description of what Yahweh looked like. Above Him were seraphim, each with six wings, and with two wings they covered their faces, with two wings they covered their feet, and with two wings they were flying. And they were calling to one another, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord Almighty. The whole earth is full of His glory. Now, this too is a rather strange story, and why wouldn't the Lord, why wouldn't Yahweh want us to represent Him with any image from anything we could find in the creation? I remember growing up and singing that in Holy, Holy, Holy, and I always wondered, why do they say Holy three times? It seems enormously repetitive. Well, for the Hebrews, we would say in English, Holy, Holier, Holy-yes, and that's how we have our comparative and our superlative. In Hebrew, if you had a hole that was deep, you would call it deep. And if you had a well that was quite deep, you would say, that well is deep, deep. And so for the angels to say, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord Almighty, is Yahweh Almighty, that means He is the Holiness. But what does that mean? It's an alarming thing to think about the kind of being that could create the universe. You know, over the last couple of months, I've had a lot of conversations with friends who are atheists, and atheism is a lot of the news today with the new atheists making their noises, and the Pew Foundation surveys that come out and say the number of those who declare themselves not related to any formal religion has doubled. I can understand how my atheist friends look at the cosmos and say, I cannot conceive of a being so smart, so powerful, so ancient, so other, that this being would have the power and the brilliance and the complexity to actually make this universe. I would also say to them that in some ways, if that stretches your mind, you should also be stretched by the idea that how this all would come about simply by accident. But if you look at this picture taken by the Hubble Space Telescope, this was a picture taken of a spot of sky that seemed empty, devoid of things. And so they let the telescope focus on that space of sky for a long period of time, and to the amazement of those who were running the telescope, what they discovered is that these in fact are not stars, these are galaxies. And in all of these galaxies there are billions and billions of stars, like the billions and billions of stars in our own galaxy. And when we look at this picture and when we cover the plate of this picture, we have to ask ourselves, why couldn't this? What kind of being could create this? When we think about the fact that even the size of our own galaxy is incomprehensible. And when we think about the number of years it took light to travel from stars, even in our own galaxy to get here, and we think that these galaxies took, the light from these galaxies took how many years to get here? And when you think about a being that is capable of producing this, and you think that this being is desirous of knowing us, who are tiny and small, this being cares about the minutiae of our lives. You know, I can understand how my atheist friends say, how could such a being exist? It's too amazing to consider. The angels cry out, Holy, Holy, Holy, this being is so powerful, is so eternal, is so beyond anything we can even comprehend. In fact, we didn't know that these galaxies were out there until when? The 1960s or 70s. Let's imagine, for example, that you were the inventor of pizza. Let's imagine that your invention of pizza has become one of the most popular food in all the world. Let's imagine that you can take credit for Papa Murphy's, Papa John's, Little Caesar's, Round Table, Pizza Hut, and all the various permutations in all the different cultures in all the world. If someone wished to represent you as the author of pizza, how would you feel if they made an image of you that looked like a pizza? Would that flatter you? Would you be happy with that? Now, you might say, you might be very proud of the fact that you invented what's probably the world's most popular food, but you would probably also say to people who are making representations of you that look like a pizza, no, wait a minute, I appreciate the adoration, I appreciate the fame, but let's be honest, pizza is a wonderful food, there's nothing wrong with pizza, but I am not myself a pizza. And any attempt to represent me as a pizza really doesn't do justice to me. Now let me ask you this question. If you can understand why representing you as a pizza would be an insult, consider this. Where would anyone in the world get the idea that representing God as a calf or an old man or any of these other things would be an insult? It would be someone who would have to recognize how holy and great and amazing and other this God would be. So either if religion is in fact simply the stuff that we made up looking at the world, either the Jews were by far the smartest, most ingenious religious people we've ever known, or a God who is this other, this holy, this different from anything we can imagine, no matter how fond we are of him, no matter how much we wish to praise him, actually came into our story and told us, by the way, I'm a lot more than a cow or an old man or a giant on a seat. I am wholly other. In fact, the more you get to know the creation, the more you will find that it is mind-blowingly complicated and that I must be degrees of magnitude more great than anything else you can find. So on one hand, I appreciate the fact that this strange command that gets picked up by the Jews and then the Christians and the Muslims, that seems so illogical in terms of your desire to promote a religious ideology, but it's just a disadvantage to not make a picture of him. Ah, but if you have any idea what we're talking about, how could we make a picture of him and not in the same way consult him? If you imagine that religion is the product of human creativity and our desire to gain control of the universe and our neighbor through it, the Prohibition on creating images of the Creator God is either an incredible stoke of genius or it speaks to the outlandish possibility that this God, in fact, has spoken and relayed his preferences to how we might imagine and relate to him. The second thing that the angels say about him, first thing again, this God is so far beyond anything you can imagine. He's holy, holy, holy. And the next phrase, and the whole earth is full of his glory. Every two or three months I get an opportunity to go to my friend Krishna's class over at the Art Institute, and it's a whole classroom full of people who are studying physical arts or culinary arts or computer arts, all of this. And this issue of glory is always one that communicates to them because they understand glory, because they're artists, because they use their skill and they develop stuff that's glory. And I always ask them, especially the culinary students, if you cook the most amazing dish, would it be any fun to eat it by yourself at home? No. In fact, if you cook the most amazing dish, do you know what you want to do? You want to share it. In fact, there's no greater joy than having a room filled with people and to place this food in front of them and to have people eat it and say, this is wonderful. What we're touching on here is glory. You know, we are incuriously religious. And here's the thing, that if you're a culinary arts student and you discover that you have this gift, this power, that you can make food, and when people eat this food they say, I've never eaten such a thing. And then they look at you and they say thank you, and they begin to connect you with this glory. What temptations begin to creep into our hearts? As many of us would know, the good steward of such power allows the glory to stand on its own. Because if you in fact are an amazing chef and you in fact do put great food in front of people, the best way for this food to be a joy would be for the people to eat it and say, who made this food? This is wonderful. Thank you so much for this. If in fact you turned it around and you put the food in and said, now wait a minute, I made this, I made this, I want everybody to know, I made this. What happens to the glory? What happens to the food? Suddenly the glory of the food is diminished because the sub-creator who made the food gets in the way and tries to draw the glory in for themselves. And in fact this is what we do. This is also of course why Jesus says, don't promote yourself, do what you do and let others promote you for you. Because that way it's much more pleasing to eat this and say, this is wonderful, thank you. Rather than have the person say, I made this, it's good isn't it? It's good isn't it? It's really good isn't it? Yes, it's good, thank you. We all get this. We understand this. See we want to capture the glory and make it our slave so we can enjoy it on cue, so we can employ it to our own competitive advantage. Because here's the thing, we distrust the gift and we want to make it our slave. And because the thing about a gift is just that, if it's a gift, it has to be received, not secured. And that in fact is the difference. Do we have open hands trusting that we will receive? You know the amazing thing is that maybe this chef made a great dish and everyone in the room said, wow it was wonderful. And so they went back into the kitchen and said, I'll top that. And they go in and they make it and they put it out and everyone says, this isn't as good as the other one. And if you've made your ability to cook the essence of your identity, and if you've made the essence of your identity, for example you've got Forest here, he's a performer. If Forest decides his chief identity is going to be bringing delight to people by doing magic, when the show goes well and everyone says, wow Enchanted Forest, this is wonderful, it's a great day. But what happens when he does his magic and he stumbles with his hands or he can't handle it? Have you ever had a show that hasn't gone well, Forest? have the same liability. You preach a good servant and everyone says, Pastor, that was a wonderful servant. You're on the top of the world. Next week, you come into church and you lay an egg and folks just say, good to see you, Pastor. You can open the door fast. You see, we want, we don't want to receive the gift, we want to control the glory, we want to make it ours and we want to make it about us. And that is the heart of idolatry. Colossians 1.15 says, the sun, meaning Jesus, is the image. In Greek, the word we translate to image is actually the word icon. The sun is the icon of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation. One of the strange mysteries of the incarnation of Jesus is that God put Jesus in harm's way, available for our mistreatment, our image making, our abuse. It was in fact the reason he came to be mistreated by us. And this in fact is the mystery of Jesus. Because if you would ask an ancient author to write a story about a God-man coming in, you'd have a story about Hercules, or you'd have a story about Achilles, you would have a story maybe about someone who walked into a dark room and he was shining out the place, because he'd glow or have a halo or something like this. This gives you a hint into the humility of God and the way he uses glory. Because Jesus comes in, the icon, the image of the invisible God, and we did what to him? You know, the question about should you put a Buddha in the bathroom? It was interesting because actually if you look at Buddhism, the Buddha himself is no more God than any other human being. And so it's a little bit different than let's say putting Jesus in a bathroom. And some discussions talk about that if you look at it on the internet. But what's alarming about what happens in the Incarnation is that instead of staying holy, holy, holy, far away from us, God comes down here to where our arms can reach him and our fists can pummel him. And we can take away even the kinds of glory that are common to us. I used this illustration back in November. One of the things you learn as a preacher is you can repeat a sermon, but you're always a little at risk repeating the illustration. But I'll take that risk this time because it fits so well. In the book Silence, written about the attempt to evangelize in the early modern period, late medieval period, the attempt to evangelize Japan, the Japanese Shogun figured out that they could stop the Jesuit priests not by killing the priests, but by threatening the priests by killing their followers. And so what they did was they rounded up the priests and they told the priests, it was a very smart way to go about it, they told the priests, look, we have this image, this foamy, this image of Jesus. And unless you take your foot and trample on this image and denounce this Jesus, we will torture and kill the people in these new churches that you have founded. And so all of these priests had a crisis of faith. And this author wrote this amazing book, it's in South Japanese, and he tells this story in the story of a man, of a Portuguese priest named Rodriguez. In the climax of the novel, Christ breaks his silence and invites the priest to trample upon him. Yet the face was different from that on which the priest had gave so often in Portugal, in Rome, in Doha, and in Macau. It was not Christ whose face was filled with majesty and glory, neither was it a face made beautiful by endurance and pain, nor was it a face with the strength of a will that repelled temptation. The face of the man who then lay at his feet in the fooby was sunken and utterly exhausted. The sorrow it had gazed up at him as the eyes spoke concealingly, trample, trample. It is to be trampled on by you that I am here. The Gospel of John is commonly broken up into two sections. The book of signs, which is most of the book, and then the second part of the book, which talks about the humiliation and crucifixion of Jesus, as commonly been called the book of glory. How could it be that this holy, holy, holy God, who can make billions of galaxies, comes as the icon of the invisible God in Jesus Christ, and his glory is in his humiliation, is his being beaten by Roman soldiers, scourged by their whips, hung naked on a cross for the mockery of anyone passing by, how on earth would this be the glory of the holy, holy, holy God? It's his glory, because what it deeply shows is that this God who can spin out billions of galaxies with billions of stars does not exclude himself from what we do to each other, but makes himself subject to us so that we can see his love. If you look in a telescope, if you look in a Hubble telescope, you will see his glory, you will see his power, but only by seeing this one, for whom far worse was it done to him than to become a statue in our bathroom or our front lawn. Far worse did we do to him that we can see his love. At the heart of bio-making is the confidence that we possess in ourselves, the moral strength to better ourselves, and our world, if only we had available to us the power of God. In Jesus, God comes to us and makes it subject to humanity, and with this power, we crush him. He indeed came to be crushed by us, and in this moment, the image of the crucified Lord becomes a testimony to our cruelty and avarice. When we put him in the bathroom, on the front lawn, or hang him around our neck, we remind the world of who we are and what we do. Jesus himself gave us something to know ourselves by, and to know him through it. He gave us bread and wine, and said that when we eat it, we remember him. Because on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And it's amazing that the image he gives us is common. And in fact, more before the service said, I'm having a harder and harder time finding real grape juice for communion, so I have some sparkling apple juice that's flavored grape this week. It seems better than sugar water. And you might say, oh, but you shouldn't have that. Oh. But the icon of the invisible God who spun out galaxies upon galaxies comes to us, and we brutalize him, and he says, I want you to remember who I am. So take bread and break it. And when you do so, see me. Know yourself and understand, yes, I am holy, holy, holy. But I am also committed to you in ways as incomprehensible as my power. Come to the stage.