https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-efe4mhbJ1w

 Advent is about God's rescue of us as we are enveloped by empire where God is concealed and our rebellion is revealed. That's how the book of Esther speaks to us in Advent. Advent is the time when we remember God will not leave us in this world as it is, but has come and will come to us to rescue. That song we just finished singing is a beautiful song that reminds us that we are in his hand. In Act 1 in our walk through Esther, we looked at compromise with empire and we saw how Esther and Mordecai at each turn try to make their way by living empire's way. In Act 2, Mordecai and Esther came to a defining moment when they saw that empire that they thought they had beaten was about to consume them and they had to decide whether or not to turn to the Lord or to keep going as they had been. Here in Act 3, we're going to see how within empire predictably the proud undo themselves. In fact, Mary's song, which you will find in Luke 1, Mary's song is this glorious song where Mary after the angel announces to her that she is to bear the child, the proudest one of God, instead of cursing an unplanned pregnancy, instead of demanding that God send someone else, she sings this song. And at the heart of this song is a revolutionary message that basically says that in Jesus' revolution, empire is undone. From generation to generation, he is merciful to those who fear him. He has demonstrated power with his arm. He has scattered those whose pride wells up from the sheer arrogance of their hearts. He has brought down the mighty from their thrones and has lifted up those of lowly position. He has filled the hungry with good things and has sent the rich away empty. So it happened that on the third day, Esther put on her royal attire and stood in the inner court of the palace opposite the king's quarters. As you know now, Esther has to take her life in her own hand if she is going to try to save not only her life and that of Mordecai, but the life of her whole nation from slaughter by Haman and those who would like to advance themselves at their expense. The king was sitting on his royal throne in the palace opposite the entrance. When the king saw Queen Esther standing in the court, she met with his approval. The king extended to Esther the gold scepter that was in his hand and Esther approached and touched the end of the scepter. The king said to her, what is on your mind, Queen Esther? What is your request? Even as much as half the kingdom, I will give it to you. Esther replied, if the king is so inclined, let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have prepared for him. And then she brings them to a banquet and then when she and Haman and the king are having a banquet, the king says, what is your request? And she says, that you come to another banquet. Now Haman went forth that day pleased and very much encouraged. He was thrilled that. Haman, he seemed to have pierced the innermost ring of power. But when Haman saw Mordecai at the king's gate, and he meaning Mordecai, did not rise or tremble in his presence, Haman was filled with rage towards Mordecai. But Haman restrained himself and went to his house and he sent for his friends to join him along with his wife Zareth. Haman then recounted to them his fabulous wealth, his many sons, and how the king had magnified him and exalted him over the king's others of other officials and servants. Haman said, furthermore, Queen Esther invited only me to accompany the king to the banquet that she prepared. And also today I am invited along with the king. Yet all of this fails to satisfy me so long as I have to see Mordecai, the Jew, standing at the king's gate. This is a picture of us in empire. Haman, on one hand, is so immensely pleased he imagines he has finally arrived. He has pierced the inner ring. He has joined the inner circle. And so he gathers his wife and his friends and he brags about his wealth and he brags about his power and he brags about all of these things that his whole life has been leading up to. But can he enjoy it? No. Why? There's a hold out. Mordecai still won't tremble before him. Mordecai is spoiling the entire party. And this is the story of a self that is bloated. Should Mordecai enjoy the wealth and the power and the privilege he has been given? Certainly. But he can't because his self is bloated. And in fact his self continues to expand. And if in fact Mordecai hadn't been there, there would be yet another hold out in the land that wouldn't want to worship him. Because in our heart of hearts we are all the same and we are hungry until we are at the center of it all and we are not satisfied. It doesn't matter how much admiration. It doesn't matter how much success. It doesn't matter how much power. It doesn't matter how much money. It doesn't matter how many goals. Our hearts are never satisfied until the entire universe is ours. And Haman fits this picture. It doesn't matter what you give him. It will never be happy. Haman's wife Zerah and all of his friends said to him, have a gallows 75 feet high built and in the morning tell the king that Mordecai should be hanged on it. Then go with the king to the banquet contended. It seemed like a good idea to Haman so he had the gallows built. Now if you go up I-50 to old hang town you'll think about how we used to hang folks in America. That's not how they would do it then. I mean here they do the roll with the deck and all that kind of thing. In the ancient world what they would do would be to stick a pole through you and then raise you up 75 feet. And so Mordecai despite all of his wealth and all of his power and everything he had, his only consolation now is imagining Mordecai with a pole through him 75 feet in the air. And that he imagines will be his glory. But here's the thing about the book of Esther. The book of Esther does not mention God once. The book of mentioned does not mention Yahweh once. The book of Esther has very little religious content in it. But in the book of Esther God is sneaky and he works his way in unseen places. So just as Mordecai and his friends are comforting, consoling themselves over this abuse, supposed abuse that Mordecai is giving him by refusing to worship them, the Lord is moving in another way. Throughout that night the king was unable to sleep. So he asked for the book containing the historical records to be brought. As the records were being read in the king's presence, and now I was a history major and I'm a little offended by this because it tells us that history can be used to put us to sleep. I personally find history to be a very interesting thing. So as the king can't sleep they're reading the historical records. And it was found written that Mordecai had disclosed that Bichlina and Tereth, two of the king's eunuchs who guarded the entrance, had plotted to assassinate King Haschiris. The king asked, what great honor was bestowed on Mordecai because of this? The king's attendants who served him responded, not a thing was done for him. Then the king said, who is in the courtyard? Now Haman had come into the outer courtyard of the palace to suggest that the king hanged Mordecai on the gallows that he had constructed for him. The king's attendants said to him, it is Haman who is standing in the courtyard. The king said, let him enter. So Haman came in and the king said to him, what should be done for the man whom the king wishes to honor? Now here again we have a lovely little lesson in how we are because as soon as the question is asked, what does Haman think? Haman thought to himself, who isn't that the king would want to honor more than me? So Haman said to the king, for the man whom the king wishes to honor, let him bring royal attire, which the king himself has worn, and a horse on which the king himself has ridden, one bearing the royal insignia. Then let the clothes and this horse be given to one of the king's noble officials. Let him clothe the man whom the king wishes to honor and let him lead him through the plaza of the city on the horse, calling before him, so shall it be done to the man whom the king wishes to honor. This is the best thing Haman can think of. He can imagine all the second tier, all the second tier people worshiping him and just drinking in their adoration. The king said to Haman, go quickly, take the clothing and the horse just as you have described and do just as you indicated to Mordecai, the Jew who sits at the king's gate. Don't neglect a single thing that you have said. So Haman took the clothing and the horse and he clothe Mordecai and he led him about on the horse throughout the plaza of the city, calling before him, so shall it be done to the man whom the king wishes to honor. Who is the lord? He brings up the lowly and takes down the proud. Then Mordecai again sat at the king's gate while Haman hurried away to his home, mournful and with a veil over his head. He was so furious he didn't even want anyone seeing his face. Haman then related to his wife, Zerath, and all of his friends, everything that had happened to him. These wise men, along with his wife, Zerath said to him, if indeed this Mordecai, for whom you have begun to fall, is Jewish, you will not prevail against him. No, you will surely fall before him. No, you will surely fall before him. While they were still speaking with him, the king's eunuchs arrived and they quickly brought Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared. So the king and Haman came to die with Queen Esther. On the second day of the banquet of wine, the king asked Esther, what is your request, Queen Esther? It shall be granted to you. What is your petition? Ask up to half the kingdom and it shall be done. Queen Esther replied, if I have met with your approval, O king, and if the king is so incline, grant me my life as my request, and my people as my petition. For we have been sold, both I and my people, to destruction and to slaughter and to annihilation. If we had simply been sold as male and female slaves, I would have remained silent for such distress would not have been sufficient for troubling the king. Then King Hoaziaris responded to Queen Esther, who is this individual? Where is the person to be found who is presumptuous enough to act in this way? Esther replied, the oppressor and the enemy is this evil Haman. That Haman became terrified in the presence of the king and the queen. Enraged, the king arose from the banquet of wine and withdrew to the palace garden. Meanwhile, Haman stood to beg Queen Esther for his life, for he realized that the king had now determined a catastrophic end for him. When the king returned from the palace garden to the banquet of wine, Haman was throwing himself down on the couch where Esther was lying. The king exclaimed, will he also attempt to rape the queen while I'm still in the building? As the words left the king's mouth, they covered Haman's face. Harbono, one of the king's eunuchs, said, indeed, there is a gallows that Haman made for Mordecai, who spoke out in the king's behalf. It stands near Haman's home and is 75 feet high. The king said, hang him on it. So they hanged Haman on the very gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. The king's rage was that bad. What drove Haman? The irony of the story is that what drove Haman drove him to his own destruction. Haman builds the gallows that he hangs on. This picture is for us. His self, ironically, though he had wealth and power and status and standing and success, his own self was enormously fragile. It was a reflection of everything that empire had. And so it could not tolerate even one simple man who refused to praise Mordecai. One simple man who refused to praise him. Is Haman alone in this? In fact, the troubles need to know how much like Haman I really am. I was sharing this story in the Sunday school class when I was in Costco a few months ago and there was a woman in front of me and we were all kind of in a little area. I was behind a woman with a cart and she backed up and bumped into my cart. Just bumped into my cart for a minute and I didn't think anything of it. And then as she continued to move on down the way she said something about this guy who crashed into me. I said wait a minute, you backed into me! Now, this was a rather large woman and a million fat jokes came to my mind. I was ready to say something. And then I thought to myself, what offense has she given me? Now, was she right? No. Did she harm me? Did she hurt me? No. What I felt was my self-righteousness that she wounded. And here I was ready to cut her down verbally to leave to defend her. What a fragile, silly self I have. Haman is us. This is what we do. This is where we go. This is how we are. Contrast Haman with Jesus. Did Haman deserve to be worshipped? Was furious when Mordecai was the only holdout. Jesus comes, is deserving of worship, and look at how we treat him. He came to serve, not to be served. While enemies mocked and executed him. Haman, if he walked through Mordecai and didn't bow, Haman was furious. Jesus, when he's on the cross, prays for those who are mocking him. Philippians says he did not consider equality with God as something to be exploited, but made himself humble. Made himself the servant of all. What Jesus reveals to us is the humility of God. Because if I were God, I'd be like Haman. In fact, if I had God-like powers, I'd be like Satan. Because I would want to control and dominate and possess everything. But look at God. He's free. He gives. He's humble. He's gentle. C.S. Lewis wrote the screw-taped letters where it's one demon writing to another, so you have to kind of reverse it. And in this passage, C.S. Lewis puts his finger on exactly the difference between our broken, rebellious hearts and God the Father. To us, human is primarily food. For Haman, the empire was food. Our aim is the absorption of its will into ours, the increase of our own area of selfhood at its expense. Why is it we want to control each other? Why is it we demand that everything has to be the way we imagine it to be? Why is it that this dominates our relationships with each other? This comes from the love. But the obedience which the enemy, meaning God, demands of man is quite a different thing. One must face the fact that all the talk about his love for men and his perfect service, and his service being perfect freedom, is not, as one would gladly believe, mere propaganda, but a truth that appalls hell. He does not want to fill the universe with a lot of little loathsome, he really does want to fill the universe with a lot of loathsome little replicas of himself. Creatures whose life, on its miniature scale, will be qualitatively like his own. Not because he has absorbed them, that's what Haman wanted to do with everything, absorb it. Not because he has absorbed them, but because their wills freely conform to his. We want cattle who can finally become food. He wants servants who can finally become sons. We want to suck in, he wants to give out. We are empty and would be filled, like Haman. Doesn't matter if you've got the whole kingdom, one standout Mordecai must be killed. We want servants, we want to suck in, he wants to give out. We are empty and would be filled, he is full and flows over. Our war aim is a world in which our Father below has drawn all other beings into himself. The enemy wants a world of beings united to him, but still distinct. This is the vision of our Heavenly Father. He gives us life, he gives us will, he gives us freedom, he gives us, he's patient with us, he's kind with us, he's gentle with us, he waits for us. He doesn't dominate and control. How bloated and exposed is yourself? Are you easily offended? Are you continually frustrated that all the other beings you share your home with or your office with or this world with aren't conforming to your image of how it all should be? Do you need attention, praise, and even worship? How is someone's refusal to honor you met? Are you captive to the hunger of yourself? He even wanted a high pole for Mordecai to make an example for the empire to see. The Romans hung Jesus on a cross as an example of anyone who would dare to cross that. But Jesus went there willingly. He took our shame on himself. He took God's wrath on himself. And there on the cross he becomes the servant of all. If you have been freed from the bondage of your bloated self, how then will you use your time? Because the truth is, we spend a lot of time bloating ourselves, trying to become satisfied, trying to finally arrive. If you give up that game, how will you spend your time? Spend it like God does. How does God spend his time? Giving, loving, waiting, encouraging, sending his Son, sending his Spirit. Pursuing worship of self probably takes most of our times, but your Heavenly Father spends his time giving to us. Let's pray. Lord, we are fearful, selfish, bloated selves that are easily offended, easily pricked, easily slighted, and our fury and our wrath are set to destroy any who would defy us. And it is an endless job, because we are not God and never will be. And in order to understand you, you send your Son Jesus, who comes into this world not jumping off the temple making the show. When he'd forgive or heal or do a miracle for someone, he would tell them, don't tell anybody, just go and enjoy God's gifts. And then Lord, when we couldn't stand his outrageous generosity any longer, we killed him and enjoyed the killing. But even as we killed him, he prayed for our forgiveness. And in the resurrection he came, and even Lord, the disciples who deserted him, he didn't beat them down. He invited them to follow once more. Lord, may we give up our insecure, bloated selves, and may we receive a new self from you, one who has been given everything we could possibly need out of your generosity. One who does not need to fear the empires of this world, because we know that you will give us new life in the resurrection. And may we live those selves in the spaces we live today. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Amen.