https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sZIt3hjHDB0

 Sometimes people ask, where do you get all your stories and tidbits and information and things? Well, some of you, or my Facebook friends know I read through a lot of blogs, a lot of news, read through a lot of material through the course of the week looking for stuff that I can swirl away for this week or next week or weeks to come. Often I'll also notice that preachers often follow the news cycle. If there's a big event in the news, you'll wind up hearing something about it in a sermon. Same with bloggers, people who write. And so a couple weeks ago, Ferguson and Eric Gardner and racism were very much in the news. And many, many people commenting on those events. And in fact, we talked a lot about race last week in the sermon, got a lot of interesting feedback from a number of you. Well, the big story this week was, of course, the Senate torture report. And as you heard, the text this morning is Isaiah 61, where Jesus comes and sets the prisoners free. And I will confess to you that when I saw all this news coming out about the Senate torture report, I just click again. I don't want to read this stuff. I don't want to read this stuff. This is partisan politics. This is government stuff. I don't care about this. I don't want to talk about this. I want to avoid this. And then I had to ask myself, why? I had to confess. I don't care if the government tortures people. I kind of assume they do this to people. And I assume or hope they have good reasons for doing it. But I don't want to hear about it. And I don't want to talk about it. And I don't want to know about it. So I posted some things on Facebook this week, and one person responded that essentially what I just said, I always assumed that the government was doing this, but I don't want to know about it. I'm sure it keeps us safe. Isn't that what's important? And as I reflected on it, especially in the light of the conversation the previous week about racism, and I think about all the people who say, well, that young man stole from that store, didn't he? If these people, they wouldn't have the attention of the police if they weren't in trouble, if they didn't do something. Isn't that right? And what I see in my heart is a really ugly thing that I categorize a group of people and they may very well be guilty. And I don't care what happens to them. As long as I'm safe, I don't need to know about it. I don't want to talk about it. New York Times said, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. when it comes to momentous matters of national security, democratic tradition, and the rule of law, there is precious little disclosure, and no justice, and no accountability. It is a bipartisan affliction. Another reader who was writing to The Dish, a popular blog, notes this. I'm a Republican subscriber to The Dish, and a frequent yeller at my computer screen as a result. And I'll say enthusiastic subscriber because you've got passion and smarts and personality, and that's more than due. But honestly, no one, but honestly, not one reference throughout your ongoing commentary about the Senate torture report and the nearly 3,000 victims of the 9-11 attacks, they went to work that morning and died in horror and never knew why. Surely there's some mitigating context that deserves at least a mention alongside the allegations and yes, ugly truths about America's security efforts in the wake of that attack. A very similar picture to this has been going around social media, essentially saying, I don't give a blank about what they did to those terrorists or what they've done. Probably the most, the clearest voice on this, I've heard, has been John McCain, and no one can fault John McCain for being soft on terrorism. Yet John McCain, as you well know, served in the military and was subject to torture in Vietnam, and if you can see his Senate speech on the report, I'd recommend it. No, but this is not from him, but from the week. None of the detainees seemed to be hiding pertinent facts about the imminent terrorist attacks. None of them needed any coercion to give up what they knew, none. The CIA does not dispute this. Because when I look in my heart, what I usually say to myself is, you know what, if it works, it's not a threat. You know what, if it works, or if it may work, try it. But the deeper truth is, I don't care if it works. I really want them to suffer for what they've done. This Christmas, a movie will come out by the title Unbroken. I read the book. It's an amazing book about Louis Zafferini, and I mentioned him in a previous sermon. And a lot of the book is about the torture that he was subjected to at the hands of one particularly sadistic prison guard in Japan. And I thought it will be tremendously ironic that we go to the movie theaters and have a sense of self-righteousness, that we are the good country, we are the good guys, we treat our prisoners well. When I don't know if we do, and what's more, and even more disturbing, I don't know if we want to. Because I think we torture because we're angry. I think we torture because we're scared. And so that's why these really difficult things, like treating our enemies even with a minimum of respect or kindness, seems out of bounds. Our text this morning is a hard one. If the prisoners are our enemies. The spirit of the sovereign Lord is on me because the Lord has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim freedom for the castes and release from darkness for the prisoners, to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all who mourn, and to provide for those who grieve in Zion. To bestow on them a crown of beauty instead of ashes, the oil of joy instead of mourning, and the garment of praise instead of a spirit of despair. They will be called oaks of righteousness, a planting of the Lord for the display of his splendor. Part of the difficulty in this is that, for some, the reputation of God is that he likes torture and that hell is torture. Second is from a book, Skeleton and God's Paws, which is really an excellent book in dealing with a lot of these images. Second, hell is imagined to be torture. God looks like a sadistic master capable of propitious cruelty equivalent to the kid next door who enjoys spending his spare time tormenting cats. This torture serves no positive purpose, makes no constructive contribution to the flourishing of the world. God is not like Jack Bauer, going after information to prevent an imminent terrorist attack. God is the terrorist in this picture, looking for a few sadistic kicks out for pure and simple vengeance. There are a number of people that I know who have walked away from Christianity. Part of the reason is because they imagine this is what God is like. And it is exactly at this moment that we must remember the heart of the Christian story and the declarations it maintains, which is that you cannot so easily run a line down the middle of this world and say, these are the good guys and these are the bad guys. That doesn't mean there aren't good guys and bad guys, and it doesn't mean there aren't dangerous people that we need to be protected from. But we recognize that if I was called upon to watch over prisoners who have threatened my family and hurt people that I love, what would I do? I'd love to stand up here and tell you that I would always respect the law. I'd love to stand up here and tell you that I wouldn't be vindictive or sadistic or want to take it out of them after they had hurt me and mine. I don't know that I can promise you that because I know myself and I know what's in my heart and I know how I can even be vindictive and petty for people who just slight my ego and don't really do great harm. What's amazing about this text in Isaiah is in fact, what the Lord is looking for, he doesn't just release prisoners just to be nice. What he is doing is creating a new world. What he is doing is supplanting what's at the heart of our present world. And what he's looking for is for creation to be restored. For I, the Lord, love justice. I hate robbery and wrongdoing. In my faithfulness, I will reward my people who make an everlasting covenant with them. Their descendants will be known among the nation and they're offspring among the peoples. One of the things that God is looking for, and we've seen it in the Exodus stories and we see it here in Isaiah, is that God cares about his reputation. Last week we talked about racism and we noted how right from the start, it didn't take much for Satan to plant that seed in our hearts. Is he holding out on you? Can you trust him? And how that seed, if watered and cared for, will germinate into a plant, into vengeance, into violence, into racism, into torture and brutality. It's that same seed of mistrust that grows within us. And it's that seed that must be undone. And so if God would spread the good news about the fact that what he wants for us is good, somehow we'll need to trust him. I do any greatly in the Lord. My soul rejoices in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation and arrayed me in a robe of his righteousness. As a bride from adorns his head like a priest and a bride adorns herself with jewels. For as the soil makes the sprout come up and the garden causes seed to grow, so the sovereign Lord will make righteousness and praise spring before the nations. With this rain we've gotten, golden California has again turned to green. And we celebrate with that. And Isaiah loves to use images like that. Isaiah loves to say, what the Lord will do, is turn a barren landscape into a green and lush place. And righteousness and justice and goodness and mercy will pop up all around us, just like every little green thing in California that had gone dormant is now coming out and turning itself green. God is so determined that his creation, not produce racism, not produce torture, not produce the strife that we experience every day in even small ways within our own families, inside of our own hearts, but that joy and love and generosity abound and flow out of all of us naturally, like we want to imagine, others to imagine it does now. And this in fact is his mission. But the difficulty is how? One of the things of course that came out this week is, well, here's what we've always suspected. So the nations of Europe, shaming the West, Ayatollah Khomeini, they claim human rights and trample its basics in their prisons and interactions with nations, even with their own people. The Ayatollah says, China of course, when we go to China and complain about how they treat their political prisoners, what will they turn around and put in our face? And on and on and on it goes. The difficulty with empire is that once you have an empire, you want to maintain it. And you know, every empire in the world comes to the people. The Babylonians came to the Jews and say, you backwards Jews, you don't know how to live. Let's take your brightest and your best to Babylon. Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. And we'll give them Babylonian names and we'll give them a Babylonian education. And we'll make them Babylonians and all of you backwards Jews will figure out how the real world works. And Persia did the same thing. And when the Greeks came through, they did the same thing. Oh, you barbarians, you know where the word comes from? Comes from the Greeks. You are a Greek or you are a barbarian. Two people in the world. And the Greeks would show you the writings of Socrates, the writings of Plato, the writings of Aristotle, all of the magnificence that the Greeks had, mathematics, philosophy, theater, literature, bestow it on the world you backwards people. And then of course the Romans came along and said, yes, we'll take the finest of the Greeks but add to it Roman power and administration. And we'll bring you water works and we'll bring you roads and we'll bring you water. We will bestow all of this on you. And of course France did the similar thing with Napoleon and Germany did the similar thing with Hitler. And now, and then Britain of course had their day and they had the white man's burden to take over Africa, to show the Africans how they really should live. And on and on and on it goes. Every empire imagines it has discovered the key to life and will promote it around the world whether the world wants it or not. And if you comply with us, we will reward you. But if you resist us, we will crush you. It is the way of empire. And so when Jesus comes and says, I am bringing a kingdom, the world rightly sits back and says, is it a kingdom like the Greeks? Is it a kingdom like the Romans? Do you have a better idea that you're gonna shove down our throat whether we like it or not? Because that just sets up the whole thing all over again, time and time again. Isaiah had some very interesting things to say about this kingdom. He will judge between the nations and will settle disputes for many people. They will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning posts. Nation will not take up sword against nation nor will they train for war anymore. The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lamb lie in at the yearling together and a little child will lead them. The cow will feed with the bear and their young will lie down together and the lion will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the coper's den. The young child will put his hand into the viper's nest. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. But we didn't trust God. We can't trust God. We can't trust each other. So we play out empire in small and big ways between us and we look at God and say, what will make your empire any different? And as I talk with friends who are not Christians, they look at the church and they say, isn't this just the power move? Aren't you just trying to prioritize yourself at our expense? Aren't you just playing the same game that everyone else in the world plays again and again? How on earth can I trust you? We know how leaders work. Will any of their daughters be the ones to administer special interrogation techniques? Will any of their daughters be on the front lines or will their daughters by virtue of what their fathers have succeeded instead have best access to jobs and what America has to offer? You see, leaders don't offer their children up to the dirty work that their empires involve. But what is that then? God sends who? His minions? God sends his son. God sends his son to the people. And if the daughters of any president would come into this room, who would come with him or her? Secret service to protect them, to watch over them, to make sure they're not taken or harmed. God sends his son into this world without an escort. And what do we do with them? As with racism, it is instructive that we are quick to play the self-righteous critic. The movie of the book I love, Unbroken, is coming out this Christmas. And while we're aghast at the torture that Luis Amparini endures, I feel self-righteous pride that it was the Japanese and the Germans who tortured people, not the Americans. But when I hear that we torture terrorists, I want to either point fingers at one political party or posture myself as the righteous patriot who isn't afraid to criticize my own government. The darker truth is that part of me wants these people tortured. I trust in power and pain, and when I'm scared, I reach for it. Because if in the end it's me or my enemy, I want my enemy to suffer and to die. This is who I am deep inside, and so much of my public righteousness is actually a show to advantage myself as posturing to claim moral high ground. The suspicions of my enemies are true. I am finally in it for myself. I can't speak for you. You might discover this for yourself too. It is in fact the beginning of health to recognize our misery. While I'm in it for myself, I discover that God, my ultimate enemy. Because here's the thing, you might be able to out-compete another human being. Your civilization might be able to out-compete another civilization, but what will you do against God if God stands against you? While I'm in it for myself, I discover that God, my ultimate enemy, is so devoted to my well-being, he gave his son to be tortured and killed by my side for me. How do you describe what they did to Jesus? Did they beat him? Because he had information? Did they crucify him? Because maybe he could stay where the other disciples were? They had it all! Am I different from the Romans or the Jews? No victim of Japanese or American or ISIS torture can look at Jesus and say, you don't understand. We rise up in righteous indignation at ISIS, who publishes videos of the behavior. Jesus was tortured publicly by Rome at the request of God's own people as a public expression of our demand to rule the earth. He just came, however, not to bring judgment, but to bear it and to bear it for us. When I see that God would allow himself to be a victim of torture for the sake of his enemy, I am moved to watch or embrace the banner of that kingdom and that empire. Every other empire I know finally is in it for themselves and their idea and their way of life and their friends. Only God's empire is here for us. I am moved to believe that only that empire will actually bring the kind of flourishing that Isaiah 61 talks about. That kingdom, where just as our recent rains turned California from golden to green again, so also the blood of Jesus, Jesus' blood, and the blood of Jesus' blood, turned us from golden to green again, so also the blood of Jesus shed for us, turns us from self-righteous, self-satisfied, insecure, my well-being at your expense type of people, we are by nature into people like Jesus who genuinely want to see others flourish, even if it costs us. Now, I look at that, I think, I am a long ways from Jesus. I am a long ways from that because when I see these stories of torture, it's like, tell somebody else, I don't want to talk about racism. I want to posture myself against racism, yes, torture, and let's just not talk about it. But then I have to reflect on the fact that when Jesus came, we didn't just execute him, we wanted him tortured first. And when I see that ugliness in my heart, and when I recognize what he did for me, right there are the seeds of beginning to live your well-being at my expense. And then the question is, which story, and this line won't go, there it is, which story will I live on? Because every day, I'm not torturing anyone, there is a woman here who has a mental illness that's once called me and accused me of holding her family in our Living Stones dungeon. Well, if anybody knows where we set the dungeon, please let me know. I don't have a dungeon, I'm not torturing anyone. But deep in my heart, it's not just that I'm capable of it. Can I be passive aggressive? Can I be petty? Can I be self-indulgent? It's the root of the same tree. But when I say him, who did not need to, who did not need to preserve his reputation before me, did what he did for me, that changes me, and moves me to want to be beautiful in his way. Let's pray. Lord, I would love to stand up here and just declare that we're all good people, we all mean well, and chucks, none of us have blood on our hands. Lord, maybe we don't have literal blood on our hands, or maybe we do. Maybe it's just the petty ways we play our games between each other. Help us, Lord, to confess that we don't just need an improver, we need a savior. Help us, Lord, to profess that in fact, this Jesus came and gave everything for us. And help us to see, Lord, that his beauty was completely given freely. And to teach us to also give freely, not because we're gonna earn anything from him, just because we want to be like him, and because we love him, and we believe that his kingdom is coming, and his kingdom is different. Help us to embrace it, and may we walk in its light. Hear our prayer, in the name of Jesus, amen. Would you please open up the altar hand that's number 470. Raise your hand, soldier. Can you raise your hand? Well, let's hope it's not me, soldier, so let's hope you know the melody. I don't think so. Thank you, sir. ["The Star-Spangled Banner"]