https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nSJ4dBIRftk

 So it's 10 o'clock Sunday. Okay, how do you imagine that big look 2000 years ago when after Jesus' ascension the disciples were gathered together in the upper room and they were praying and a wind blew and tongues of fire appeared on their head. And when the apostles preached and spoke, people heard them in other tongues and Peter preached a great sermon and 3000 people gathered from the Jews all over the Roman Empire became parts of the church and received the Holy Spirit that day. Now I tell you that little story, but what did it look like? One of the fun things about a long history of art, especially in the West where there's a lot of Christian art, is we get a sense of what artists imagined the day would look like. And up at the top we have one from the 18th century where you have these great pillars and marys in the middle and sky above and all of this. This one over here on the left is from the Eastern Church and it very much looks like an Ichi. It was made over the Western Church because Pentecost is Latin. But you can see in the images a very different imagination about what that event must have looked like. And so I wonder for us what we imagined that day of Pentecost when wind blows through, tongues of fire on people's head, and then people start talking and they're understood in other languages and we just imagine what must that have looked like? If I were to ask you what some of the most important events of the 20th century were, most of you would probably list World War I, the huge changes in the world, World War II, the rise of communism, the development of the atom bomb, the invention of the internet. But I would suggest that one of the most crucial events of the 20th century was actually the Azusa Street Revival in 1905 in Los Angeles. And you would say, really? Right up there with World War II and the invention of the internet? And I'd say yeah. And 1905, the 32-year-old son of former slaves moved into Los Angeles. And he had a particular theological idea, which I do not subscribe to, which the majority of the Christian Church does not subscribe to, but his idea was that the Holy Spirit, when it comes, would manifest itself in the speaking of tongues. And so he came to Los Angeles and started preaching this and had a little group gather around him and it caused quite a stir. A lot of things happened. If you read the Los Angeles Times of that area, there's a lot of hand-wringing and people not being quite sure about what to make out of these events. William Seymour would tend to sit in the corner between a couple of milk rates and just kind of pray the whole time. And other preachers would come up and preach and there would be people yelling and whooping and people falling down and all kinds of things. And so observers would come and complain about the strangeness and the noise. And part of the things that really kind of disturbed some of the reporters in 1905 Los Angeles was the disturbing, mingling of the races. Because here you had African Americans kind of leading the show and whites coming in and Hispanics coming in and it all seemed to be a mess. And it didn't really go anywhere. It lasted for a few years. But what happened as a result of this, in fact, has changed the world. And there isn't a corner of the world that you can't go to and not find, in some senses, ecclesiastical heirs of these events all over the planet. There are now 500 million Christians who identify themselves as Pentecostal in one shape or another. That's more than the population of the US, Canada, and Mexico combined. And they are in just about every corner of the world. When I went to the Dominican Republic, many of the practices that began there at the Azusa Street Revival happened in these other places. Now I have theological conversations with Pentecostals about a number of things, but consider for a moment that what happened in that little run-down church that had been used as a lumber yard and a variety of stables before these guys took it over, changed the world in a hundred years in a way that, in a sense, what happened to the original Pentecost didn't even do so numerically. What are we to think about that? Well, the Pentecostal tradition has gone on. And I would imagine that when many of us imagine that day of Pentecost, our minds are probably more shaped by some of the things that happened at the Azusa Street Mission than necessarily happened in the Book of Acts and Luke's telling of it. So Pentecostals have gone all over the world, and one of the biggest arguments with Pentecostals, between Pentecostals and atheists today, has to do with healing. Does God heal people? Robbie Dawkins, who is over on the left, just this week there was a news item in Charisma magazine that he finally got a chance to raise someone from the dead. And you can imagine where that debate goes, right and left. Was he really dead? Was he not dead? What would it mean if he raised someone from the dead? Can a doctor prove this? Atheists on the one hand, we turn back and say, okay, you're doing all of these miracles of leg lengthening and helping this person, but show me one amputee who has had an arm or a leg restored by healing. So where does that place us? Does God hate amputees? You can find an entire website devoted to the question. Just a couple hours north there's Bill Johnson, who's, how many of you have heard of the Bethel Church in Redding? A few of you. A lot of people go to that church, come from all over the country to figure out what's going on. Is this Pentecost? What is Pentecost? Theologically we say what happens at Pentecost, as Jesus foretold in the Gospel of John, we've been listening to the Gospel of John, at Pentecost the Holy Spirit comes and continues the ministry of Christ unto the end of the age. The Holy Spirit comes and works in our heart, convicts us of sin, empowers us. The beginning of Luke, Jesus says to the disciples, go to Jerusalem and wait for the Holy, you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you. But what does that power look like? Does it look like the Azusa Street Revital? Does it look like Robbie Dawkins and Bill Johnson? A lot of times when I talk to people about the Holy Spirit, people say, well, I don't know what to think about the Holy Spirit. Is the Holy Spirit a little quiet voice in me that nudges me? Does the Holy Spirit come upon me and makes me shake and yell? Does the Holy Spirit really heal people today? What is the work of the Holy Spirit and how does it touch me? Another blogger in the Bay Area, this guy teaches New Testament for the Fuller adjunct, wrote this blog a couple of days ago, just asking the question, when the Messiah comes? If you have picked much into my work at all, then you will probably recall that I am haunted by the words of this Jewish philosopher, Mark Berber. To the Jew, the Christian is the incomprehensibly daring person who affirms in an unredeemed world that his redemption has been accomplished. Everything is supposed to be different after the Messiah comes, but everything is all too much the same. Is that true after Pentecost? See, all of these questions revolve around us. If the Holy Spirit is available to us, why does Jack have to go to the hospital to have a doctor put steel in his arm? Can't he just come up to the front and have me lay hands on him and heal him? Part of the irony, of course, is that William Seymour died, he went to Los Angeles when he was 34, he died at the age of 54 of a heart attack. He couldn't heal himself. John Wender, who helped start the Banger movement, had multiple health issues, even as he was praying for others to be healed. We have all these questions that linger in the air. Is the Holy Spirit here? If the Holy Spirit is here, why don't I feel it clearly? Why doesn't God speak to me clearly? Why doesn't God do this or why doesn't God do that? It's true on one hand that God can take a tiny little movement in Los Angeles in 1905 and by the year 2015 completely transform world Christianity, yet can we bank on and leverage the movement of God in our lives? Because so many of us would say, okay Lord, if I give you a wish list, these are the things I want done. Will you fix them for me? Is that the work of the Holy Spirit? One of the most important passages about the work of the Holy Spirit, this is even in the New Testament, it's in the Old, it's in this vision of Ezekiel. Ezekiel is an exile. The Babylonians have captured Jerusalem and have taken the brightest and the best back to Babylon and Ezekiel is in that group. And the Lord takes Ezekiel out to a valley and says, I want to show you something. The hand of the Lord was on me and he brought me out by the Spirit of the Lord and set me in the middle of the valley. It was full of bones. He led me back and forth among them and I saw a great many bones on the floor of the valley, bones that were very dry. He asked me, son of man, can these bones live? I said, sovereign Lord, you alone know. And he said to me, prophesy to these bones and say to them, dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. This is what the sovereign Lord says to these bones. I will make breath enter into you and you will come to life. I will attach tendons to you and make flesh upon you and cover you with skin. I will put breath in you and you will come to life. Then you will know that I am the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded. And as I was prophesying, there was a noise, a rattling sound and the bones came together, bone to bone. I looked, tendons and flesh appeared on them and skin covered them. But there was no breath in them. Then he said to me, prophesy to the breath, prophesy, son of man, and say to it, this is what the sovereign Lord says, come, breathe from the four wings and breathe into these slain that they may live. So I prophesied as he commanded me and the breath entered into them and they came to life and stood up on their feet, a vast army. Then he said to me, son of man, these bones are the people of Israel. They say our bones are dried up, our hope is gone, we are cut off. Therefore prophesy and say to them, this is what the sovereign Lord says, my people, I'm going to open your graves and give you up from them. I will bring you back to the land of Israel. Then you, my people, will know that I am the Lord. When I open your graves and bring you up from them, I will put my spirit on you and you will live. And I will settle you in your own land. Then you will know that I the Lord have spoken and I have done it, declares the Lord. Think of the day of Pentecost. You probably don't think of this passage. If you go all the way back to Genesis 1 and you find the world that is formless and void, the spirit covers over it. If you go to Genesis 2, you find God making a man out of the dust and he breathes into the man and the man becomes a living being. And the language of Genesis 1 and Genesis 2 are echoed here in Ezekiel 37. And what the Lord is saying to Ezekiel is, your people look like they are in a corner. You have political issues, you have medical issues, you have relational issues, and these issues around you are so insurmountable, you cannot address them. You are cut off. And the imagery for that is this valley of bones. Do you feel that way sometimes? Do you look at your life and say, I thought I would have it in hand. I thought I could manage it and control it. I thought I could give to myself the kingdom. This passage says, the valley of the dry bones is us. This is our state. And then the question is, where is your hope? Aratoria, as this is about the Deity of Pentecost, if we think of the Holy Spirit as a power, we will want to know how to get a hold of it and to use it. But if we think of the Holy Spirit as a person, we will want to know how he can get a hold of me and use me. The nature of the cross of Christ is that he comes to us, one who would have all options because he had all power, and he lives himself making himself flesh. And he comes and lives in our midst, and we grab him and we take him and we crucify him. And he loses all of his options. And in a sense, Ezekiel is speaking of Christ and he's speaking of us because when we have no options, when we are finally at the end of what we can secure for ourselves, when we finally are in the place, when we have no other options to manipulate or control or coerce or get what we want, God finally comes to us and says, are you ready now for my Holy Spirit? I would imagine that this 34 year old, he only had one good eye, he goes to Los Angeles, which again, in my opinion, with some not terribly biblical theology, God uses him. And the world has changed. He never became rich. His revival only went for a few years in his church. There were never more than 40 or 60 people who actually went to the church. Thousands came through. And then another 20 years later or so, he dies of a heart attack just as poor as when he got there. He had no book deal. He had no pain. God used him and changed the world. When God blew through by his Holy Spirit that room in Pentecost and the disciples began to speak in tongues, we have stories of the disciples going out and doing amazing things. But how did the disciples die? Usually at the hands of their enemies, like their master. So what is the Holy Spirit given to us for? Is the Holy Spirit given to us to be a tool so that we can fix things in our lives? Or is the Holy Spirit a person that we begin to surrender ourselves to? And then you might say, oh, I'd like the first, thank you. I would really like to experience the Holy Spirit as something like the force of Star Wars that can move through me so I can do wild things like rip at the air and get my lightsaber to travel to me. If you look at the Holy Spirit, the Holy Spirit turns us into Christ. You see, Pentecost has everything to do with the mission of God and the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Now, if I were to say to you, there is a power available to you that is more powerful than anything in the world. What immediately grabs us is, how can I use this to better myself? How can I use this to be famous? How can I use this to be wealthy? The Holy Spirit comes to us and says, will you let me use you to be like Christ, to give yourself to your neighbor? This is the mission of God. The Holy Spirit is not a miracle working tool that we can use to get what we want. The reason is that the cross and the resurrection illuminate Ezekiel 37. So that when we read Ezekiel 37, now on this side of the cross, we look back and say, is that dry bones? Can these bones live? We stand with Ezekiel and say, well, we would probably say no, but Ezekiel is a little bit more polite and says, Lord, you know. And then the Lord says to Ezekiel, prophesy on these bones. Now again, when we hear prophesy, we think, oh, that sounds kind of weird. But essentially what he's saying to Ezekiel is, preach on these bones. Preach to them. And Ezekiel thinks, maybe. Can anything come out of this? Can anything change? Can anything really happen? And what's alarming is that, of course, then the skeletons start coming together and skin starts growing out of them. And they stand up and they look like a group, but they're not alive. And then the Lord says, prophesy to them. Let the breath come into them that they may live and become an army. So we begin our life with the Holy Spirit. When we first hear about him, usually thinking, this is a tool I can use to make my life better. As we begin to know the Holy Spirit, we begin to realize the shape of God and the shape of Christ. That the Holy Spirit is not a personal possession to help me out of my fixes, but is in fact the work of God working to not only change me, but to change the world. And then we ask, well, is there a payoff for me? This actually comes together in the next text from the Book of Romans. We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to this present moment. Paul looks over the world and you know what he says? I know when I started talking about this, a bunch of you said, where do you get that? Paul says the world is in the grip of decay. Everything you plant in this world dies. Everything you establish in this world breaks down. Every child you give birth in this world will grow old and meet the grave. Paul says the creation has been groaning. The creation has been laboring. The creation has been waiting. The glories of this world says, I don't want to be only temporal. I want to be permanent. Almost every young child when they get to a certain age will begin to realize, mom, dad, will you grow old? Will you die? And that grips a child's imagination. And the parent will say, oh, sweetheart, not for a long time. We don't need to worry about it. But in the back of the parent's mind they know, yes, I will grow old. And if the world has any order at all, I hope you stand before my tomb and not the other way around. But right there in the voice of the child, we see what our hearts long for. We long to see the dry bones put together. We long to see breath come into them. We long to see the creation undone from the bonds that it's been put into. We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time. Not only so, but we ourselves, who are the first fruits of the spirit, grown inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies. Many of you are in the age group where you have seen your bodies decay. And on one hand you sigh and say, it's just the way of all flesh. But another piece of you looks and says, Lord, why does it have to be so? Could I be cool again? Could I be young again? Could this death be undone? Or in this hope, you are saved. But hope that is seen is no hope at all. Who hopes for what they already have? But if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently. In the same way the spirit helps us in our weakness. We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the spirit itself intercedes for us through wordless groans. Notice the groans of the creation are echoed by the groans of the spirit. We wait and we pray and we hope and we stand on Ezekiel looking over our lives or looking over this world and looking at the bones of our broken dreams and we say, Lord. And the Lord says, can these bones live? And we resist the temptation to say no and we say instead, Lord, you know, and the Lord says, prophesy to these bones. Here in Romans, the world picture and the personal picture come together. And all of those bones in your life that you look over, you say, Lord, I don't even know how to talk to you about this. And the Lord says, the spirit hears your desire, your wishes, your good hopes and dreams and brings that to my throne. And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the spirit because the spirit intercedes for God's people in accordance with the will of God. I would imagine that William Seymour as he prayed between those milk crates at that run down place in Los Angeles where reporters were coming through making side remarks about the mingling of the racism, the people doing crazy things, all of this disorder. And William Seymour, who probably had ambitions of being a great preacher and famous and would never realize any of these things in his lifetime. Here we are talking about it 110 years later, a church not at all connected with him. And we would say, William Seymour, get the bones, live. And we would say, William Seymour, those bones lived a lot more than I bet you ever imagined. And William Seymour would die a one-eyed son of a slave just like we met him. And his wife was probably scrounging for pennies and his church was 40 or 60 people. But what did the Holy Spirit do? What did the Holy Spirit accomplish? This was in 1995 out at the border between Haiti and the Atlantic Republic. This is in a little church out there that we had just been associated with. There were 40 or 50 people lined up for baptism in a town that probably only had 40 or 50 people. And we sat down at this church that they had readily tried to construct for our coming because they thought, oh, the missionary is coming, we need something. So they cut down a bunch of holes and made some logs for us to sit on. They didn't have any musical instruments. So when we were sitting, there were some people in the stand that were going, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep. And I looked at the pastors and the pastor looked at me and I said, is this normal? And he said, I've never seen anything like it. But here in this out of the way place, the Holy Spirit had come and men and women and children had decided to give themselves to Christ. And when the pastor would take them into the water, this was common with many of our baptisms, the pastor would grab the person and put him under. But the Haitians believed that there were spirits in the air and spirits in them and the demons in them and there were spirits in the waters. And so when their baptisms, the demons would be drowned. And so a lot of the pastors would take the baptizers and they'd put them in the water. And then the people in the water would crash because the devil didn't want to leave. So the pastor would take them and put them in again. And they'd keep putting them in. And the while the demons were drowned and the person was free of the spirits and they were Holy Christ. And once the pastor of the National Church came out and one of our baptisms and saw this, this doesn't happen in the capital. The Holy Spirit comes and we look at the Valley of Dry Bones and God says, can these bones live? And we say, you know, and God says, I will make them live. And then when you see them alive, you will know that I am the Lord. That is what the Day of Pentecost is about. Lord, we are now filled with doubts and wonders. We look at the bones, the wreckages of our lives, and you ask us, can these bones live? And we look at you sheepishly and say, you know, Lord, and you tell us, watch me raise the dead. Lord, we continue in our doubts sometimes. Sometimes we have a faint hope of belief. But Lord, here on this day of Pentecost, may we believe that your Holy Spirit comes. And sometimes he comes like a rushing wind. And sometimes he brings things that make us stretch our heads and say, well, that ain't right. And sometimes he comes so quietly and subtly that we haven't even noticed. But then we believe and we begin to see you do your work. So Lord, help us to believe that you in fact are our Savior. We are not our own Savior. Help us to believe that you have bought us and redeemed us and your Holy Spirit is in this midst, is in this room, is in this place. Even if sometimes we look more like a valley of dry bones. That you can make us live. Here on earth, in the name of Jesus, Amen. Where do you stand?