https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=VFFQ6gFp97E

 Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. I'm gonna sit right down. Okay we're good. Can we stand up for a minute. Okay. Okay. Okay, I'm sorry. Okay, I'm sorry. When I was growing up in the Christian Reformed Church, I don't think I ever heard the word Lent. It wasn't until I got to college that the church I was attending in Grand Rapids, a Christian Reformed Church, started talking about Lent. And they even had, I remember, had an Ash Wednesday service that I went to in college, and they smeared ash on my forehead. Some of you grew up with Lent in the Roman Catholic Church. Well, Lent has been having something of a revival all over the church in North America. Evangelicals that, 50 years ago, would never have dared darken the door or have anything smeared on their foreheads have been having Lenten services and Ash Wednesday services to the degree that some are wondering why all the attention. Carl Truman is a professor at Westminster in Philadelphia, and he wrote a blog post this week which caught quite a bit of attention. In light of this, I suspect, the reasons evangelicals are rediscovering Lent is as much to do with the poverty of their own liturgical tradition as anything. American evangelicals are past masters at appropriating anything that accounts for their advancing church history and claiming it as their own. Yet, if your own tradition lacks the historical, liturgical, and theological depth for which you are looking, then there may be time to join a church which can provide the same. I also fear that it speaks to a certain carnality, a desire to do something which simply looks cool and which has certain ostentatious spirituality about it. As an active piety, it costs nothing, yet implies a deep seriousness. In fact, far from revealing deep seriousness, in an evangelical context, it simply exposes the superficiality, eclectic consumerism, and underlying identity confusion of the movement. Pretty harsh words caused quite a bit of debate amongst people writing back and forth on the internet. But his point, I think, is important. Another scholar, not a Christian scholar, but I believe she teaches at Yale who wrote a very recent and interesting history of evangelicalism, said, yes, it was the evangelical sense of rudderlessness, their desire for an authority to guide them in questions of dogma, life, and worship that led them to rediscover liturgy and history in the first place. The irony was that in their smorgasbord approach to that Protestant tradition, in their individualistic rejection of the rules of any one church in favor of a free run for the so-called Church Universal, in their repudiation of American nationalisms in face of the cosmopolitanism, young evangelicals were being quintessentially evangelical and stereotypically American, doing as they please according to no authority about their own. The principle of solo scriptura was far clearer in theory than practice. I think they make a good point because to many degrees Americans are about consuming and finding something spiritual to consume. If I think it will make me look deep or important or somehow give me meaning, I'll put ashes on my head or oil on my head or just about anything on my head. I'll go to whatever church seems to make me feel the way it is I want to feel at the moment. That's a very American thing to do. It's simply another aspect of this self-appropriated spirituality. The Roman Catholics I know have actually a long and rich tradition around them that involves pretty serious decisions about what to eat or what not to eat. Orthodox have different decisions and different traditions and many of the churches do. One of the things that I recall in thinking about this was how in our own tradition in the Christian Reformed Church, practice surrounding the Lord's Day was a very serious thing. I remember growing up and we'd camp at Fairwoods in Massachusetts and we could go into the pond early in the morning with a bar of soap to kind of wash up for church, but after going to church there was no going and swimming in the pond because that of course would be recreation. We could swim for bathing but not swim for fun. That was part of the liturgical and spiritual tradition of the Christian Reformed Church, a lot of which has been set aside. But now once we get into an empty space where there are no traditions, suddenly we start picking up traditions. Well I think this would be cool and I think that would be cool. It's kind of like the kids at school that all say well I just have to be me and so I'm going to express myself and I'm going to dress exactly how I want to and then you watch all these little individualists dressing exactly the same and you say, hmm, isn't this funny? Part of it is also the American sense of we manage the internal by the external. I want to feel a certain way and so I imagine I arrange my world around me so I do instead of the other way around which is I am a certain way and so I express myself in the world. In American culture these two ideas are very much in competition with each other. But where it tends to boil down to is God as I define him or her on it is there to help me become what I think is beautiful and meaningful. Which as we talk about moralistic therapeutic deism kind of makes God my lifestyle accessory. And if you think a little bit more about that you have to ask if God is simply your lifestyle accessory what kind of God do you really have? And so then the question after Carl Truman's blog post is a very fair one. Is Lent in the Bible? If you go to a Bible concordance and look up Lent you won't find it. The book of Lent is not in the Bible. And a little bit of historical sleuthing will show that we know that there were some practices of Lent by the third century but the practices were varied and different among the churches. One of the things that most practices in fact involved were fasting. This seems to come liturgically through the practice at this time of year of remembering Jesus' journey into the wilderness. And Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. After fasting 40 days and 40 nights he was hungry. And then the temptation story continues. And when I read this passage I think to myself do we as Americans appropriate this? Now with the world of social media people all over are declaring what they're going to be doing for Lent. And a number of people at the beginning of Lent said you won't find me on Facebook anymore until after Lent. And I thought well that's interesting. And then I posted actually on Facebook a little bit more information about Lent which is actually that if you count 40 days from Ash Wednesday to Easter you really get 46 days. So why 40 days? And then if you look at it in more detail you realize that Christians don't fast, Christians who know something about the tradition don't fast on Sunday. And then one of my friends said well then all the internet Facebook people should be Facebooking on Sunday and off the rest of the week. Those who have actually grown up in a liturgical tradition might or might not know that the reason liturgically they didn't fast on Sunday, anybody have any idea why they don't fast on Sunday? Sunday is the day the Lord was raised from the dead. Which is why Christians hold services on Sunday. If you explore these things you begin to realize there's reasons behind a lot of these traditions. But more or less Lent goes back to Jesus 40 days in the wilderness. Now one of the things that people begin to realize often in this church is that we teach a lot of things from the Bible. And we actually take our study of the Bible very seriously. We have our 930 Sunday school class and we just went through the book of Ruth and now we're going to go into the book of 1 Corinthians and we might spend a year in a particular book because we walk through it carefully and we look at the details. How many of you know what a fandom is? I think you're all too old. My teenage children told me what a fandom is. A fandom is basically people who are fans of a certain thing. And so there's the fandom of Harry Potter and there's the fandom of Lord of the Rings. And if you find someone who loves Harry Potter they know all the little details about all the things in the books of Harry Potter. And I guess I'm in the fandom of Jarod Tolkien because I know all these little details of the story of the Lord of the Rings. The Bible in a sense is written for a fandom. And part of the reason that Christians throughout the centuries have read the Bible every day and studied the Bible in a pretty detailed manner is in fact because it's enjoyable. And when you begin to know all the little intricacies of the Bible the world begins to come alive to you. Just like it does with young people learning about Harry Potter or the Lord of the Rings or various other things. Throughout the Bible there are all these motifs going on. There's all these stories and these stories are talking back and forth. And so you might rightly ask the question, why does Jesus go into the wilderness? Why does he fast? Why does the devil tempt him there? And the answer to that is Jesus goes into the wilderness because Jesus, especially if you read the Gospel of Matthew, is Israel. The author of Matthew writes, Out of Israel I have called my son. Jesus is connected with Israel. And so when Jesus goes into the wilderness and fasts, Jesus is recreating the story of Israel. And in fact you find this kind of thing going on and on in the Bible. And you might say, well that's strange. Well wait until next Halloween and people will dress up as Hermione, Harry Potter, Bilbo, characters from Lord of the Rings. This is what people do all the time. People reenact stories that are significant in their life and they begin to gain resonance. So Jesus goes into the wilderness. Another little bit of Bible trivia that you might have caught on as we're going through the Old Testament is, Israel wasn't supposed to spend 40 years in the desert. Let's go deeper into the story. Numbers 13 and 14, the story goes like this. Israel's been two years in the wilderness and the time has come to go up into the promised land and so Moses sends 12 spies in. The spies go up into the land, look around, look at the fortifications, look at the fruit, come back, bring some samples of the fruit. And they say there's good news and bad news. The good news is the land is a land flowing with milk and honey. The fruit is prodigious, the land is productive, it's a wonderful place for us to settle. The bad news is people have already gotten there first. Ten of the 12 spies give a despairing story and they say there are giants in the land and before them we look like grasshoppers. We can't take this place. We're outgunned, outmanned, we will surely fail. Two of them say, no, if the Lord is with us, the Lord will take the land and we will be able to be here. But if you remember the last two Sundays, what is Israel's nature? What is their character? Remember two Sundays ago when first they get out into the desert and they say, we'll starve. And what does the Lord do? Gives them manna. Ah, some of you are part of the fandom. You know the stories. The Lord gives them manna. So they eat manna every day. So they eat manna every day. And then what do the people say? Oh, we want meat! And so they cry out to the Lord and the Lord gives them meat. Last week's sermon we had Aaron and we have Aaron and Miriam. And Aaron and Miriam are feeling a little claustrophobic for some reason with Moses' wife. And they began to say things like, doesn't the Lord speak to us too? And so they complain. But now we see all of Israel once again, oh no, we hear that this is going to be hard. We don't think that the Lord, who we just saw, can kick Egypt's butt and bring down super power Egypt. We don't think the Lord can do this. We don't have any confidence in you, Moses. So we're going to, now this was an example of perhaps early democracy, we're going to elect a new leader who's going to take us back to Egypt and put us back in there. That night all the members of the community raised their voices and wept aloud. All the Israelites grumbled against Moses and Aaron. And the whole assembly said to them, if only we had died in Egypt or in this wilderness, why is the Lord bringing us to this land only to let us fall by the sword? Our wives and children will be taken as plunder. Wouldn't it be better for us to go back to Egypt? And they said to one another, we should choose a leader to go back to Egypt. Then Moses and Aaron fell down in front of the whole Israelite assembly gathered there, because they probably knew what was coming. Joshua son of Nun and Caleb son of Jehunah, who were among those who had explored the land, tore their clothes. And they said to the entire Israelite assembly, the land we pass through and explore is exceedingly good. If the Lord is pleased with us, he will give us, he will lead us into that land. It is a land flowing with milk and honey and he will give it to us. Only to not rebel against the Lord, he would not be afraid of the people in the land, because he will devour them. Their protection is God. But the Lord is with us, do not be afraid of them. But the whole assembly talked about stoning that. Then the glory of the Lord appeared that attended me to all the Israelites. And the Lord said to Moses, how long will these people treat me with these matters? How long will they refuse to believe in me? In spite of all the signs I have performed among them, I will strike them down with a plague and destroy them. But I will make you into a nation greater and stronger than the day. Moses said to the Lord, then the Egyptians will hear about it. But by your power you brought these people up from among them. And they will tell the inhabitants of this land about it. They have already heard that you, Lord, are with these people. And that you, Lord, have been seen face to face. That your cloud stays over them. And that you go before them in a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night. If you put all these people to death, leaving them alive, the nations who have heard this report about you will say, The Lord was not able to bring these people into the land he promised to them, I hope. So he slaughtered them in the wilderness. Now the Lord's strength be displayed, just as you have declared. The Lord is slow to anger, abounding in love and forgiving sin and rebellion. Yet he does not leave the guilty unpunished. He punishes the children for the sin of the parents to the third and fourth generation. And according to your great love, pardon the sin of these people. Just as you have pardoned them from the time they left Egypt until now. Now I want you to notice something here. First of all, the Lord tells Moses, I will make you a great nation greater than them. This is an opportunity for Moses, isn't it? And he passes it by. And if you remember the last two stories, you know that these people are causing Moses to watch suicide himself. Two stories ago he asked, Lord, kill me just so I may be relieved of these people. But Moses puts their needs ahead of his own. And notice something else. Moses asked the Lord to display his great strength. Now that's an interesting comment because the Lord is about to kill the people. So I ask you, if someone makes you angry, which requires more strength? If you are powerful to beat them up or to resist and keep control of yourself. To resist. It's interesting that right at this moment, Moses knows God can wipe them out. And he says, display your strength. How? By displaying your mercy. Because your mercy, Lord, is a strength greater than the strength that brought plagues on Egypt. Is a strength greater than the strength that could wipe these people out. Is a strength greater than all of the other things that you have shown. And that is a greater strength to show mercy than to simply act out of retribution and vengeance. The Lord replied, I have forgiven them. Notice how quickly he forgives them. In a moment. He heard Moses and he forgave them. Just like that. But, nevertheless, as surely as I live and as surely as the glory of the Lord goes to the whole earth, not one of those who saw my glory and signs I performed in Egypt and in the wilderness, who disobeyed me and tested me ten times, the testing word is important, not one of them will see the land I promised I owed to their ancestors. No one who treated me with contempt will ever see it. But because my servant Caeli, who has a different spirit and follows me wholeheartedly, I will bring him into the land he went into and his descendants will inherit it. And don't forget the reason we're reading this story. It's lent. Why did Jesus pass? You see, Jesus, like Moses, intercedes for the people. Jesus, like Moses, goes between God and the rebellious people and says, Stop! Show your great power! Don't destroy them! Again and again we ask, Lord, how can you tolerate seeing what we do to each other, seeing what we do to the earth, seeing what we do here, how can you tolerate? In a sense, Moses, and then Jesus comes between us and the Lord and says, Lord, yes, this is what we do to each other, but please forgive. Show your great strength by not hitting us. Jesus goes into the wilderness to reenact Moses. Jesus also goes into the wilderness to reenact Israel. Jesus, unlike Israel, obeys and trusts in the death of the wilderness and in the death of the cross. Now Israel went into the wilderness with the power of Jesus and Satan said, Make stones out of bread. What do you think Israel would have done? Shall we stop with bread? Let's make dancing girls and feasts and, I mean, look what they did. They made a golden cap. What Israel would do, Jesus goes into the wilderness and Satan says, Make bread out of stones. And Jesus does what? Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of the Lord. Jesus goes into the wilderness and Satan says, Jump from the temple and let them see your splendor and your power. And Jesus says, No. Satan brings them to a high hill and says, Look at the nations of the world, they own it all, Jesus. Just right now in a little private ceremony, give me a little respect and a little bit of worship and I'll give you control of the whole thing. And Jesus says, Worship only the Lord your God. Jesus goes into the wilderness to fulfill where Israel failed. Jesus fulfills Israel's mission. Now here's the problem. We also see ourselves in Israel. We also see ourselves like them because like them we look into the land and we look where the Lord is sending us and we say, We don't want to go there. We'd rather go live in Dacus. We'd rather go to empire. We'd rather have security and prosperity. We don't want to follow you in there because we really don't know you can follow through. We really don't know you have our best interests at heart. So we'd rather diminish you and make you an item that basically will do our bidding. So we appropriate religious traditions and we practice them just as much. Appropriating religious traditions or practice can be just as much a part of trying to make ourselves as rebellion and unbelief and taking matters into our own hands. This is what we do. Israelites made a golden calf. They wanted to elect a new president. Fundamentally they never trusted God. But Jesus didn't come to us because he thought it would be cool. Jesus didn't come to us because he thought, Wow, if everybody saw me coming and saving people, that would really make me look good. He didn't come to us because he thought he would look deep or meaningful or thoughtful. Jesus came to us. Why? Because we needed him. Because we had no other option. And what did we do to him? You see, when we come into Lent, if we come into Lent thinking, Oh, this would be a really cool experience for me, we're not really understanding anything about Jesus and his mission. Because essentially, becoming part of us was not really a cool experience for Jesus. Jesus' mission was painful, difficult, and costly, and Lent reminds us of that. Seeking to emulate that costliness, for its own sake in some ways, misses the mark. Christian examination should not be out of fear or out of, Boy, if I really do Lent hard this year, then God will think a lot of me. It should come out of gratitude, recognizing what he has done, recognizing who he is, and in a sense, wanting to be part of this fandom, like wanting to dress like Harry Potter because you love Harry Potter. Now, if you dress like Harry Potter, Harry Potter won't care. Why? Because he lives in a book. Jesus enters into Israel's story for our sake, and in Lent, in a sense, we're being asked to enter into this story. We celebrated in joy, remembering the cost, and celebrating the substitute. Now, this week I posted on Facebook, and I think I threw out poor Carol, because everybody's going, oh, I'm going to give up chocolate, oh, I'm going to give up coffee, so that I post on Facebook, I'm going to give up eating right, exercise, and using my money well. And people are like, oh, what does this mean? You're supposed to give up bad things on Lent. But here's the problem. Where do I, what do I trust in? Don't I trust in the proper maintenance of my life and money? Isn't that where my heart is at? Shouldn't Lent be asking me when Jesus goes into the wilderness, what is he doing? Is he bringing a backpack full of goodies because this is what he trusts in? No! Lent is about leaning into the Lord and trusting in him. So maybe for Lent you should give up some of the things you really trust in. Now, the most important thing I think we need to keep in mind for Lent are Jesus' words on fasting. When you fast, do not look somber as the hypocrites do, for they disfigure their faces to show others that they are fasting. Truly, I tell you, they have received their reward in full. But when you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face, so that it will not be obvious to others that you are fasting, but only to your Father who is unseen. And your Father who sees what is done in secret will reward you. So if you want to do this Lenten thing, if you want to appropriate the fasting of Jesus of 40 days in the wilderness, I would ask you to do it quietly. Don't tell anybody what you're giving up. Please do it quietly. Don't tell anybody what you're giving up. Please do it in such a way that no one else will notice. Why? Because then you begin to understand what this is about. You see, the truth is that the Gospel sets you free, and it should set you free quietly. You are free to fast quietly. You are free to figure out how to express your gratitude to God. That is what Lent is for. The wise will believe in his generous invitation, which is exactly what Israel did not do, will believe and trust in his strength rather than your own, and receive the promised land even while we live in the age of decay. This is Lent. It's a good thing. Receive it like a Christian. Let's pray. Lord, Israel did not want to spend an extra 40 years in the wilderness. Israel did not want to spend 40 years watching a rebellious generation die. But that rebellious generation had to invest in the belief that the next generation would receive what the rebels forfeit. Lord, all of your grace to us is given. We can't hold onto it. We can't put it in a bank account. We can't stuff it under our mattress. It's freely given every day. May we leave our miserable self-sufficiencies, especially the religious ones, and may we open ourselves up to receiving what you have to give us every day, even when it comes in packages that don't look right to us. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Will you stand? Amen.