https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=J9Oermdf7qU

 I'm gonna go ahead and this guy has been hanging out backstage even though in my selection, I didn't pick him but uh I'm just gonna I'm just gonna bring you on just for just for sheer uh uh oh, you're really loud. Oh, sorry about that. I'm in Los Angeles. This car is going left and right out here. Okay and I'm severely lacking um the loose thoughts of a 27 year old ex evangelical missionary now Anglican wedding DJ who lives in a box truck on the street of Los Angeles. Well, there you go. We're lacking in this. Yeah. Yeah. I've seen anyone else cover this uh the small little niche yet. Um in short, I think DJing once I got the symbolic lens from Pajow, I've been a DJ my whole life and I've been using the symbolic lens and I started to look at like record A record B. I'm blending between them. There's like a sweet spot in the middle. Uh it it totally just transformed like what I think about DJing and so I've been on that journey for a long time. I started when I was 13. I was doing uh in high school. I was like I didn't go to any of my own high school dances. I DJed all of them and all the neighboring high schools, you know, and all the churches, you know, I was raised in a um a four-square church uh which is very interesting because now I'm a DJ in the Angeles at the Angeles temple, which is I mean I don't go there but I live, you know, live on the street in a box truck a block from the uh origin of four square church here in Echo Park. Um and so I've grown up DJing for lots of four square churches DJing for young life, DJing for youth groups. I just like my hometown is DJ. I did it all the time everywhere and I started to kind of you know out of high school. Well, okay. So right out of high school, um I joined the Syrian-Israeli alliance and uh moved to Paris and I was in Paris for about a year and some change we were this is during the midst of the Syrian refugee crisis and I was doing documentary work to help with the humanitarian relief uh at the midst of all of that and the whole time I'm thinking like I was expecting to get this kind of like bigger spiritual kind of picture of Christianity because it's like I'm going to my little small town where I was doing all this course where I don't know I was really involved like I was in young life. I was in a wanna I don't know if you've heard of a wanna but when I went when I went to the Chino conference, one of my main things I was hoping for is like, please let me find somebody who grew up in a wanna and as is as weird as I am because I want to just turns you into a freak man. Like, just when you go to school and you're like, Oh, yeah, what do you do on Sundays? Well, I go and recite Bible verses in exchange for candy. And I'm up to like this much candy now. And then we got like I want to games. It's like a whole different world. And then at the Chino conference, like sitting around grim gristless campfire, it's like two guys were like, Oh, yeah, I went to a one a couple of times. It's like, yeah, my parents were cubby directors. They we were in it, man. We were in it to win it. So like, I have so much love and so much appreciation for like the evangelical evangelical world that I came from. But kind of at the same time, this guy says I dominated a lot of the crowns off and everything. Yeah. So I went into the Christian Missionary Alliance after high school. You know, I'd left the DJing thing kind of by the wayside. I mean, I was like, OK, time to have an official job to do something real. And luckily, I was able to like have helped my have my hometown in my home high school like help fundraise for the mission trip is like twenty thousand dollars or something like that. We're all saving up. We're all going and I get out there to Paris. And like the experience was really sorry. There's the hope this doesn't get too loud. There's some typical business going on. Hold on. I'll let him pass. Oh, good. It's going the other way. I was I don't know what to say. It may be unfair of me to expect this like higher level of spirituality from a mission track from a mission trip. But the church that I was a part of there and no shame to them, like I still love them all. I still keep in contact with them. But I still had this like I was very intellectual. And I think we were at a Trinitarian Church at Paris was our home church. And I was going to all these bases and like the one on one conversations and the stories I was getting in this documentary work. It was very cool and impactful and stuff. But there was still this like kind of intellectual chasm, you know, nothing and nothing in Foursquare is very theology based. It's all very relational. It's all very pastoral. It's very mundane, I guess you could say. And right as I get back from the mission trip, I'm like, screw it. I'm going back to DJing. I got a trailer. I moved down to Los Angeles. This is not five years ago, I moved down to Los Angeles. And after a couple years of working at Best Buy, I met Stanley from the office at Best Buy, I helped get give him his TV, get it all set up. And I set up a TV for Andrew Dice Clay, the Dice man. I know he's like, what do you want to do here in LA? And I'm like, well, I want to be a DJ. He's like, you know what you got to do? You got to put a camera on your head. Call yourself camera dad, you're going to be the number one DJ in the world He's like giving me DJ advice. I'm like, okay, okay. Well, eventually what had happened was I got into a music thing. Right. So like, it's an Echo Park. I it was a giant warehouse when I started renting it out. And this is like, early 2020. I'm like, okay, music venue. Here's how we're going to do the DJ thing. I've always been not wanting to participate in the normal hierarchy of like the DJ world. And obviously, I'm a Christian. And so like, clubs is a very, that's the thing you don't want to really just like, spend your life, you know, doing but if I could add in a little tiny point about the Jonathan Pazzo thing, it's like, I remember one time Jonathan was talking about how his quest for creativity led him ultimately to the church and how making icons is his way to participate in the literal church, but using his like this artistic physical means. Well, I clearly like got this whole different lens on wedding DJing because it's one of the several types of things that I do for I do youth groups and girls kind of stuff like that. But I'm like, Oh my gosh, like, when I'm DJing for a wedding, obviously, the wedding is not about me or anything. But there is a moment in time where if I don't do my job, right, these, this union is not, you know, there's a very important thing that happens on the dance floor that night, you know what I mean? It is where everything comes together, everything gels, the first dance, the, you know, the mother, son, the father, daughter, these are these are rituals, you know, when you start talking about this ritual thing, my eyes were open. It's like, Oh my God, I'm like the, I'm the shaman, like, I'm the shaman at this wedding, like bringing this evoking the evoking, you know, when I have to know the right songs, and it's very cultural, and it's very contextual, you know, I've DJed several weddings like outside of the US. And that was very eye opening to me to there to see like, what is the norm? And what's the standard here? And how do I still provide the service that I need to do, but still bring all these people together? So back into LA, I'm at the venue, and COVID happens. COVID, I got my venue, I signed my lease, like a month before COVID happened. I'm like, here we go. I want to be outside of the system. I'm going to make my own venue. I'm going to DJ, it's going to be whole, it's going to be lovely. It's going to be sweet. A month later, COVID happens in Los Angeles, the lockdown in Los Angeles. It was hard. It was Gestapo, man, it was harder here than it was anywhere else. So I am fighting tooth and nail for the first like four months to try to just allow myself to have a show. Obviously, that gets shut down pretty quickly. I revert back to doing private shows. And so I'm doing like, you know, looking both ways, sneaking 10 people in the door, and we're doing like a karaoke night for like a someone's birthday party or something like that. But obviously, because of COVID, I was never able to get the venue off the ground, really, it just kind of like fizzled out. And it came to a point about a year and a half ago, I'm like three months behind on rent, I haven't done a profitable show, and who knows how long and my car gets smashed as it's sitting on the side of the and I'm like, Oh, that's that's lovely. Oh, and oh, and you don't have insurance. That's awesome. Cool. And I only have liability. Great. Love that for me. So I'm back in the venue, I have no idea what to do. And a second time, my car gets smashed. So now it was in drivable condition. Now at this point, the hatch is pulling off. It was like a Honda like a newer Honda hatch has been fallen off. It's like lumping its way down the road. And I'm like, and he Oh, and you don't have insurance inside this couldn't get any worse possibly. Finally, the third crash happens. By the way, if you want to have your if you have a car and you need to get it like cashed out for insurance purposes, park it on Alvarado Street, someone will hit it eventually. Finally, the last guy hits the car. And he has insurance and I'm like, Yes, that's what I like. Like I was excited that finally somebody hit my car because I'm just hoping someone would hit it who has insurance. So finally, this guy has insurance, I get a $12,000 check, which is insane because I bought the car for like $10,000. It was at the peak of the chip shortage when used cars were going way up in value. So I'm like, no, this is the best thing ever. I got $12,000. And that is when I made maybe the best decision, maybe the worst decision ever. I flew back home to Washington State. So I'm from the Pacific Northwest. I'm from a very small town in the northwest of forest. My grandparents own 36 acres of land up there. And there's only one house a single story Sears mail order like located home on the top of the mountain on that 36 acres. It's where I was born. It's where I was raised. I came into the city sometime in my later childhood and high school stuff. But that forest is you know, it's my main it's my main place. And my whole idea was to take my my this where the truck comes in to take my music venue idea. And I realized the problem was that I was stuck in Los Angeles, there was nearby counties even that I could have been doing shows in. But I couldn't the truck was, you know, our venue was stayed put in Los Angeles. So I basically came home with my $12,000 check at the venue collapse. I just like got got my stuff out of there, stuck it in the storage unit. I got my check. And I'm back home in Washington. And I'm here to buy a truck. And I'm like, okay, venue on wheels, no longer will I ever be shut down from government regulations or whatever, I'm going to get a truck, and I'm going to put all the speakers on the truck. And it's going to be like I pulled down the drawbridge. And there's the there's the show right there. Right. And so the first place that I visited, because I hadn't seen him in a while with my grandparents, which they're the ones who live on that big 36 acres of property. And this is what I was just picturing getting one on like Facebook marketplace or offer up or something. It's just cars are generally cheaper in Washington than they are in California. But but I go and visit my grandparents. And Papa's like, Hey, what do you ever haven't seen in a while? What do you what's up to? And I'm like, well, I'm here and I'm looking for a late 80s Ford F 700 diesel box truck with a manual transmission. And this is where my life change. He goes, Oh, okay. I think there's one right over there. I think your uncle left it here about 20 years ago. And I say, What are you talking about? He hands me a machete. And I go like 20 yards this way with a compass. And there it is like, I call it the woody mammoth. It's this giant, giant box truck that apparently my uncle had parked it there 20 years ago. And like it was living there the whole time I was living there watching me grow up from the forest just waiting to be uncovered one day. So I uncovered the woody man. And I had that name still in Los Angeles. I'm like, I'm gonna have a truck and I'm gonna call it the woody mammoth. It was just a premonition. It just came to me. I don't know where the name came from. And then when I hacked down the forest and I saw it, I'm like, it's real. It was a total symbolic moment or something like that. I don't know. Like I thought of woody mammoth. Then I found this giant mammoth in the woods. And it looks like one too with the way that the box truck is and all that stuff. And so then this is a year and a half ago at this point, I spent the next year and a half living out of my grandparents or my living out of my parents attic, Harry Potter style, just like kicking myself because I did not know how to fix this truck. I didn't know I was not a diesel tech. I was not a you know, the forest is very cruel to vehicles. It was a it was a total rest bucket. Luckily, the engine still ran, but it needed a whole new rear axle. It needed to get pulled out of the forest in the first place, new wheels, new tires, new brakes. I had to spend the next year and a half basically fixing this truck up with zero prior knowledge. You know what I mean? And and every single week, I thought it was just going to be one more week. It was just going to be one more week and slowed throughout that year and a half. Like I lost friendships and stuff. I lost opportunities here in Los Angeles. The time I thought there's going to be a one or two week trip. I just go to Washington and then keep going with the whole DJ thing. But that is not how things found out. I spent a year and a half back home totally just like having this existential crisis. Am I ever going to make it back to Los Angeles? Should I even be DJ? What's the point? Is DJing even worth pursuing in 2024? Is there anything worth it? And one day right before Christmas this year, I start the truck and it keeps running and then nothing is hindering the vehicle's continued operation. So I slammed the gas pedal in second gear and I had down I-5 all the way down. I'm like, please keep going. Don't stop. Don't stop. No fast going. No cost. Two hundred dollars. I'm just going, going, going. And then right around Christmas time, I made it back here. I went straight to my church. So that's a little tiny piece of it is like I kind of stopped going to church when I got back from the mission trip and I was just kind of like burnt out on Christianity and I was kind of kind of frustrated honestly that nothing that happens during that trip basically was like spiritually deep or anything like that. There was no theology. There was no I guess I was kind of thinking of it like, oh, I'm basically going to Bible college, but not really. I'm just going on this mission trip and it just didn't have that whatever for me. But one of the one of the guys who was on my video team back there, he's an older guy named Josh. He texted me one time and he was like, dude, I know it's been a while since either of us has been to church. I know that whole experience in Paris was kind of weird and stuff. And, you know, I mean, think of what time it was at that time, like Syrian refugee crisis. This is like 2015, 2016. I was such a modernist there when I lived in Paris. I hated everything old and I'm so complete opposite right now. Like I wanted to spend all my time in the modern area. I was so modern. I was very techie. I was very, you know, just not ancient, not medieval at all. And he texted me, he's like, dude, I think you should try going to an Anglican church. And this is before a page. Oh, you can talk to me about liturgy or anything like that. He just said, we found one out in Louisiana. We love going to it. And I can't really explain why, but you should go try it. And so I go on Los Angeles Instagram and I just find like the coolest looking Anglican church. I show up and the very first service I go to, it's the husband and wife, a pastor couple, and they're saying at their service, they're like, Hey guys, stick around at the end of service. We have a little, um, announcement to make. And the announcement they make is it's been a lovely seven years with you guys, but we are leaving this church. And so my very first service at Anglican service, the pastors are basically saying, we're leaving. Here's a bunch of chaos. You guys got to deal with, we're going to have an interim pastor. We're going to have all this stuff. And I'm just like, this is what I was raised in. This is like, not what I was raised in, but this was what I was born for. I know how to serve at church. I know how to help out with stuff. I know how to pick up chairs, you know, six stacks high. This is my game man. Bring me in. So I immediately like sucked myself into that church and it's been my home church ever since the whole back in Washington. It was very painful to not have them in my life, but, um, now I'm back in the church and, uh, things are moving steadily. I mean, I got the truck, the woody mammoth, uh, I'm working on creating like a show. I kind of think of like the, uh, have you ever seen like the medieval image of a passion play? What's like a big, like a big car moving through the town. Hold on. Okay. Got 5%. I got 5% battery. Paul. So we're going to, we're going to bring this thing all the way to the end here. Uh, the passion play is like this medieval idea that you have this wagon traveling from village to village with like some sort of, okay. Yeah. Symbolism happens. That's right. That's right.