https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2qzirSJTkQw

 I'm happy to be here with all of you. I can also tell you about Snicker Salad. Having grown up in the location where Paul just was, in rural northwestern Iowa, I can tell you it's a land of many salads. Most of them are not green, and many of them are not recognizable to people in California. There's Jell-O Salad, and Snicker Salad, and Oreo Salad, and most of them are desserts. And the longest time I grew up there, I still have no idea why they're referred to as salads. I don't know. You may have to ask me that no longer than me, who's 18 or 20 years or something. I remember when I was in college, I had a long argument with a roommate in sign who was not from Iowa about why in the world would you refer to anything that had pieces of Snicker candy bar as a salad. After arguing for an hour, I just said, I don't know. It is the way it is, but it is delicious. It's good to be with you. Our text this morning is Psalm 107. Psalm 107, we're not reading the whole thing. It's a long one. So we're just going to read verses 1 through 3, and skipping down to 23 through 32. And then we're going to read verse 9 through 47. That's what we have here. I believe that's also the act of the debtor. This is the word of the Lord. Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, as love endures forever. But redeem the Lord's savings, those he redeemed from the hand of the foe, those he gathered from the lands, from east and west, from north and south, and jumped and got out of the storm to a whisper. Waves of the sea were plushed. They were glad and it grew calm, and he guided them to their desired paradise. Let them give thanks for failing love, and his wonderful deeds for men. But let them assemble the people, and praise him in the counsel of the elders. This is the word of the Lord. If you'd join me in a brief prayer. Praise the Holy Father, we come before you on this beautiful morning with a cool breeze. Thankful for the opportunity to gather together. We recognize that we come in many ways are a very diverse group. We come from all sorts of places in our own spiritual journey. For some of us, this is a day, it's Father's Day, and it's a day of joy. We can either celebrate being a father or having one that's lucky. For some of us, this is a day being Father's Day that brings painful memories. As our Father was less than present, or maybe wasn't at all. For some of us, we come out of this building and we're full of joy and faith. Others of us come filled with questions and skepticism and doubt. Some of us come happy and doing well. Others of us suffering, we're sick, we grieve, we're lonely. We come from all these different places. And it helps us to see that as diverse as we are, all of us are also striking in some way. All of us need your grace. All of us indeed need your grace. All of us dependent on your mercy and your love. And so guide us, O God, by your word and spirit, that in your light we may see light. In your truth, find freedom, and in your will, discover your peace. Your Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen. Well, Neil Gaiman is an English novelist and screenwriter who a number of years ago was having a conversation, a remarkable conversation with his 97-year-old cousin Helen. Helen was a survivor of the Polish Holocaust. And so she was telling the story about in the midst of Nazi occupation, all books in the ghetto in which she was forced to live were banned. They couldn't read anything, they couldn't teach children, schools were closed down, everything was shut down. So she told him about how she decided that was unacceptable for the children. And so under the guise of having a sewing class, she had 20 young girls come to her house for an hour each day. The authorities assumed she was teaching them how to sew. But really she was teaching them reading and writing, mathematics, grammar, English and Polish, all sorts of things. And then one day somebody slipped Helen a copy of the Polish translation of the novel Gone with the Wind. And so she started reading it, and every night she was blacking out her windows so that nobody could see because books were banned. And so she would read it late in the evening hours. And then the next day she was so taken with the story that she sort of just stopped getting the lessons in writing and math. And she started telling the story of the novel Gone with the Wind to these young girls. And every day they were just in awe, listening to this story. And as he's having this conversation with his cousin, at this point the novelist, Mr. Gaiman, stops her and he says, He says, wait a second, I understand the reading and the writing and the math and the education part. I understand risking your life for that, but why in the world would you risk your life for a story? And she thought for a second and she said to him, because for one hour every day those girls were no longer in the ghetto. For one hour every day they got to escape. They were out having adventures. They got away. Reflecting back on that conversation and how it changed and shaped him as a novelist and a writer, someone who makes his living writing and telling stories. Mr. Gaiman said this, he said, I realized in that moment that stories can change you. Good stories should change you. Now when we come to the songs, this ancient footpath of poetry and music, we rightly assume and think of it as poems and songs that were sung and prayed. We often don't think of them as stories. And yet, Psalm 107, what I just read for us a few moments ago, gives us an example of a song as a story as well. We actually only read a little snippet of it. It begins with a call of praise and there's actually four stories in the middle of which we read one. And like Mr. Gaiman noted, Psalm 107 is one of those good stories. Stories that can change us. So I want us to look at it. There's a few moments together. As I mentioned, Psalm 107 is one, we only read a portion of it. We read that begins a line that Herman Melville actually borrowed in his famous book, The Mobile People. They that go down to the sea in ships. So we know we're about to hear a story about the people on the water. Now that might not be a good deal for you and for me, but in the ancient world in which this was written and read and prayed down through the centuries, that was sort of a cue for something else. In the ancient world, the sea was the place of darkness and trouble. It was the place where things lurked that you didn't know what to do with. The sea was a symbol and metaphor for fear and anxiety and insecurity. They that go down to the sea in ships are people who are taking a risk and they know it. Make no mistake, the sea was unsafe, even the most advanced sailor. And so as if on cue, the story that Psalm 107 tells us, tells us a story about sailors who find themselves in trouble. A tempest is whipped up in very poetic languages. The waves are so big that their vessel is being pitched as high as the heavens and cast as low as the very depths. Let me read this line. Their peril has melted their courage and they cry out to God in distress. As I mentioned, I grew up in the world in the west just looking at big waves on the ocean. Melts my own courage. I can only imagine what it's like to be in giant waves of that sort. They cry out to God. It's an admission of need. These competent professional sailors for the most part are at their wits end. They simply do not know what else to do. They are utterly dependent on God. Now this is instructive for you and for me because on a daily basis, you and I aren't particularly good at this sort of thing. We're not particularly good at admitting our need very well. Regardless of whether you consider yourself a Christian or not, we don't like to think of ourselves as dependents. We much prefer self-sufficiency. This is like the third time I mentioned it. I grew up in the rural Midwest and so when you live in a particular place, you don't necessarily notice it. It's like the water that you're swimming in until you leave it. And then you start to notice things about it. My wife and I moved from the rural Midwest to New England, Boston, which is a very, very different place. We learned something about it. We learned that asking for help or whether help is offered in the rural Midwest is a different thing. You respond to a different one. Where I grew up, if somebody offered you help, I don't mean that it can help you move this table. I mean I'm in distress. I need financial help or spiritual help or emotional help. I need people. That kind of help. In the rural Midwest where I grew up, if you are in need and somebody offers to help you, the appropriate thing to say is, Don't find me honest. No matter how bad you are doing, the first response is, I think you're good. And then if the people know the game and they know the rules and engagements, they offer to help again. And then you can accept their help. Because then I'm not totally dependent. I've said I'm self-sufficient, but okay, if they're going to insist, I'll let you call me. That's how it works where I grew up. So then we moved to Boston. And I learned that if you are in need of help and somebody offers to help in New England where people tend to be a little more blunt, that's sort of a broad picture to get that idea. You get the offer of help. One time. And so if you need something and somebody says, Oh, can I help you with that? And you respond in my Midwestern way of doing it, kind of, I think I got this. And the response that we got in New England was, Okay, great. See you later. And that was no other offer of help came. Because they took me literally. And my wife and I were puzzled by this for a while because we didn't realize we had grown up with a different set of rules. A different way of interacting with people. The way that second offer of help to come, it never came because people in New England, for the most part, had a different set of rules. I'm going to offer help one time. If you don't take it, you're lost. I'm going to help you. Now, I think that even though there are sort of eccentricities and differences regardless of where you grew up, there's something underneath all of that. And it is this. None of us like to be dependent. We all prefer to be thought of and to project a sense of self-sufficiency. I think that's true of all of us. One of the dominant stories that we tell ourselves, certainly one of the dominant stories we are told, is that we earn what you have, you need to earn. When you fall, you pull yourself back up. We're told that real security lies in what we can get for ourselves, claim for ourselves, save for ourselves. We're told that success is what you made. And we've tricked ourselves into thinking this is all true. We've tricked ourselves into thinking we actually are self-sufficient because we want to believe it is so. I read this last week, and I read it earlier actually, but earlier this year a man named Johannes Vorhahn had been headlines around the world when he released a study by a team of German researchers that found that people on a low-carb diet would lose weight 10% faster if they ate chocolate every day. You can imagine the headlines of this study raced around the world. You can accelerate your weight loss, lower your cholesterol levels, increase your overall well-being by eating chocolate. What's not to love? Now here's the problem. The study was revealed, but it was all set up to prove a point. It was set up to be a ruse. This man, Johannes Vorhahn, actually has a PhD, but he goes by the name John, not the hats. His PhD is in molecular biology of bacteria, not diet science. But it actually is no such thing as the Institute of Diet and Health. That was a website we made up. And he spends his day, his day job is being a journalist. And so they decided to come up with a study that they could manipulate the figures so that it was a real study, but they wanted to manipulate it to see how far junk science would actually get passed around the world. They wanted to find out who is going to notice that the study he did is deeply, deeply flawed. And who is just going to run it? Well, you can imagine. People ran it. Very few scientists called to confirm. Very few journalists called to do any fact checking. Instead they released a press release that was essentially written word for word by the people who submitted the study themselves. Now reflecting on why it was so easy to fool people with this, I thought Dr. Bohannan said something profound. He wrote this. So they wrote an article about how the salt came out. He wrote this. Why should you care? You should care because people who are desperate for reliable information face a bewildering array of diet guidance. Salt is bad, salt is good. Protein is good, protein is bad. And it all seems to change like the weather. Then he wrote this. The world is awash with junk science. And it seems we all want to be fooled. There's just so much noise. Now I think that's profound, far beyond just diet science. It's true. I want to be fooled into thinking that chocolate is a great thing for me to have on a daily basis. But I also think he knows something about food. And at the end of the day, we want to be fooled. At the end of the day we want to assume things like we are more self-sufficient than we really are. At the end of the day we want to assume things like we are more self-sufficient than we really are. That we have it all under control. But then in parallel comes a Psalm 107 suggested will. And our courage melts away. We're given a way to respond. To recognize our need and to try out in distress. The message of Psalm 107 is simple but incredibly radical. It is this. There is no such thing as self-sufficiency. Regardless of whether you consider yourself a Christian or not. Regardless of whether we recognize it or not. According to Psalm 107, all of life depends on God. J. Cameron Harbers is a professor of theology and black church studies at Duke Divinity School. People are like this. Every gesture to constitute our identity for ourselves rests in the assumption that we know ourselves. And that gesture will always have a kind of structure of violence to it. In other words, you and I tend to assume that we know ourselves far better than we actually know ourselves. And we need to rest. What Dr. Carter in Psalm 107 is suggesting is that you don't know yourself nearly as well as you can. And I don't know myself nearly as well as I think I do. But the good news is our own identities rest not on how well we know ourselves. But on God. Did you notice that in the story of this Psalm, God is the one doing most of the acting? God brings them up out of their distress. God spills the storm into a whisper. God hushes the waves of the sea and guides them to the desired haven. This ancient poem is a poetic retelling of the story of God rescuing his people in turn. And so this ancient Psalm, this story, points us beyond even itself to the larger redemptive story of God. That when we look past Psalm 107, we see something else entirely. There's a story in Mark's Gospel of chapter 4 where Jesus and his disciples are out on a lake and a storm whips up. And so the church around the world using these two passages with Mark 4 and Psalm 107 sort of combines them together. And what happens in that story is Jesus is on a boat and he's sleeping. And the wind and the waves are whipped up and his disciples are sleeping. And the wind and the waves are whipped up and his disciples, many of them competent professionals sailors themselves, start to freak out. And they are losing it. They are at their wits end in the words of Psalm 117. And so they wake Jesus up and they say, don't you care that we're perishing? Now at this point, Jesus stands up, rebukes the wind and the waves and the sea and he says to his people, peace. Peace to them. And when the story calms down, the disciples look at each other and they say, who in the world is this? Psalm 117 helps flesh out and answer that question for us. Who in the world is this? When we look at Jesus, friends, we see God acting definitive to rescue his people and bring them out of their distress. When we see Jesus, we are witnessing God coming to us, showing clearly his unfailing love, his wonderful deeds in the language of this song for all human honor. Jesus is the one who can fill the storm with a whisper. Jesus hushes the waves of the sea and brings us the peace of God. When we watch Jesus die on a cross and rise to new life, we are witnessing the love of God that has been given to us. And that endures forever. What we are not promised is that it will be easy. What we are not promised is instant success in all that you may do. We are not promised that we won't suffer, actually, if you hang around Jesus long enough, apparently he begins to promise the opposite. You're going to suffer. But instead, friends, the promise of the resurrection is this, that come what may, the love of God endures forever. No matter what you go into. And so the response of Psalm 107 is just as radical and grand. Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, and love endures forever. Give thanks to the Lord, for his unfailing love, exulting in the assembly of the people. So how do we do that? How do we become people who are bent towards gratitude and thanksgiving, even when our lives feel like anything but skill? Even when we feel like the waves of our lives, even when they are, passing us high and low. Even when we feel like we're getting thrown about. How do we do this? Well, this old Psalm helps us here as well, right at the beginning. It reminds us, let the redeemed of the Lord say so. Another way of putting that is this, let the redeemed of the Lord tell their story. Psalm 107 reminds us that our own stories are a part of and are transformed by the larger story of God. At work, in the world. And so we get to tell our stories to each other, to our friends, to our neighbors, to those here. We tell our stories with an eye of the love of God to us in them. With an eye towards thanksgiving, and dependency, and grace. We tell our stories, even in their pain, and their suffering, and their sorrow. Even with their wounds, and their pain. We tell them, friends, believing that the story of God's redemption picks up our stories, and envelops them, and weaves them in together. So much so that the story of the redemption of God actually becomes and is your story. You may not go down to the sea in ships, but you can still get thanks to the Lord, his love for you forever. You may not immediately recognize yourself in some of the stories of scripture, but you can rest assured, no less is your identity found in Christ. So much so that the writers of the New Testament insist that you and I are more and more united in Christ so that what becomes true of him is true of you. It's what we celebrate in baptism. That when Jesus goes down the depths of sin and death, you go with him. And when Jesus is raised to new life, he brings you with him too. So that what is true of Jesus is true of you. The old is gone, the new is coming. His story becomes your story. It's why we come here, wake up early. And we hear the same old story, a story of Jesus, grace, love, and redemption. Because it's a story that reminds us week in and week out that it is a love that will not let you go. And it's not about your self-sufficiency, it's about God being sufficient for you. It's why we celebrate baptism and take communion. The word Eucharist means, another word for communion, the word Eucharist means giving thanks. Give thanks to the Lord for he is good and all your strength. It's why we sing and pray and study and read these old songs. Because in so doing they actually help us tell our own stories in light of the story of God. And as Mr. Gayden put it after listening to his aunt, good stories should change you. And good stories like Psalm 107 remind us that the love of God endures forever and can change us as a thankful people. Dr. J. Todd Billings is a professor of history and theology at Western Theological Seminary. At the age of 39, a couple of years ago, he was diagnosed with a rare form of incurable cancer. The news washed over him like a fog as he immediately thought this was the end of my career, which is just beginning. But more importantly, this is the end of my family, my wife, my two young children. And so he did the only thing he knew how. He immersed himself in the songs. Not as a way to make the pain go away, but just to give him a language to use in the midst of his pain, in the midst of his father. And so he tells a story of one day he received a card from a 15 year old girl at his congregation, his home church that is down in Seabrook. And he put it this way, he said, it was a few weeks after my diagnosis and I had already received a number of cards, but this one was different. She had colored it herself and big black letters she wrote on there, get well soon. Jesus loves you. God is bigger than cancer. He says, as I read this, tears streamed down my face. She did not say to me, God will cure you of your cancer. She did not say to me, God will make your mess disappear. She simply spoke the truth that God is bigger than cancer. Mindy wrote this, reflecting on that card, I said this. I believe that God's story does not annihilate our own stories, like our cancer stories. But it transforms them as we are incorporating into God's larger story. My own story has many unanswered questions and raw cries of distress. But ultimately, it is a testimony for the astonishing grace of God that meets us even in the darkness. So friends, friends of Living Stones Church, you may, you, when you find your courage melting away, may you cry out to God in distress. May you know that he holds you in his hand. May you know that the Lord is good and his love endures forever. Would you pray? Charging God in a world of division and despair, and we be one as you are one. We pray for your spirit to guide us even through the fog and through the darkness, that when we cry out in distress, God may hear us, but you come to us. You see us exactly as we are, and your response is to come to us in your son Jesus. In his strong name we pray. Amen.