https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=xpskzQlMZek

 How is it that you know somebody? My father passed away last, he passed away in March of 2013. And if someone came up to me soon after my father's death and said, I'd like to know who Stan VanderKlay was. Would I have permission to examine the body and look at his medical records? If someone made such a request, I would tell them, well, you can probably save yourself that effort and just read his book that he wrote soon after his retirement about his life. The reason, of course, being that who knows you better, your friends or your doctor? You go into your doctor's office and the doctor pokes and prods and examines and looks at you. But most of you would probably say that a friend who you sit across the table from, who listens to your stories, who knows the story of your life, knows you better than a trained medical professional who could have complete access to all the nooks and crannies of your body and could see through it with our best X-ray technology. Why is it that you as a person, in a way, could be better known by a story and by a medical examination? What are you? It's probably not a thing you've ever thought much of, but what exactly are you? You're a human being walking around with fingers and toes and eyes, but if I look at you, I might think for a moment I know who you are, but if I sit down and talk to you, if I take you out to lunch and I listen to your stories, what I'll begin to realize is I don't know you at all. As a pastor, one of the things I get used to doing is trying to size people up when I see them because I try to figure out, okay, how can we serve them, how can we connect with them? And more often than not, the more I get to know people, the quicker I realize I had no idea what I was thinking about. In fact, one of the things I really enjoy doing and one of the real pleasures of a small church like this is that I can get to know people. So actually, if you got a bulletin today and you're new to this church or fairly newish, if you fill out that section and put your name and address in, there's a contact information, put that in and just put a note on this and say, have the pastor take me out to lunch and I will take you out to lunch. And what I will do is I will basically ask you, tell me your story. And I look around this room and there are a number of you who I have taken out to lunch and what I learned is amazing. You would not believe, and I feel so privileged here, because if in fact, many of you would take each other out to lunch and just listen to each other's stories, you would be amazed by the stories in this room. And me looking at you, I know that and that's my treasure in a sense. But then again, to ask the question, what are you, what is a human being, is no small question. I have over the last couple of months read a number of, been reading a bunch of stuff by a southern writer who died in 1990 named Walker Percy. He was raised as an agnostic and converted later in life. He was trained as a medical doctor and so had a chance to sit down and examine and know people and study them. Both his father and his grandfather committed suicide. And he called his mother a victim of suicide. And so what this did for Walker Percy was although he had a good job at security being a medical doctor and was very well educated and clearly a very bright man, the suicides of his father and his grandfather haunted him and he didn't know what to make of it. So actually one day when he was conducting an autopsy of someone who died, he contracted tuberculosis and so had to spend an extended period of time in what used to be called a sanitarium recovering from tuberculosis and began to read authors like Dostoevsky and Sorin Kierkegaard who asked very penetrating questions about what exactly is a human being. He has a very fun little book, one of his last books called Lost in the Cosmos where he says this is the last self-help book and that's where I got my line that if you go to the bookstore and you see these eyes of self-help books, if any one of them worked there would only be one on the shelf. And so he in this book, he calls it a self-help book. He basically makes the point that you have lived with yourself all your life and you still don't know yourself. And if you live with another human being, be it a parent or a spouse or a son or a daughter or a neighbor or someone, you can be with a person all of your life. Why is it they are in many ways still a mystery to you? The question is why is it that your entire lifetime you would never be able to size yourself up as you can size up someone else or the size of Saturn in a ten second look? Why is it that the look of another person looking at you is different from everything else in the cosmos? That is to say looking at lions or tigers or Saturn or the ringed nebula or at an owl or another person from the side is one thing, but finding yourself looking into the eyes of another person looking at you is something else. And why is it that one can look at a lion or a planet or an owl or at someone's finger as long as one pleases but to look into the eyes of another person if prolonged past the second is a perilous affair? And we all know this. And why someone would call on Easter Sunday morning at 1140 always is beyond me as if they have no idea what we would be doing here right now. I wish we could all read Greek because to read the Bible, the New Testament in Greek and the Old Testament in Hebrew is a different experience than reading it in English because part of the difficulty we have is that words are so important. And the New Testament again and again talks about us and it says we are a psyche and that follows the Old Testament tradition of calling us a nephesh. And what a psyche is, if I say psyche you have some handle on that in the English language, often it's translated soul in a lot of older translations, but I think in our contemporary language a better understanding would be a self. You are a self. And your self is not so much just this body, but your self is really more like a story. But you're a special kind of story self because you're the kind of story self that keeps making more of it. Every day you wake up and you live another chapter, another piece of this story. You are a story making story. And you live like this. And in fact you are living in just a part of a far larger story. One of the books that I read recently was a book by Jennifer Michael Heck named Stay, A History of Suicide and the Philosophies Against It. I learned a lot in this book about suicide. One of the strangest things about us is that on one hand we will fight like anything to preserve life and then even if we have food and shelter and drink and a host of people around us who love us, we will throw our life away out of despair. Have you ever heard of an animal who had all of its needs met ending its own life because of an idea? It doesn't happen. It was through my scholarly work that I first grew interested in the subject of what people live for in difficult situations, especially when they have no religion. As was the case with many of the people I wrote about in my book, A History. It was through my personal life that I became interested in suicide. In 2007 an old friend and a successful poet, Sarah Hanna, whom I had known from graduate school at Columbia University, took her home life. Had she not told me about her sadness, I wouldn't have guessed. She had good friends and a teaching job she loved. She was young and beautiful. She was writing with smart, psychologically rich poetry. At the time I had been going through some frightening dark emotional times myself, and so while her death was not incomprehensible to me, it was intensely shocking nevertheless. Our mutual friend from graduate school, Rachel West... Rachel, another poet, felt that same shock and expressed it in an afterword to Sarah's posthumous poetry book. Then in 2009, just after becoming the poet editor at the New Republic and completing another highly praised semester of teaching, Rachel took her own life as well. These events knocked me around, forced me to confront how today we think about our lives and death, and drew me to ask questions of history and philosophy, the realms I always turn to, to seeking understanding. A year or so after Sarah died, I was planning a scholarly essay about the conclusions I had reached. Before I could write it, I found myself trying to take in the fact that Rachel was gone too. We like to say that we are animals, and we certainly have the flesh of animals, but we are the strangest kind of animal you could ever imagine, because what animal takes its own life for an idea? David Foster Wallace was another person like the kind that heck, my friend, David Foster Wallace was an incredibly brilliant man, and at a very young age had almost won the Pulitzer Prize, wrote Infinite Jest, which is a novel that was declared by Time magazine one of the 100 most important books in the 20th century. He did a commencement address that you can find on YouTube called Talking About Water, which is basically talking about us. And he killed himself. And it's amazing listening to his stuff, because here's a man who is so insightful, and such a handle on contemporary life in many respects, and someone who had the kind of career and resume that millions of people would die for, the kinds of opportunities that none of us can probably imagine, and he takes his own life. This is a description of contemporary life from his enduring tenium over real time in a confined space is what real courage is. Such endurance is, as it happens, the discomfitment of the mind, such endurance is, as it happens, the distillate of what is today in this world neither I nor you have made, heroism. Heroism. The truth is that heroism in your childhood entertainments was not true valor, it was theater. The grand gesture, the moment of choice, the mortal danger, the external foe, the climactic battle whose outcome resolves all. Have you been to the movies lately? It seems like every movie is this. All designed to appear heroic, to excite and gratify an audience. Gentlemen, welcome to the world of reality. There is no audience. No one to applaud, to admire, no one to see you. Do you understand? This is the truth. Actual heroism receives no obeisance, entertains no one. No one queues up to see it. No one is interested. And my example of this? Have a baby. You wake up in the middle of the night, right? We have two parents here, that six month beautiful old baby. You wake up in the middle of the night. Does the baby say, excuse me, I need a little something. Could you please attend to my needs? In fact, there's a lot of heroism in this room because I've heard your stories. Because what real life involves is living. My son Philip just graduated from college and every morning I see him getting dressed up in his nice clothes, taking his briefcase and going off to work. And every now and then he says, gosh, I don't have time for all the fun stuff I used to do. No you don't. You get up and you go to work every day and you do things. And in fact, most of the truly heroic stuff that you do, no one knows and no one will ever know. It's being kind and generous to someone who didn't deserve it. It's being gracious to your child when you're at your wit's end. It's caring for that spouse or that parent or that child or that loved one that you know the world long would have given up on. But you are determined to do good. That is heroism. And nobody sees it and nobody knows it. Now, David Foster Wallace is after his suicide, which it seems with every suicide everyone is shocked. Half of this beautiful, wealthy, famous person throw their life away perhaps on a drug overdose or perhaps in this way or that way. His father said, yes, he has struggled with suicide for a long time. Because there is a medical cause for suicide and it is depression. And all efforts should be made to help people not take their life. Many, many studies show that if someone is despondent and suicidal, if they can be interrupted for a day or some days at some point, they will come out of it and can continue to go on and not take their own life. But in a sense, we tell this story to push suicide away and not listen to the voice of many who are in despair. One interesting note that people have found is that not all who are depressed have their views so terribly distorted. The prevailing view is that the depressed person tends to distort reality in a negative way. And in my experience with depression, I have seen that clearly. Sometimes people say, oh, it's always going to be terrible. And I'll think, that's probably not true. But at the same time, we have this other bias. But recent research has turned this received wisdom on its head, providing evidence that it is not the depressive who distorts reality but the so-called healthy population. Even if depression does distort reality in a negative way, the fact remains it removes the positive self-biases that are seen in the non-depressed. With recovery from depression and with the lifting of the mood, a new kind of truth could emerge. You see, the truth is we assume a simple equation, and I hear it all the time. Someone will come to me, pastor, there's been a crisis, there's been a trauma. Or pastor, there's this ongoing problem in my life. And if I only had, I'll fill in the blank, a new romantic partner, a better job, more financial security, better health. If I only had all of these things, then I wouldn't be happy. And so sometimes I am having the dark kind of humor I have. Someone comes to me and they share with me some great news, I got the job. And part of me inside wants to say, okay, now will you be happy? And the answer is, no, probably not. We imagine that if we have everything, if we line up life exactly the way we want it, if prayer actually worked like, okay, Lord, give me the lottery numbers, 15, 12, 13, 1, bingo! That everything would be grand. The truth is, that isn't the truth. Yet we all still live. Imagine it's the case. And the reason I know this is because if you look at Hex's book, she's writing to the elite, she's writing to people who went to Ivy League schools, who have high-profile jobs in New York, who have their articles written in the New York Times or the New Yorker, who are known internationally, these are the elite of the elite and they kill themselves. And when I worked in the Dominican Republic with Haitians who are illegally in a poor country, scrapping and trying to make life work on a dollar a day, often losing their children to malnutrition or diarrhea, they don't kill themselves. And I have to say, what is with this world? Why are people who have terrible lives killing themselves and those who have the lives that we all save and we want, are killing themselves? Life is upside down. And again, Walker Percy, when he received an award, the Jefferson Prize from the National Endowment of the Arts, I listened to a video of his lecture and he said the line, show me a man with all of his needs satisfied and I'll show you a man in serious trouble. It's true. Now, Hex Crusade, she's an atheist philosopher and she says, she says, we cannot count on God, so therefore, here's my argument against suicide. It would hurt those who love you and it cuts off a future self. But she basically is only making this argument for the elite who will know if I forestall suicide, there will be another grand award I'll win. There will be another something that I'm looking for. It's continuing to chase whatever it is they imagine will make them happy. And we already know this doesn't work. It's an ironic appeal because she's an atheist, she doesn't discourage suicide among the old or among the infirm. Only the future self worth living is a comfortable one. And the irony, of course, is that if you're depressed, you don't think there will be one. Secular Americans are doubtful about the soul, but if I tell people, you are a story and even if you kill yourself, your story doesn't die, it just kind of gets cut off. But what if, in fact, God knows your story, just as we know each other's story? What if, in fact, you imagine that what we are are story making stories, that we are stories in flesh, that we are stories put in our flesh in the community of a whole range of other stories. And what if, in fact, we are not merely these disconnected objects or animals, but we are all these stories intertwined within one grander, greater story. We have no trouble believing that, in fact, stories don't die. The Epicureans lived, they were one of the major philosophical groups during Jesus' time. The Epicureans basically said, you know, when you die, the gods don't care, so get as much enjoyment and meaning as you can right now. And I find a lot of modern atheist friends say the same thing. It doesn't matter if there's life after death, you can have meaning right now, which is like being in a movie theater and saying, I feel meaning while I watch the movie, but when I walk out that door, the meaning evaporates, and I say, that's no meaning at all. Eastern religions say, what you are right now is just a little moment in time, but when your story ends, you'll be part of this larger, grander story. A friend, Danny Fass, got me on this Liftserv thing where once a day someone writes to the entire Liftserv about 25,000 people, and this week, in fact, somebody wrote in who was living in San Francisco, and he had a medical emergency, and his partner wasn't able to come to the hospital, so he spent the night in the hospital, and he was an atheist, and he said, I don't know what I am. And so he got this saying from some holy man in the East saying, we are waves. The beginning and the end of the wave is like a person's birth and death. We are ourselves. We are also made up of everything else. Other people, the earth, plants, sun, the sky, and all the elements. We are and have always been inseparable, and we begin and ultimately we die, and when we die, we become what we have always been, everything else. And he writes this and says, this is a wonderful idea, and now I feel my life has meaning. I read this and I say, it's very pretty words, but the truth is, when you're at the beach, you don't name a wave. And I don't mourn when the wave goes into the sand because there will be another one. But all of you have names, and all of you have stories, and you are of far more worth than a wave. You're even of more worth than a sparrow, because in fact, your story matters, and the reason you named people during prayer time was that those names matter, and those people matter, and their stories matter, and the fact that their stories got cut off by death matters. Now Mary stood outside the tomb crying. As she wept, she bent over to look into the tomb and saw two angels in white, seated where Jesus' body had been, one at the head and the other at the foot. They asked her, woman, why are you crying? They have taken my Lord away, she said. I don't know where they have put him. At this she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus. She asked her, woman, why are you crying? Who is it you are looking for? Thinking he was the gardener, she said, sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him and I will get him. And again, at this point she is only thinking the body, and she is thinking, I love this man so much, I don't want to be parted even with his body, I even want to see his body honored. And Jesus said to her, Mary, of all the resurrection stories, this is my favorite, because he names her and she names him. They are not just bodies, they are not just stories, they are body stories, they are story making stories. And what Jesus does when he comes out of the tomb is says, you are not just a wave that has no name, that will just, your atoms will just be part of the ground again and you will come back as a flower. You are not a flower. You have a name, you have a story, you have a tale, you have meaning, you have purpose. And the fact that death cuts you off should not be. And when Jesus comes out of that grave and calls her Mary, it means that the Lord of the Universe knows her story. The Lord of the Universe cares about her story and the Lord of the Universe will not let her story see decay. That's what Easter means. Her story in Jesus doesn't suffer decay. Jesus said her name, she saw Jesus and knew that they would never finally be apart. They may be parted for a time, the story making stories in Christ will rise again and live the story once more. Next time, without death, fear or decay. The very good thing to think about is that even though my father's book is this bad, and it's full of stories about his life, it is only the first chapter in his story. And for all of the names that you named, the only chapter you know of their story is the first. And in fact, all the best chapters are yet to come. And that's why we're here. Because in this world, that's a hard thing to believe. Wallace and Heck do see life clearly under the sun. Life in this world is short, hard and painful, even for the elite. Wallace is right in the seeming meaningless tedium that crushes us. Heck is right that it's easy to wonder, even for the elite, who have more of everything than most of us, will make us happy, won't in fact make things much better at all. Wallace ended his life and Heck was clearly considered it more than once. But what I offer you is not some simple platitude to make your life work, or give you your best life now. I don't sugarcoat life at the age of decay, because Jesus didn't, because it killed him. Life is hard, yes. But the story he is making in you, even though you suffer, even though sometimes in pain you say, I don't want it to go on, means it is only the first chapter. And what Christ says is, the harder it is now, the more glorious he can make it going forward. So don't give up on him. By his sacrifice, he made peace for you with the creator God, and by his power, he wrecked the power of death on us and for our stories. I want us to say this together. What is your only comfort in life and in death? That I am not my own, but belong, body and soul, in life and in death, to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ. He has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood, and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. He also watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head without the will of my Father in heaven. In fact, all things must work together for my salvation. Because I belong to him, Christ, by his Holy Spirit, assures me of eternal life, and makes me loyally willing and ready from now on to live for him. This is the story. That he knows your name. This is the story. That he's not disconnected from your story. This is the story that he has authored you. And he is offering you, and he will bring your story to a crescendo, the likes of which you cannot fully contemplate. And the real story is that he will bring your story to a crescendo, and the reason to continue storying in this world, whether your life is tedious or okay right now, or hard or just plain painful, is that he knows you. And he will never leave you or forsake you. And he will turn and recycle even your hard things into glory. And so why we celebrate on Easter is that if the man of sorrows, who lived fully, your well-being at his expense, and was crushed and tormented and persecuted for it, and yet turned it into glory at his resurrection, he promises to do the same for you. Now you can continue to live imagining that I need to get everything done before I kick the bucket, so I'll have the bucket list. So I'm going to spend all kinds of money traveling the world, or who knows what. Or you can imagine that, in fact, the greater things you cannot lose because he has them secured for you, and that actually a better way is to live your life loving and serving those that the world has forgotten, which is exactly what he did. That's great. Lord, what a strange world it is that the poor of the earth struggle to live and the elite of the world throw their stories away. But we believe that the truly elite of this world came into this world to make himself part of our story, to redeem our stories, and to make our stories like his. May we not succumb to the temptation that we imagine this is all there is, because this is only the beginning. And may we not succumb to the temptation that we think we are merely awake because waves have no names. And if Jesus of Nazareth, upon his resurrection, could recognize his friend and call her by name, Mary, that he will call us as well. May we put our trust in him. May you give us his spirit. And may we live our lives after him. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Put your staff.