https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=r9xHB-Suyjk

 Developing model Dramatic picture, isn't it? We're going to talk about one of those texts in the Bible this morning that makes some of my friends really hate the Bible. It's the story of the death of two men, Nadab and Abiyu. Now, this honest rendition depicts Nadab and Abiyu as young men, given the fact that Aaron, I believe, is Moses' older brother. Nadab and Abiyu could very well have been men in their 60s. But the story is of God taking their lives, and that, for many people, is disturbing. Now, I've had enough experience with people to know that a sermon or an argument doesn't usually change how we feel about things. Remember in this series on Exodus, I've been using the image of us as a rider and an elephant. And the elephant is that automatic part of ourselves where we respond and react and where we have emotions about things. Many of you will remember the sermon when I had that large picture of a whole specimen come up, and I saw many of you just kind of lean back and hope. Well, this is how the elephant responds. And so when we hear this story of the death of Nadab and Abiyu at the Tabernacle, we wonder how could this be? In going through the book of Leviticus, it's not an easy book to read, but you might notice that the first seven chapters of the book of Leviticus are all instructions for sacrifices. That is, in fact, intentional because the sacrifices in terms of the story of Israel from Exodus through Midorotomy start in chapters 8, 9, and 10 when the Tabernacle is consecrated and initiated and Aaron and his sons are taken in as priests. If you remember, the story in Exodus began with Moses going to Pharaoh and saying, Let my people go to worship me in the wilderness. That is accomplished at Sinai when God comes down on the mountain, and the mountain is called the Mount of Israel. Let my people go to worship me in the wilderness. That is accomplished at Sinai when God comes down on the mountain, and the mountain is full of smoke and fire, and the people worship God there. And then as we've been going through Exodus, with all of the people staying in tents, the Lord assigns Moses to build a tent, a special tent, where the presence of the Lord will dwell in the midst of his people. Now, if you recall from the Exodus story as we've been going through the story, the great interruption of that was the golden calf. And in a sense, God steps back and wonders, Do I want to, in fact, live with these people? Am I ready to commit to life with these people? But God comes to the conclusion, Yes, I'm going to go through with my plan. And so now in the part of the story, we're ready to consecrate the Paternacle, and God is going to inhabit the Paternacle just as the children of Israel are inhabiting their tents. Then Aaron lifted his hands towards the people and blessed them. And having sacrificed the sin offering, the burnt offering, and the fellowship offering, he stepped down. Moses and Aaron then went into the tent of meeting. When they came out, they blessed the people, and the glory of the Lord appeared to all of the people. Now again, if you're imagining the story as I'm reading it, the glory of the Lord is this fiery pillar. It's what came down on Sinai in thunder and lightning. And so now in the temple, this fiery cloud appears, and everyone understands this as the physical manifestation of the presence of the Lord. Fire came out from the presence of the Lord and consumed the burnt offering, and the fat portions of the altar. When all of the people saw it, they shouted for joy and fell face down. Now, Aaron's sons, Nadad and Baibu, took their censors, put fire in them, and added incense. Now, the way incense was burned, then you have a pan, and you put coals of fire on it, and you take incense and you sprinkle it on the coals, and that would burn the incense, and that then would reduce the smell. And they offered unauthorized fire before the Lord, contrary to his command. So fire came out from the presence of the Lord and consumed them, and they died before the Lord. Now again, then Moses said to Aaron and his son, and his son's Eleazar and Nidama, Do not let your hair become a temp, and do not tear your clothes, or you will die, and the Lord will be angry with the whole community. But your relatives, all the Israelites, may mourn for those the Lord has destroyed by fire. Do not leave the entrance of the tent of meeting, or you will die, because the Lord's anointing oil is on you. So they did, as Moses said. Now again, maybe for some of you, and certainly for some friends of mine, this is what's wrong with religion, they will tell you. There's inordinate punishment for procedural violations, it's uncaring about humans and their feelings, and these texts invite religious people to be petty, hurtful, and uncaring. Maybe you feel this way, maybe you know people who feel this way. And so Christians sometimes will take a text like this and kind of put it away, and we don't want to talk about these kinds of things, but you know it's there, and you wonder, what does this mean, and why is it in the Bible? I have this list up before you before, it comes from Christian Smith, who's a sociologist, who did very careful studies of American youth and their ideas about religion, and he came up with this term, moralistic therapeutic deism, and he said, almost all American youth, whether they were born in a Christian home, a Roman Catholic home, a Muslim home, a Mormon home, an atheist home, almost all American youth believe these five things, that a God exists and created and orders the world and watches over life on earth, that God wants people to be good, nice, and fair to each other, as taught in the Bible by most world religions, that the central goal of life is to be happy and to feel good about oneself, that God is not involved in my life except where I need God to resolve a problem, and good people go to heaven when they have. This is kind of your basic package that most Americans implicitly believe, and so when you hear a story like this, that God would destroy Nadab and Abihu for a procedural violation, you think, what kind of God is this? This certainly can't be a God that I would love and a God that I could understand, because should God be nice? Should God say, oh, Nadab and Abihu, so silly to bring in the wrong procedure, go back and try it again, kind of like a kindergarten teacher. What's happening here, however, is in a sense the consummation of God living with his people. This is, in a sense, the wedding night where God and his people are coming together, and this is the great celebration. So when the fire of God comes down onto the tabernacle, and the fire of God comes out from the Holy of Holies and burns up the offering on the altar, this is the great realization that God here is in the midst of his people. And then this happens. Now again, if you remember outside, God comes down in thunder and lightning, and if you remember the story, the people hear it and tremble, and they eventually, when Moses is talking to the Lord in front of them, they say, shut him up! He's too great! This is not the kind of God that is really like your Sunday school teacher or your kindergarten teacher. And I know many people will say things like, well, I just love being with God, and I think, is this the same God that we find in Exodus, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy? This is not a God that is someplace between a warm puppy and a nice grandpa. This God is awesome, and to get close to him, well, think about it. The likes, the kind of being that is capable of creating this universe, that is who we're talking about here. Now, one of the things that we don't realize, and in fact, when we read this text, there's a lot of what we don't realize, is that in fact, what's happening at this consummation moment, when Aaron gets everything set on the altar and God's fire comes out, and comes out of the Holy Spirit, lights the altar, Moses has been given the command, the fire on the altar must be kept burning, it must not go out. Every morning the priest is to add firewood and arrange the burnt offering on the fire, and burn the fat fellowship offering on it. The fire must be kept burning on the altar continuously, it must not go out. Twice in two verses, this gets repeated. Why? Here's the idea. When the Lord visits them at Sinai, he comes down at the mountain and he is present there. When the tabernacle is constructed in the midst of the camp, the Lord comes into the midst of the camp now, and dwells there, and he himself lights the fire of the altar. The idea is this, that when God lights that fire, and the priest sustains it, right there on the altar, in a physical way, is God. Now this is a strange idea for us, because we have a lot of ideas about God, and a lot of people might say, well God is everywhere, and yes, God is everywhere. And what we really say by that as Christians is God is able to impact every space. But in the Old Testament, when it talks about the presence of God, it means quite literally that in a certain sense, God is right here in a very physical, tangible way. And so when they looked at that altar and saw the fire, then the idea is that for generations Israel would say, God is present in that altar, in that fire, in a very special way. And so you have to keep the fire going. And what's also happening in here, in terms of the sacrifice, is exactly this. When the head of a household would bring an animal to the tabernacle for an offering, the head of the household would put his hand on that animal, and in a sense say, all my debt to the Lord I place on this animal. And so that animal would then go to the altar, and it was a whole burnt offering, the whole animal would be consumed. If it was another kind of offering, the animal would be cleaned, and then the meat from that animal would go to the priest, and the priest would consume the offering. And again, you hear that and say, well what's the point of this? Have you ever been forgiven? Have you ever done something that has deeply hurt someone, and they said, I forgive you. Maybe it was something that you broke, maybe it was something that you said, maybe it was a relationship that you violated. In a sense what happens in the sacrificial system is that that sin is present in that animal, and when that animal goes out to the altar, that sin comes into the very presence of this fiery God, and God consumes the sin. And when that sin then, by means of the animal, goes into the priest as he's eating the offering in the confines of the tabernacle, in a sense what the tabernacle is saying is God takes your death and turns it into life. That God takes your sin and removes it and heals it and turns it into blessing. The fire of God consumes the sin. The priest, in their priestly function, take in the sin, the dead flesh, and the plants, and convert it to life by consuming it and living still. The tabernacle is the means by which death turns to life. Now my guess is that today each of you will eat. Do you ever think about the fact that the death of that animal or the death of that plant by you gets converted into life? It's a strange thought. What happens in the tabernacle is that's exactly the exchange where God says, you all have sinned. You all are in rebellion against me, but I am going to take your rebellion, convert it into a sacrifice, and I am going to turn it into life. So what's the point of Nadab and Abihu? You see, according to the rules of the priests, the censor, the coal that was on the middle of that plate that Nadab and Abihu were supposed to take was from the fire of the Lord. And so when the fire of the Lord was combined with the fire of the Lord, and so when the fire of the Lord was combined with the incense, that would present a pleasing odor. That would present the smell of forgiveness for the Lord. When Nadab and Abihu take a different fire and sprinkle the incense on it, in a sense what Nadab and Abihu were saying is, I'll do my own healing. I'll do my own converting. I'll make my own life. And what is also true of the tabernacle was that the rules were stipulated in such a way that the priests can, in the moment at the tabernacle, do things that no one else could do and still be saved. They could, in a sense, be by the fire of God, and God would not consume them. They could bear the sin of the people, and they would not be consumed. The priests, when they're acting within the confines of the tabernacle, could do what none of us could do because they take in the death by virtue of the power of God and turn it into life. And what Nadab and Abihu do, what they did, in a sense, they violated the physics of the sacrifice. Now imagine you had a girlfriend, but before this girlfriend, you had another girlfriend before her. So you're sitting with girlfriend two, and you find a card given you by girlfriend one, and you open it and you say, ah, wasn't this sweet. What would girlfriend one do? Well, I'm sorry, you're right. What would girlfriend two do? Fire would come out from her and consume. Why? Because girlfriend two feels that even a card of girlfriend one is a what? Is a violation of their relationship. And in a sense, what Nadab and Abihu offer is adulterous fire. Now, one of the things that I think we as moderns have to deal with is the question of whether we fear God or physics more. Because every year, if you look at the research this week, every year between 50 and 100 people who work with electricity up on telephone lines die. How? Usually something as simple as they grab the wrong wire. And nobody says, I think that's horrible, electricity, to kill people like that. Why don't we say that? Because electricity is dumb. Electricity doesn't care. It's just physics. And if you grab the wrong wire, who do we blame? The electrician. Here's the thing. Do we believe that God, we take God less serious than we take physics? I thought about the question this way. I thought, I do it all the time. I beg on God's mercy. I beg God, oh, God will understand. I beg God, I don't really take God seriously. I take it less seriously than I take the electricity that's flowing through my house. What's really interesting in this story, however, I find is that native and Abiyu get smoked in this moment. And Aaron has been forgiven to go to the Catholic city. It's an alarming thing because native and Abiyu, we don't know if this was intentional or unintentional. We don't know if this is a slip-up. This is the first time through. They're gone. Aaron made the Golden Cap let all of Israel down the wrong road. He put the whole thing in jeopardy. And here stands Aaron as priest still. And you might have to ask, does this make any sense? Well, and again, it's interesting to note that, in fact, when you think about God and physics, this whole issue of God's presence is very interesting in the Old Testament because on the one hand, often the children of Israel treat God as if he's physics. In the story of Samuel, they'll take the ark out to try and beat the Philistines. And then the ark gets lost and the Philistines take the ark to the temple of Dagon. So on one hand, why does God let them handle the ark? But he does. And then when the ark is in the temple of Dagon, the Philistines get sick and some of them die. Now the Lord is acting like physics before he was it. And then they turn back over the ark and then somebody decides, well, take a look in the ark, and he dies. And so what you begin to see is that God, in fact, should be taken more seriously than physics when he doesn't act like physics. He forgives Aaron, but he doesn't forgive Nadam or Baikon. And here we stand and we say, why? I don't get the net. Another interesting thing we note is how often the people of God can challenge God in the midst of a serious relationship. Moses shares his feelings with the Lord. Sometimes Moses wishes to die. Sometimes Moses wishes the people would die. Sometimes Moses just wants out of the whole business. Job has a very complicated relationship with God. At first, when he's in the lamb and he's in the fall, he says, the Lord gave it and the Lord taken it away, blessed it be the name of the Lord. Well, that's only by chapter four. We're going to have chapter and chapter after that when the Lord says, when Job says, I wish God would come down and see me face to face. And then when God does, Job puts his hand over his head. Abraham struggles with how God should navigate things. Abraham's always grinding the punch. Maybe Lot will be my heir. Maybe Ishmael will be my heir. Abraham has second thoughts about what God is going to do to Sodom and Gomorrah. And even Jesus, when he gets to the garden of Gethsemane, he says to the Lord, if there be another way, can this cup pass from me? I didn't read to you the verses following the death of Adonai. This is what the Lord spoke of when he said, among those who approach me, I will be proved holy and the sight of all the people I will be honored. And Aaron remained silent. I wonder what Aaron was thinking when he saw two of his sons destroyed for this indiscretion. And he realized that he had sinned a whole lot worse. And there he stood as the chief priest before the Lord. John the Baptist is this fiery figure when Jesus comes. And if you read John's sermons, the axe is laid at the root of the tree. And John expects when Jesus comes, he's going to come like the fire of the Lord smoking out of the sanctuary. And he's going to burn Romans and he's going to burn wobbly Jews. And he's going to set things straight. And then he begins to see Jesus' ministry. And he's wondering, what is this? Why no smoking Romans? Why no day of the Lord? And Jesus, and so he sends when he's in prison a disciple to Jesus. And Jesus says this, go back and report to John what you hear and see. The blind receive sight, the lame walk, and those who have leprosy are healed. The dead here and the dead are raised. And the good news is proclaimed to the poor, lest it is anyone who does not stumble on account of me. Because here's the thing, made have and abide you die. Aaron lives. And we say, but according to my judgment, you should have smoked Aaron and made have and abide you should have gotten abide. And then John the Baptist says, I look at these Romans. They're awful people. Why don't you kill them? Look at these Jews who are collaborating. They're terrible people. They deserve worse. And me, John the Baptist, I go to prison and they take off my head. And then Jesus comes and he doesn't waltz in and rescue John. What is he doing? He's healing the lame. He's giving sight to the blind. But if you understand the tabernacle, Jesus is doing exactly what the priests did. He takes in their sin. He takes in their death. And he gives back life. You see, Jesus came not to bring a judgment, but to bear judgment. Because when God came out from the tabernacle in the life of Jesus, death was turned to life. But John the Baptist would rightly say, but may you serve death? And Jesus says, yes, and I will die for that. And you wonder, how do we know? Because he erodes. Peter will look at this. And Peter, in a sense, is a figure like Aaron. It's so interesting that he picked that verse from Hebrews as part of the liturgy this morning. Because what can you say if you've already seen the Lord and still reviled? And here we have Peter who, to save his own neck, calls down curses on the Lord. And what does the Lord do? Restore him. As you come to him, a living stone, rejected by humans, but chosen by God, precious to him, you also, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Do you understand where we fit in with may-dab and abidu? You might read abidu in a sense, are living with this high electricity, with this high voltage, because you might say, pastor, we don't have an altar here that was lit by the fire of God himself that you've managed to heat. But what Peter says, what the New Testament says is, where is God? Well, look around. He's here in this place by his Holy Spirit. And you might say, really? He looks like my neighbors. Yeah. He's here in this place, but he's as real, more real than physics. And you might say, well, why aren't people falling dead? It's because Jesus fell dead for you. He absorbed your death and gave you back life. Now, to you who believe this stone is precious, but to those who do not believe, the stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone, a cornerstone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall. They stumble because they disobey the message, which is also what they are destined for. But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, got special possession that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful life. Once you were not a people, but now you are a people of God. Once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. And what will you do with the mercy you've received? Let's pray. Lord, we say liturgically that you are in this presence, in this place, but we barely believe it. We barely believe it in the way that we have more fear of electricity than we have fear of you. And we confuse your mercy with negligence. And we imagine that we ourselves are in control when you really are. Help us to believe, Lord, that you took on our debt and from it brought life. Help us to believe, Lord, that you took our debt and gave us life. And that we in fact are the new temple, the new tabernacle. And that we in fact function in this community like your tabernacle did in Israel. Help us, Lord, to reenact your mercy and to express your love and your light. This we ask in the name of Jesus. Amen.