https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tZFiZjWCzeE

 This sermon has got a lot of reading from the screen. Roger and I still haven't figured out how to do that. I'll figure that out one day. I'm just going to have a copy of the sermon here so I can read some other things. Okay. Walter Percy is an American novelist and he received the Jefferson Award in 1989. And in his speech, which I listened to this week, he had this phrase, which really grabbed me. Show me a man with his needs satisfied and I'll show you a man in serious trouble. And I heard this and I thought, this is probably one of the most brilliant, seemingly backwards things I've ever heard. Because we imagine that if all of our needs get satisfied, then we'll be okay. And when it comes to people, I think in fact it's almost just the opposite. This is from Peter Cree. To live is to suffer. That's the Buddha's first noble truth. The truth that he thought was the most obvious and indisputable truth in life. The data on which any quasi-scientific theory of human life must be erected. Pain is the most obvious problem in the world. This is no less true today. For now that our civilization has succeeded in conquering half of humanity's physical pains by anesthetics and medical technology and booby boards, it has also doubled humanity's spiritual pains. Depression, despair, divorce, which is more painful than death. Other betrayals, loneliness, emptiness, meaninglessness, the existential vacuum. Victor Frankl says, I mentioned Victor Frankl in the Sunday school class this morning, he was a Viennese psychiatrist who was a Jew and went through the concentration camps and survived to write about them. Victor Frankl quoting Nietzsche, A man can endure almost any how if he has a why. The how is the circumstances, including the suffering. The why is the purpose or meaning. This is not a theory. This is an observation. Frankl is a scientist. He observed this to be true in the laboratory of Auschwitz. The corollary of this truth is that if we do not have a purpose or a meaning, then we cannot endure suffering that's inconvenient. Our culture seems to have made the fascinating argument of giving up a better why or a better how. Giving up meaning for comfort. We've conquered the world of pain, but we've lost our soul, our meaning, our hope, our purpose. And that's why the physical pains that remain, though only half as bad in quantity compared to those of our ancestors, are twice as bad in quality, twice as unendurable without the meaning to surround them. The end result is that though the pains are less, we fear them and we feel them more. I love these little things from first world problems or white people's problems. I have to pee, but I just got comfy. The bottom of my foot itches, but it tickles when I scratch. To many in human history, this is our civilization. To use a quantitative analogy for something that is not quantitative, the birth is a hundred pains, but a thousand transcendently meaningful joys. The abortion has only a dozen pains, but no joys. What do all these people have in common? What's that? Lorenz Scott and Mick Jagger, the most recent. 49, most of them were drug overdoses. Lorenz Scott, humbler self. Whitney Houston, drowned in the bathtub. Lorenz Scott in the upper corner, 49 years old, a model, clothing designer, hunker on life. Tony Scott here with his wife and two sons, jumped off a bridge in Los Angeles. Whitney Houston drowned in the bathtub. The other three over on the right, drug overdoses. And we look at these people and say, why would these people check out? They're wealthy, they're famous, they're powerful, they're beautiful. Some took some checkouts simply with suicide, others checked out because they were simply doing so many drugs that took their life. Where's all the pain? Well, one of the things that I was amazed at, and working in the third world with patients and extremely poor people, is that I would see people endure unimaginable suffering and want to live. I've been reading a lot of literature from the Nazi death camps lately, and you would think that going into a concentration camp, you would just want to kill yourself to get out of the pain and misery. Yet they don't. And why isn't these wealthy, powerful, beautiful people who strive to obtain what they have, then would take their own lives? What is it about us? Show me a man that has his needs met, and I'll show you a man in trouble. What is it about us? As I mentioned, I read Elie Wiesel's Night. I just finished Victor Frankl's Man's Search for Meaning, which is truly a wonderful book. But of all the Holocaust material I've read, by far the best book has been Cory Tim Boone's Night. Cory Tim Boone, as many of you know, was born towards the end of the 19th century and grew up in Holland, and talks a little bit about her early life at home, where she lived with her father and her sister, her brother eventually got married and moved out, another sister got married and moved out, two sisters who never married, and then her mother who was ill, and three aunts, two of whom were ill. That spring I finished school, I don't know if it was eighth grade or high school, I finished school and took over the work of the household, and it had always been planned that I would do this, but now there was an added reason. Tante Bep had tuberculosis. At the beginning of the 20th century, tuberculosis was obviously a death sentence, and those who had enough money went into the sanatorium, but they didn't have enough money for Tante Bep to do that, so they took care of her in the home. The disease was regarded as incurable. The only treatment was rest at a sanitarium, and that was only for the rich. So for many months, Tante Bep lay in her little closet of her room, coughing away her life. To keep down the risk of infection, only Tante Ana went in and out. Around the clock she nursed her older sister, many nights getting no sleep at all, and so the cooking and washing and cleaning for the family fell to me. Again, this was common through most of human history. I loved the work, and except for Tante Bep, would have been completely happy. Over everything that lay the shadow, over everything lay the shadow, not only the illness, but her whole disgruntled, disappointed life. I often would catch a glimpse inside when I handed a tray, or Tante Ana passed me out one. There were a few pathetic mementos of 30 years in other people's homes, perfume bottles empty many years, because well-bred families always gave the governess perfume for Christmas. Some degaro types of children, who by now have children and grandchildren of their own, that the door would shut, but I would linger in that narrow passage under the ease, yearning to say something. Tante Bep, through most of her life, was a governess for other people's children, and took care of them. Didn't have children of her own. I spoke once about my feelings to Mama. She too was more and more often in bed. Always before, when pain from the gallstones had gotten too bad, she had an operation. But a small stroke after the last one made further surgery impossible. And many days, making up a tray for Tante Bep, I carried one upstairs to Mama also. I glanced out of Mama's single window at the brick wall three feet away. Mama, I said, as I set the tray on the bed, and sat down beside. Can't we do something for Tante Bep? I mean, isn't it sad that she has to spend her last days here, where she hates it, instead of where she was so happy, at the wall or someplace? Mama laid down her pen and looked at me. Corrie, she said at last. Bep has been just as happy here with us, no more nor less than anywhere else. I stared at her not understanding. Do you know when she started praising the wall or so highly? Mama went on the day she left them. As long as she was there, she had nothing but complaints. The wall would be completely prepared for the Minhooks, when she had where she had been before. But at the Minhooks, she had always been miserable. Happiness isn't something that depends on our surroundings, Corrie. It's something we make inside ourselves. This morning we have a story of a Samaritan woman who had had five husbands. You would think that if one husband is a good thing, five would be better, right? No. I don't know what to believe in that. And she's in a position now, in fact, where she's given up on the whole marriage thing, kind of like Tiger Woods and Lindsey Vonn. Well, marriage, that was painful, so now we'll just be together without being married. Yeah, I'm sure that will end better. You know, we're waiting for Mr. Incredible. We imagine with more power, more knowledge, we'll fix our problems. Because our problem is our situation, and we figure if we can change the situation, we'll fix my problem. And last week we looked at Nicodemus, who was looking for a religious solution to fixing his problem. This week we look at an agent of God's kingdom. While Nicodemus was a Jew, God's chosen people, this woman is a heretic. While Nicodemus was a pure Jew, this woman, in the eyes of the Jews, was a mambo. Nicodemus knew the Bible. This woman had a corrupted Bible. Nicodemus worshiped in the right place in Jerusalem. This woman worshiped in a heretical place, Mount Gerizim. Nicodemus was a respected man. This was an outcast woman in a society where a woman couldn't even be a witness in court, because by virtue of her being a woman, anything she would say would kill her life. Nicodemus was morally uplifted. This woman had relational and sexual issues. When a Samaritan woman came to draw water, Jesus said to her, Will you give me a drink? His disciples had gone into town to buy food. The Samaritan woman said to him, You are a Jew and I am a Samaritan woman. How can you ask me for a drink? The woman knew her place. What Jesus had done, however, was make the woman a benefactor, because in that society to be in need to someone else was to be indebted to someone else. So Jesus comes and approaches the woman, and the woman knows full well that being a Jew, Jesus cannot even touch her bucket because it's not ceremonial clean to drink from. And so the woman is like, Why are you even talking to me? But Jesus comes up to her from below. Jesus answers her, If you knew the gift, if you knew the gift of God, and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water. Sir, the word said, You have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. Where can you get this living water? Are you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us this well and drank from it himself? Also gave his sons and his livestock? The woman is incredulous. Why would this man be speaking to me this way? But Jesus says, If you had any indication who I was, you would have asked. And you would have asked for living water. Jesus answers, Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again. And whoever drinks the water I give them will never forget it. Indeed the water I give them will become in them a spring of water well enough to eternalize them. The woman said to him, Sir, give me this water, that I won't be thirsty and have to keep coming here to draw water. What happens with this woman is exactly what happens with Nicodemus. Jesus tells her something ambiguous, and she takes it the wrong way. Because the woman is convinced that the answer to all problems is the change of social status. And that culture tells them to divorce five times. Jews were allowed to be married three times. To be divorced five times means that five different men had big enough on them because obviously a woman could not initiate divorce. So five different men had tried her out. And she agreed to marry five different men, and each time it had failed. And now she's with someone who is either not her husband or is already the husband of someone else. And she tries this out. So potentially she tries to change the situation. And the truth is for many of us, the context of both things, but the other people in our lives are excited to say, I need a new group of people to be with, and that will make my life better. And that has to do this again and again and again. And so Jesus offers her living water. What she would really make her life better is indoor plumbing. And Jesus says, if you had any idea who you were talking to, and what I was capable of giving you, we wouldn't be talking about indoor plumbing. He told her, go call your husband and come back. I have no husband, she replied. Jesus said to her, you are right when you say you have no husband. In fact, you have had five husbands, and the man you have now is not your husband. That's what she said is true. Now this stops her. She doesn't quite know where to go from here. So she has to die. Sir, the woman says, I see that you are a prophet. Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain. Maybe I can divert him into an abstract theological conversation and get the focus off me. Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain, but you do claim that the place where we must work is Jerusalem. Woman, Jesus replied, believe me. A time is coming when you will worship the Father, either on this mountain nor in Jerusalem. You Samaritans worship what you do not know. We worship what we do know. For salvation is from the Jews. Yet a time is coming, and has come now, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth. For they are the kind of worshipers the Father seeks. God is spirit, and his worshipers must worship in spirit and in truth. Now I know many believe that what this verse means is that you can worship God anywhere. But the verse really focuses in his worshiping the Father through the Son by the Holy Spirit. The woman said, I know that Messiah called Christ is coming. When he comes he will explain everything to us. Then Jesus declared, I, the one speaking to you, am he. And what Jesus said in Greek in this is, Edo Emy. He says, I am, which is the name that God gives himself in the book of Exodus. And this is the first time in the Gospel of God when Jesus does this. And this is amazing because Jesus just spoke to Nicodemus, and he could have laid that out in the Greek, but he doesn't. He gives it to the woman. This woman who is a woman, and she's a Latin American, and she's a sinner, and she's a serial victim, and she has sexual abuse. And there's every reason to disqualify her and to serve Nicodemus over her. But Jesus comes to her and reveals himself in a way more fully than he's revealed to anyone else. And still, the woman is processing. What should I take of this man? And is he better than in the door of the club? Then this disciple returned, and we're surprised to find he's talking to a woman. So now we begin to realize the risk that Jesus took. But no one asks, what do you want or why are you talking to her? Because everyone here, you should not be talking to this woman. Jesus can't leave you alone, and how do you not go out and lie? Jesus. And so, in a minute, Jesus will do to his disciples what he did to the woman. But she, in seeing the other men come, leaves. Why? She was asked to get out at noon. Why? If you lived in the Third World, you know that one of the early morning chores at the beginning of the day in the Dominican Republic, we had all these little children usually head towards the screen with their galvan jugs, and they'd head to the screen and they'd get the water and they'd bring it back to the house. That would be the water for the day. Everyone in the town, probably all the women in the town, went out to the well in the morning. She goes at noon. The worst time of day to go get water, because it's hot, and it's heavy, and it's hard. She goes there because no one in the town wants to be with her, and she doesn't want to be with them. But now she's just had this conversation with this man, and it stirred something in her. But the sight of other men has caused her to flee. So then leaving her water jar, and leaving taken, it's useless for the Jews. They're not going to touch it. Then leaving her water jar, the woman went back to the town and said to the people, now this woman who has been avoiding the people, now finds the people, you would imagine that she could be a fire, or the enemy is coming. No, she comes to a news, and she says, come and see a man who told me everything I ever did. And the people who've got heard that, they said, and you want him to know everything I ever did? Is it this law you know in the law in the middle of the day? Is this a good thing that this man would know everything you ever did? Haven't you been spending your life covering up the things that you've done? Can I ask that to you? Haven't you been spending your life covering up the things that you've done? What's remarkable is that this is the moment of the woman's conversion. Why would it be that the moment of her conversion is the complete exposure of all of the virgin laundry, and all of her failing, and all of the times that these five men have been injected, and all of the times that she has grabbed after these men to try and save her life? Because this Jesus knows her through and through, knows her dirt, knows her bribe, knows her shame. And that seeks her still. And in fact, him seeking her still gives her the boldness to run towards the people she has been avoiding. And to actually believe that even asking for indoor plumbing, misunderstanding the offer he had even given her, opens the door in her, so that this woman, walking to the well, would herself become the well of living water for her community. Meanwhile, the disciples urge the rabbi, eat something! Don't be talking to these women here. But he said to them, I have food to eat that you know nothing about. Oh boy, here he goes again. Then his disciples said to each other, so someone have brought in food? My food, says Jesus, is to do the will of him who sent me and finished this work. Because again, the disciples are confused. What does he mean, he needs food? And Jesus says, you don't even understand what food is for. My food, said Jesus, is to do the will of him who sent me and finished this work. Don't you have a saying, it is still four months into harvest? I tell you, open your eyes and look at the field. They are white with harvest. Even now the one who reaps draws a wage and the harvest a crop for eternal life. For the sower and the reaper may be glad together. Thus the saying, one sows and another reaps is true. I tell you to reap what you have not sowed. Others have done their hard work and you are to reap the benefits of their labor. And the disciples are standing here, what is he talking about? And most of you are reading this thing, what is he talking about? He's talking about the fact that in a few minutes, they are about to reap what they have not sowed. In a few minutes, the entire barrier between the Jews and the Samaritans will be brought down. Now, in a couple of minutes, this entire Samaritan town will come to Jesus by the word of a simple woman. And she herself, because of her misguided request, will become a spring of living water that will be her community. Many of the Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman's testimony. He told them everything I did. And the other town thinks, that was good. So when the Samaritan came to him, they urged him to stay with them. And he stayed two days. And because of his words, many more became believers. They said to the woman, we no longer believe just because of what you said. Now we have heard for ourselves and we know that this man really is the savior of the world. The Kadimis couldn't see it. The woman asked her if you were coming. The disciples are confused about who. But because this woman gives a misguided, inside positive response to a question, God uses her to save a village. Are you seeking wellness by trying to control your circumstance? We all do. Are you using religion? Now I've got saying here that we should not pray to God for our circumstantial needs. Give us this day our daily bread. Jesus teaches us to pray. Jesus teaches us again and again and again. In fact, Jesus models for us. When he's in the garden of Gethsemane, he says to the Lord, if it's possible, take this stuff from me. So Jesus just says, pray for your circumstantial needs. If you have a problem, pray to have God moving. Ask him. You can ask God anything. Go ahead. But don't fix your relationship upon. Don't fix your relationship with him upon the condition that he fix the things you want him to fix for you to keep going to him. Are you looking for money? For power? Are you looking to seek to control your manipulation? And is it working? My guess would be that if any of us had ever received everything we'd ever asked for, you wouldn't be in church today. Walker Percy is exactly right. Show me a man with all of his needs met, and I'll show you a man in real trouble. Because if you had received everything you'd ever asked for, you certainly wouldn't be in this little church on the corner of Florn Road. You'd be out in your French Riviera or someplace. The circumstantial is secondary. The internal is primary. Would you trade your life for the life of Cory Tamboum? Would you like to be a not very well-educated, 51-year-old, unmarried daughter living in the same house her whole life, having spent a lot of it caring for her sick mother and her sick aunt, plunged into World War II, plunged into the Dutch underground during the war, only to be arrested and sent to a concentration camp? Does that sound like a good life? Does that sound like your best life now? That probably makes your life sound pretty good. Cory and Betsy held services in the box, and they figured out the guards didn't come in because the fleets were so bad. They were services like no other. These times in barracks 28, a single meeting might include a recital of the Magnificat in Latin by a group of Roman Catholics, a whispered hymn by some Lutherans, and a Soto Bosé chant by Eastern Orthodox women. With each moment, the crowd around us would swell, packing the nearby platforms, hanging over the edges until the high structures roamed in swathes. At last, Betsy and I would open the Bible. They smuggled the Bible into their concentration camp. Because only the Hollanders could understand the Dutch text, we would translate aloud in German. And then we would hear the light-moving words, passed back along the aisles in French, Polish, Russian, Czech, back into Dutch. They were little previews of heaven, these evenings beneath the light-bulb. And I would know again that in darkness, God's truth shines most clear. And again, you would imagine, here we have a very comfortable building, we have empty seats in the church, and there's no line out the door. But here in the corner of this concentration camp, these ennatiated, starving, near-death women crowding around to hear the Bible and hoping someone will translate it into their language. But as the rest of the world grew stranger, one thing became increasingly clear. And that was the reason the two of us were there. The reason you're in a concentration camp? It was because you helped Jews, who you didn't have to help because you were Dutch, but you did anyway. How dumb. Could you have survived the war better by staying away from them? Why love them? Why others would suffer we were not shown. As for us, from morning until lights out, whenever we were not in ranks for roll call, our Bible was the center of an ever-winding circle of health and hope. Like waves clustering around a blazing fire, we gathered about it, holding out our hearts to its warmth and light. The blacker the night around us, the brighter and truer and more beautiful burned the Word of God. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or distress or persecution or famine or nakedness or darkness or peril or sores, nay, and all these things, be our more than conquerors through him who loved us? I would look about us as Betsy read, watching the light leap from face to face. More than conquerors. It was not a wish, it was a fact. We knew it. We experienced it minute by minute. Poor, patriot, hungry. We were more than conquerors. Not we shall be. We are. Life in Ravensbrook took place on two separate levels, mutually impossible. One, the observable eternal, grew every day. The observable external life grew every day more horrible. The other, the life we lived with God grew daily better, truth upon truth, glory upon glory. Her world is not different from yours. Her sufferings may be worse, but you have sufferings too. Where do they take you? Nicodemus, Betsy has qualified for God's favor, and Jesus says to him, you must be born from above. There is no thing you can do to qualify for this. This American woman, imagine she is disqualified and erects these religious barriers against Jesus. And Jesus just says ask! And she becomes a spring of living water that fills her community. See grace is received, it's not achieved. If you go the Hindu path, use your yoga to try and avoid the cycle of reincarnation. But it's work you must do because if you fail to do it, you'll come back in a worse state. If you're a Buddhist, work your meditation to see beyond the illusion. But if you don't work your meditation, sorry, it doesn't work for you. In Islam or Lord Mithun for many Christians, you have to work hard to be able to be Mithun and somehow learn God's favor. And Jesus comes to this woman who has absolutely no qualification and he says ask! And even the confusion in her asking, he gives. This is our God. When he gives, it's not because he has to. It's because he wants to. So the only question for us is, will we ask? And what will we ask for? So go ahead and ask for circumstances to be changed. That's fine. But ask for something deeper. Ask for him himself. Ask for his Holy Spirit. And if he can take this woman and turn her into his first Gentile evangelist, then what can't he do with you? Let's pray. Lord, we are so full of ourselves and so empty of you. We imagine that it's all of our work that matters instead of knowing that it's only you that counts. Lord, we are so possessed by our circumstances and yes, I just got comfy and now I have to pee and I'm bothered by it. But so often, in the dimmest places of the world, you shine most clear. May we, Lord, stop believing in ourselves and start trusting Jesus more than we trust ourselves. And may we look to you and ask you for everything that we need. And may we believe in your goodness for Bible. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Will you stand? Amen.