https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=K-5uBo9QnBw

 Okay. Next slide. Go ahead, there we go. That's the lyrics. Alright, the next one. Next slide is the lyrics. Well, they put that up. So, why did she write this song? What is this song about? It's autobiographical. Where did she grow up? What's her father? Probably West Virginia. What is the purpose of the song? What are the elements of the song that give it purpose? Nancy? The love of her father. The love of her father as compared to... Now she says, I'm proud to be a Cole Meyers daughter. Why did she say that? Humble beginnings. Okay. So, in the house that she grew up in, now some of you might not be your taste in music, maybe you didn't grow up in any place like that, but what did you identify with this song? Your core. Your core, but there was love. Family was more important than money. Love was more important than money. The mom and the dad in this song did what? Worked hard. They sacrificed. They didn't complain. Now obviously she could have told a very different story, if she had lied to, perhaps if her child was different, that she's bitter that she grew up in a no place town, and her father never had enough money. They had eight kids, way too many kids, never should have had that many kids, couldn't provide adequately for her, maybe she felt neglected, or you don't hear any of that in this song, do you? What's the message of this song? Now this is 1970, so she's standing there, she's on TV. What's the other, what's another message that comes through this song? She had humble beginnings, but things have changed. She's grateful. She's grateful for having grown up in a shack. And like at the end of the song she goes there, and there's nothing there but the floors, nobody lives there. She's grateful for having grown up in a shack, and now obviously things are better for her. Loretta Lynn became a major country music star. This song itself was a huge, was a huge hit. So why was this song so popular in 1970? I think a lot of people could identify with it. I know some of you, I'm looking at you Joanne, Joanne, we talked in Sunday School Class, she grew up in Mississippi. Did you grow up in a family of well? Did you identify with some of the things in this song? Yeah. Family. Yeah, family love, even though you were poor. A lot of people can identify with a song like this. The reason I wanted us to look at this song was because in many ways Deuteronomy chapter 8 is just like this song. And in a couple ways it's different, and we're going to see that. This is Moses again, Israel is about to cross over into the promised land from the wilderness. And Moses is basically giving the last sermons, and the whole book of Deuteronomy, it's the second giving of the law, it's the last sermons, and so Deuteronomy 8 starts like this. As we talked about last week, there's a lot of, be careful to obey in the book of Deuteronomy. Be careful to follow every command I am giving you today, so that you may live and increase and may enter and possess the land the Lord promised on oath to your ancestors. Remember how the Lord your God led you all the way in the wilderness these forty years to humble and test you in order to know what was in your heart, whether or not he would keep his commands. He humbled you, causing you to hunger, and then feeding you with manner which either you nor your ancestors had known, to teach you that a man does not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God. Your clothes did not wear out, and your feet did not swell during these forty years. Know then in your heart that as a man disciplines his son, so the Lord your God disciplines you. Observe the commands of the Lord your God, walking in obedience to him and revering him, for the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land, a land with brooks, streams, and deep springs, a land that is rushing out into the valleys and the hills, a land with wheat and barley, vines and fig trees, pomegranates, olive oil, and honey, a land where bread will not be scarce, and you will lack nothing, a land where the rocks are iron, and you can dig copper out of the hills. When you have eaten and are satisfied, praise the Lord your God for the good land he has given you. Be careful that you do not forget the Lord your God family to observe his demands, his law and his decrees that I am giving you this day. Otherwise when you eat and are satisfied, when you build fine houses and settle down, and when your herds and your flocks grow large and your silver and gold increase and you have multiplied, then your heart will become proud and you will forget the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. He led you through the vast and dreadful wilderness, that thirsty and waterless land with its venomous snakes and scorpions. He brought you water out of hard rock. He gave you manna to eat in the wilderness, something your ancestors have never known, to humble and to test you so that in the end it might go well with you. You may say to yourself, my power and the strength of my hands have produced this wealth for me, but remember the Lord your God, for it is he who gives you the ability to produce wealth and so confirms his covenant which he swore to your ancestors as it is today. So, what do you find to be the same in Deuteronomy as in Loretta Lentz's song and what do you find to be different in Deuteronomy as in Loretta Lentz's song? Any ideas? Hope for the future. For the Israelites. Going through trials. And those trials testing you, developing you, molding you. What's different between the two songs? Because in some ways most of the sermon is a song. Gratitude. In one, Loretta Lentz is already in the promised land and she's already feeling grateful for, and this is ironic, she's feeling grateful for the poverty she endured. Where was the father and the mother in Loretta Lentz's song? They were helpless in a sense. The father was working in a coal mine and did all the work he could so I know he went to work in the coal mine. In the day he was working in the fields we'd wonder when the poor man slept. Had eight children. The mother was always washing by hand, having to sew things, trying to keep track of the eight children. They were poor. But in this story, however, God's position is different. God rescues them out of Egypt but brings them into the desert and God himself tests them. It's a different relationship because whereas the father and the mother of Loretta Lentz would say, I'm just doing the best I can, the Lord obviously has power and the Lord obviously has options and the Lord chooses to bring them into the desert to test them, to mold them, and to shape them. And this I think for many of us might cause problems because we would say what gives God the right to bring me into the wilderness? If God is able, shouldn't God give me comfort? If God is able, shouldn't God fix all those things in my life that are inconvenient? If God is able, shouldn't God have always given me nice and good things? And then there's the question of why remember? You see what's interesting about Loretta Lentz's song is she's basically saying now that I'm a country music star, now that I can be on 1970s TV in this flowing green dress, if you watch the video carefully you see there's a little TV in the living room and it reminds you of TV programs in the 70s. But I mean this for 1970s she had reached the peak of her fame and she obviously by virtue of this song became a very wealthy woman. But inherent in the song is this idea, it's the same thing that's inherent in the text which is Loretta in a sense sang in 1970 if it hadn't been for Butcher Holler and my humble upbringings I might get lost in this world of wealth and comfort and power My humble beginnings keeps me rooted in a way and if I forget today where I came from I'll be lost for sure. It's very interesting in fact if you read chapter 9 as well, chapter 9 goes more into how Israel behaved in the wilderness because Israel as we know after having gone through all of this, Israel did not behave well in the wilderness. Israel in the wilderness did very natural things. Israel got scared, Israel got rabid, Israel reached for whatever would comfort her immediately or seem to give her security immediately and in fact God brings her into the wilderness to develop her and to test her and to raise her and to give her character and so now on the cusp of the promised land, Moses is saying to them God is going to give you this land and it's a good land and unlike the wilderness in this good land, the rain is going to come fairly predictably and the food is going to grow out of the ground and the trees are going to bear fruit and there's going to be minerals that you can use to develop us your civilization and in the promised land, God is in fact going to go in there and in chapter 9 talks more about this, God is going to give you farms in fields that you did not clear and he's going to give you houses that you did not build and he's going to give you plots and herds that you did not have to raise up why is it that let's talk about two billionaires, let's talk about Bill and Melinda Gates and why Bill and Melinda Gates, Bill is one of the wealthiest men in the world at some point is via Microsoft he had a net worth of somewhere in the neighborhood of 80 to 90 billion dollars and his desire is to give pretty much all of his money away and not leave it to his children, why can he do that? then he tries he tries the people that he loves he tries the people that he loves the Lord tests them the Lord understands this dynamic that Loretta Lipp picks up and he says I cannot trust you in the promised land if you forget the wilderness now what's tricky here is that the Lord is not going to take every generation out of the promised land and bring them into the wilderness and so what he says is you need to remember the wilderness in order to live rightly in the promised land the difficulty that we have here, unlike Loretta Lipp's parents who seem like victims is why doesn't God just always give us everything that we need now it's very convenient for Loretta Lipp to be standing there up on stage on TV in 1970 singing this song with then probably hundreds of thousands of dollars pouring in, not billions of dollars and now reaching stardom knowing that there are how many others who are still living in the wilderness why does she know, how does she remember, how can she be grateful for what happened it's easier to deal with God but God also says it's easier to ignore God when times are good, so we must remember what's interesting is that it's this passage that Jesus cites when Jesus goes into the wilderness and when Jesus goes into the wilderness and fasts for 40 days, it's voluntary and in a sense in this passage in the New Testament after Jesus is baptized, he goes into the wilderness and he stays there for 40 days and he fasts and we think why would Jesus do this? Jesus is doing this to remember the wilderness, to reenact the wilderness because he knows that he's about to enter a situation where he will be using his power and his great temptation will be in fact, as if we could imagine to forget his power then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil after passing 40 days and 40 nights he was hungry and the tempter came to him and said, if you are the son of God tell these stones to become bread and Jesus answered, it is written, man shall not live by bread alone, but in every word that comes from the mouth of God. Deuteronomy 8 So what point is Jesus making? The point he's making is that we are so as physical creatures tempted to believe that our life flows from our strength from our abilities, our life flows from our opportunities and our ability to secure what we want and what we need around us and to guarantee it and the wilderness says, no we imagine we are self sufficient, but the wilderness teaches us that we are not. Now obviously I'm using wilderness as a metaphor, I'm not just talking about going and camping for a weekend up in the hills or something, but I think most of you know what I'm talking about because there are times in your life when you have been in the wilderness or there are times in your life when you will go through the wilderness, when you will go into times and places, you will go into things that you cannot change there will be difficulties that you cannot fix, there will be relationships that you cannot mend, there will be situations job situations, family situations, church situations, financial situations, medical situations that you have absolutely no control over and you look to God and say, why God can't you fix this? and then you may read Deuteronomy 8 and even hear hmm, maybe he doesn't want to fix it now for you maybe he wants you to be in the wilderness maybe he wants you to learn and to grow but it's really misery we are easily corrupted by comfort and plenty. If you look at the character of Israel and then transplant them into the promised land and give them strength and give them power and give them self-sufficiency, they will know nothing of God and even in the wilderness we are often unfaithful to God and our neighbor and in it for ourselves it is funny that on one hand suffering can make people more noble and it can bring out the worst in people and it does both the strange thing about Jesus is that he freely chooses to go into the wilderness and the lingering question that we have from Deuteronomy which is when we are in the wilderness and when God isn't fixing things and when God doesn't seem to be cooperating or coming through with the implicit way that we think he needs to, what does that mean? Does that mean God doesn't care? Does that mean that God doesn't love us? Does that mean that God can't be trusted? and the answer to that question is actually Jesus himself because Jesus didn't need to come Jesus didn't need to rescue, but he comes into the wilderness to suffer with us, to suffer for us and sometimes even to suffer instead of us and the whole narrative of Jesus is only understood with Deuteronomy in the background the Jews expected as with the Romans and the Greeks that a son of God would come in like Hercules and display mighty power and to be rewarded with comfort and with strength and instead Jesus comes and he's called by the prophet Isaiah a man of sorrows and by his stripes we are healed GK Chesterton said this I would maintain that thanks are the highest form of thought and that gratitude is happiness doubled by wonder The Loretta Lynne song works because she's in the promised land but it also works because the song also reflects as does Deuteronomy she basically says I could not live in the promised land if I had not been in the wilderness in the wilderness God grew me up in the wilderness God shaped me, in the wilderness God gave me some of the most precious things that even the promised land can't give She said that Loretta Lynne had grown up probably like her own children in a house full of wealth, in a house of comfort in a house of plenty Loretta Lynne's daughters might grow up singing her song but they didn't live her song. What does Loretta never forget about that country house? The love of her parents which is exactly what Deuteronomy is saying, I brought you into the desert so that you could see me, so that you could know me so that you could learn to trust me because if you would ask Loretta Lynne, what means more to you? Your fame your wealth, your status or the love that you experience from your parents I say if you talk to Loretta Lynne's therapist they would probably say if she didn't have the love of the parents no matter how much money she had later, she'd forever be in therapy Why does God bring us into the wilderness? Does it mean he doesn't love us? Does it mean he has abandoned us? It feels that way and even when we're in the wilderness we grab whatever we can to try to make life work and to try to make things feel better God brings us to the place where we realize he is what matters, it's his love that matters. I told you the story before of Mabel it's in a John Orkford book where this pastor is going through a nursing home, he's visiting someone else and finds this woman horribly injured in a hallway that reeks of urine and almost passes her by and she says something to him that makes him stop and he visits with her and he expects her to sit down and whine and complain to him about oh this nursing home is horrible and my family never visits and I'm horribly disfigured by cancer and I'm in terrible pain and he sits down by the woman and she instead gives him this flower that she's holding and says I want you to have this this flower is beautiful but I can't see it or smell it and he begins talking to her only to discover that this woman is not in misery but is in joy in this crappy nursing home because what she has is Jesus' love and it sounds happy, it sounds strange but this is the kind of character and love that wilderness can create that affluent Selva does and so the words are twofold this morning on one hand if you're in the wilderness hang on look for manak, look for the ways in which he's sustaining you even if he's failing your expectations in many ways and the other hand if you're not in the wilderness now if life is good and there's breakfast on the table every morning and there's a roof over your head and things are good remember the wilderness, remember that what you have is a gift even your ability to make wealth is a gift from God and remember where you came from so that you may live in the promised land with the values of the wilderness that's prayer where the wilderness is so often much easier to handle than memory because when we're in the midst of it we're in pain and we're in fear and we're in panic and we're willing to throw you off as quickly as we're willing to throw anything off but most often Lord you box us in and you call us to yourself and in the wilderness you teach us and you mold us and you shape us and you make us ready for the promised land may we Lord rest in you may we Lord put our hope in you and if we're in the wilderness give us the strength to endure and the power to see through the clouds to know that the suffering is only for a short time and if we're in the promised land may we remember our trials and our temptations in the wilderness and may we hold them fast so that the power of the promised land, the corruptions do not change us so that we may actually fully enjoy all of your gifts when they come to us hear our prayer in the name of Jesus, Amen Amen Would you stand please