https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FEOmeYlLuTA

 And so, for the Jewish leaders, this was a problem. Why are these Greeks looking for Jesus? And who were these Greeks? Now these were actually not people who were Greeks, ethically. These were Greek-speaking Jews. These were Jews who had moved to other places of the Roman Empire and made a life and made a living, but they were observant Jews, and so every year or every few years they would go down to Jerusalem to celebrate the Passover feast. So these were fairly hard-core Jews in that even in the midst of the great Roman Empire, they wanted to still be Jews. And they went to the synagogue and they wanted to be Jews enough so that they would go down to Jerusalem at great cost and no little hazard, and they would celebrate the Passover at Jerusalem. But they had likely heard about this Jesus, whether it was from the triumphal entry that we'll talk about next week, or whether it was from the rumors of the spherical worker, and you must have to ask, why do the found still seek? Why do those who are, for the most part, comfortable in their faith, still dissatisfied with it? Enough, for example, that these Greeks think, well, being a Jew is good, and I believe in Yahweh, and I believe in his law, but this Jesus is interesting and I want to check him out. What's also very interesting is that we learn almost nothing more about these Greeks. We will learn a lot about people like them when the story goes over to the book of Acts, and we learn and we meet, for example, the apostle Paul in our 930 Sunday school class. We've been getting pretty in depth into Paul and the Roman world. And so now these Greeks come to Jesus and they approach Philip. Now it's important to know that Philip, now I might say Philip to you, you might say, yeah, that's a common name to Philip. Well, in the ancient world, if you would name your son Philip, it was making a statement. Have any of you ever heard of Alexander the Great? Raise your hand. Lots of you. Alexander the Great, very famous man. Anybody know Alexander's father? Philip of Macedonia, king of Macedonia. And so in the ancient world, to name your son Philip was a quirk. It would be like naming your child Barack because you love Barack Obama, or naming your child George because you like King George III, or George Bush. But George is such a common name and Barack isn't. Nobody today names their son Adolf for obvious reasons. So they approach Philip because the Greeks know, well, at least this Philip guy will like to speak Greek, and he'll put up each show. And so Philip goes to Andrew, who's older and probably more senior in the inner circle, and together they both stir up enough courage to go to Jesus, who's been doing a lot of things lately, to say, could you cut out a little slice first, first, what are probably some wealthy and prominent and important Greek-speaking Jews would like to have a little meeting with you. We don't know whether or not they ever met. Here's the thing about us. We are rebellious and prompt to wander. And so when we come into a church or find a religion, we very quickly want to say, well, I want to make sure this church and this religion meets me where I am. Every now and then, you know, I'll get a word from a politician who will say to me, pastor, I'd like to come to your church. And I'll say, oh, we meet at 11 o'clock. You can come. But behind it is something like, it's usually around election time. Pastor, I'd like to come to your church to talk from the pulpit. I don't do that. What do you mean you don't do that? I don't do that. We as a church don't do that. And there are reasons for this. Because the politician would like to somehow use the church to pursue their political career. Okay, but we don't do that. We're rebellious and prone to wander. And we very quickly, when we find something, say, how can I make this work for me? You know, we're also not easily satisfied. C.S. Lewis makes the point at the beginning of his book, We Are Christianity, that there's something funny about us. That, you know, when you're hungry, there's food. And when we're feeling frisky, there's sex. And when there are things to address many of the desires that we have. But C.S. Lewis notes that we all seem to have desires that this world can't satisfy. And he makes the observation, this is a very funny thing, if all we are are simply evolved apes. We seem to be made for another world that we hear rumors of. And we feel it in our guts. But we can't find it here. That could be a part of it. And I think the third part, which C.S. Lewis also explores in his book, I've read and observed that he wrote after his wife died of cancer, sometimes pain rips us apart so much, we thrash around looking for satisfaction. And again, I think about my friends in Minnesota, for whom their life has just been ripped up. And I would not be surprised to see a number of them go on personal journeys of looking and wondering, trying to find something that will piece their hearts together. After hearing that these Greeks wanted audience with him, Jesus says a very strange thing. He replied, it would be like saying, I asked if I could have a word with you, and then I launched you to a sermon. What? The Greeks want to talk to you. Jesus stacks and says, the time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. Wait a minute, I thought you wanted a lunch meeting. What's this business about being glorified? What this says basically is that Jesus was telling the time, and Jesus was getting famous enough now that not only was he causing a stir in Galilee and Judea, but people were starting to come from other places of the world. His rumors had been spreading, and if his ministry is going to last longer, he will not only be a concern among the Jews, he will be a concern among the Romans and the Greeks and everywhere else in the world. Jesus obviously has a plan, and the plan is not to the liking of any of his friends or disciples, because he stops and he says, the time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. Now as with many things in the Gospel of John, you can understand this in two ways. The Son of Man figure, as we talk about quite often, is from Daniel 7, and in Daniel 7, which is in the Old Testament, there's this grand vision of the ancient days of the God of Heaven and Earth putting down the empires of the earth, and then appears this figure called the Son of Man, and he is given a kingdom that will last forever. So when the Greeks come to Jesus, and Jesus says, now is the time for the Son of Man to be glorified, some of his followers might have listened to that and said, oh good, now Jesus is not only going to topple the powers of Jerusalem, he's going to topple the empire in Rome. We've been waiting for this moment. These Greeks coming to Jesus is the beginning of Jesus conquering the world. And what can they do? This is the beginning of Jesus conquering the world. But all of their imaginations say, Jesus will be more famous and he'll take out the Romans and the Jews sitting in charge of Jerusalem. Jesus will become more famous and then will conquer Mesopotamia and Egypt, and Jesus will become more powerful, and then will conquer Greece, and then Jesus will become more powerful, and we and our armies, just like Alexander the Great, will march in and conquer Rome, and Jesus will take Caesar's throne and be King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This is Jesus coming into his glory. But then they hear what Jesus says next. I tell you the solid truth. Unless a curdle of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it produces much grain. The one who loves his life destroys it, and the one who hates his life in this world guards it for eternal life. If anyone wants to serve me, he must follow me, and where I am, my servant will be too. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him. You see, again, when Jesus says, Now is the time for the Son of Man to be glorified, everyone's thinking he's going to gather an army, and he's going to do what everyone in the world imagines he will do, and he will put down his enemies, and he will stand and triumph over them, and all of his disciples will be around him. And then Jesus talks about wheat, and he even makes a scientific mistake in the middle of it, because, Jack, let me ask you a question. When you put rice into the field and you put it on the ground, does that rice actually die? The curdle is consumed by a living plant. Ooh! There's a son that all in and of itself, because isn't that exactly the point Jesus makes here? They imagine that Jesus is going to enact my well-being at the expense of all my enemies, and Jesus says, No! You're all going to benefit, because this little kernel of rice, or of wheat, will be consumed by a new life, the kind you can't imagine. And he goes on to give an application. The one who hates his life destroys it, and the one who hates his life and the world guards it for eternal life. The one who loves his life destroys it. The one who hates his life and this life and this world will guard it for eternal life. What is Jesus saying? Jesus is saying this. I'm going to give myself for this world. Everyone around me is waiting for me to gather an army, and to gather some money, and to gather an ether following, and to march out and kill and destroy and tear down, and run a campaign, and run a revolution. But that's not what's going to happen. I'm going to sacrifice myself, and all of you will benefit. C.S. Lewis, in an essay, really a sermon, called The Grand Miracle, talked about the fact that if you look in creation, there's a lot of this stuff that goes on, and Jack just perfectly articulated it here. This grain of rice goes into the ground, and is consumed by a living plant. And this very process that Jack just articulated to you, is in fact the process that everyone in this room is dependent upon every day, whether you're eating rice, and Jack would say, eat more rice, whether you're eating rice, or potatoes, or wheat, or corn. And it is in a sense also true even of your birth, because every mother who gives birth puts her life on the line for the child that will come. C.S. Lewis looks at this and says, there's something in creation that bears witness to this. Now, as soon as you have thought of it, this pattern of the huge dive down to the bottom, into the depths of the universe, and coming up again into the light, everyone will see at once how it is imitated and echoed by the principles of the natural world. The descent of the seed into the soil, and it's rising again in the plants. There are all sorts of things that are on spiritual life, where a thing has to be killed and broken, in order that it may become bright and strong and splendid. And many of you know this in your own hearts. There are things in your heart that you say, this is good. But in order for it to be transformed, it must be consumed, it must be killed and broken and destroyed for something glorious and splendid to take its place. Jesus continues, Now my soul is greatly distressed, and what should I say? Father, deliver me from this hour? No, but for this very reason I have come to this hour. Father, glorify your name. And a voice came from heaven, I have glorified it, and I will glorify it again. And the crowd that stood there and heard the voice said that it had thunder. Others said an angel had spoken to him. So Jesus realized that he is the grain of rice, he is the grain of wheat that will be passed into the soil, and he himself will be consumed. He looks at this and says, I don't want to be consumed. I want to live. And so he stands on the precipice and he debates, and in the end he says, I will be consumed so that my Father can have glory. And here in this moment, it only is found in the Gospel of John, in this moment God speaks from heaven and says, I have glorified it, and I will. And the crowd marvels. Now, one of the important things to recognize here is that everyone in the world will read the Gospel of John, I promise everyone, at some point. And what Jesus is saying here is striking at the heart of polytheism, which was the general religion in all of the world then. The fundamental insight of polytheism, which distinguishes it from polytheism, is that the supreme power governing the world is devoid of interests and biases, and therefore is unconcerned with the mundane desires, cares, and worries of humans. It is pointless to ask this power for victory in war, for health or for reign, because it is all encompassing vantage point. It makes no difference whether a particular people wins or loses, whether a particular city prospers or withers, whether a particular person recuperates or dies. The Greeks did not waste any sacrifices on faith, and the Hindus build no temples to Atma. The point is that throughout the world, many, many people would say, there's a high creator God who made this world, but he clearly doesn't care. This world is clearly governed by chaos or faith or all of these other things or all of these polytheists trying to manipulate the gods to get power to give me an advantage. And here at this moment, what Jesus says is that it's all wrong. That the God of this universe does in fact care, and the God doesn't just care about nations, but he cares about you. And he cares about what we think, and that he in fact wishes to be glorified. And there's Jesus standing here who will fall like a seed from a farmer's bag onto the earth and be consumed by the plant that will grow. What he will grow is the evidence of the concern of this God. Jesus said, the voice has not come for my benefit, but for yours. Now is the judgment of this world. Now the ruler of this world will be driven out, and I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself. Now to set this to clearly, to indicate clearly what kind of death he was going to die. Now, we should have a little perspective here, because here we have this Jesus of Nazareth who caused a stir in a fairly isolated, fairly backwards place in the world, and he said something pretty alarming things about himself. Well, there's lots of people in the world who say alarming things about themselves. David Koresh, Jim Jones, lots of folks. Adolf Hitler, who caused a much bigger stir, declared that he was beginning a thousand year reign of his empire over the world. Lots of people claim things. It's really amazing that the words of this one Jewish man are being proclaimed not just in this place this morning, but all over the world, that Jesus' way of changing the world, which involved his dying, his becoming the seed from which the plant would grow, actually worked. But no other thing has ever worked. That Jesus' way of overturning the power of this world, and Jesus' way of demonstrating that the creator God loves this world, and is committed to it, actually bore fruit. A minute ago I asked how many of you knew Alexander the Great books? Raise your hand. I asked how many of you can quote Alexander the Great? Alexander the Great was, in many respects, claimed to be the son of a god. Alexander the Great conquered and took and strove. We're not here today to celebrate the life of Alexander the Great, but we're still talking about Jesus. I wonder what that sound is. Who's the speaker? It doesn't sound like a good channel. Oh, it's just a gas tank. Oh, good. But the... T.S. Lewis notes, this statement would have gotten the attention of visiting Greece. Whether you imagine the decay, pain, or chaos of this world as a function of its order, our rebellion, or the intentional work of other spiritual forces whose goal it is to rob God of the humanity and the glory desired by its creator, what Jesus says here is astounding. The moment the adversaries, human and spiritual, of Jesus seem to secure their victory will be the moment Jesus finally triumphs over it. It will be the moment that nature copies in the cycle of life or the gift of motherhood or the sacrifice of the hero for his health and followers. Jesus declares that whatever nuggets of wisdom or insight the Greeks hope to secure by a sit-down with Jesus will be overshadowed by what Jesus himself will accomplish on the cross and in the empty tomb. You and I live in the age of decay. I want Lily to throw up her hands and say, here we go again, the pastor talks about the age of decay. I know Curtis is on the TV, he's probably rolling his eyes if I hear him. The reason I talk about it is that it's true. This is a world where if we're strong and healthy we might live 70, 80, 94, 100 years. But in the scope of this world, it's just a short time. This is a world where young men fall into despair, write suicide notes on Facebook, and take their lives before their parents can rescue them. This is a world where accidents come and take the lives of our loved ones before we can do anything about it. This is a world where the things we put together can be ruptured carelessly by people who care nothing for us or the consequences of what they do. That is this world. It's an old thing to say this is not just a product of chaos. It's a bolder thing to say the Creator God loves it. How much of that is it? Do you feel the pain of this bitter and cruel world? Jesus says, you need to look to the Son of Man. He was lifted up to do untold reading into the mockery and entertainment of his enemies. Because the Son of Man does it, not us. I think about my friend racing to rescue the Son of Man and getting there too late. I think about when we get sick, collaborating with the doctors, working the best we can to address our medical things, knowing that we might win this battle, but one day we all lose the war. It is not our capacity to meet him, but his capacity to meet us. He goes to the cross and dies. And the great miracle is fulfilled. The question of course then is how do we respond? Do we believe it? How does it change our lives when we think death in this world is not the end? When we think my relationship with Jesus is what will endure? When we think the legacy of what I leave by sacrificially loving those around me is what will persist? C.S. Lewis in concluding this essay says this, that is why I think this grand miracle is the missing chapter in this novel. The chapter on which the whole plot turns. That is why I believe that God really has died down into the bottom of creation and has come up bringing the whole redeemed nature on his shoulder. The miracles that have already happened are of course the scriptures so often say, the first fruits of that cosmic summer which is presently coming on. Christ has risen and so we shall rise. Saint Peter for a few seconds walked on the water and the day will come when there will be a re-ade universe infinitely obedient to the will of glorified and obedient men. That is C.S. Lewis writing the book. When we can do all things, when we shall be those gods that we are described as being in scripture. To be sure it feels witchery enough still, but often in the very early spring it feels like that. Two thousand years are only a day or two by this scale. A man really ought to say the resurrection happened two thousand years ago in the same spirit that he says I saw a crocus yesterday. Because we know what is coming behind the crocus. The spring comes slowly down this way, but the great thing is that the corner has been turned. There is of course this difference that in the natural spring the crocus cannot choose whether it will respond or not. We can. We have the power either of withstanding the spring and sinking back into the cosmic winter or of going on to those fine midsummer pumps in which our leader, the son of man, already dwells and to which he is calling us. It remains with us to follow or not. To die this winter or to go on into that spring and into that summer. So why do the fountains still seek? I think it's because we are looking for that summer. And the question you have to answer is where will you find it? And what I believe the gospel says is you will only find it in Jesus and that is the happy place. Lord this world is broken and it is our misery that we cannot save. Forgive us Lord for imagining ourselves to be what we really aren't. Help us Lord to know that in the resurrection of Jesus the spring has come. The flowers are up, the trees are blooming, and the summer is almost here. Help us Lord to turn this way when our hearts are broken. To turn towards you when life doesn't work. And to put our hope in that seed that falls into the ground and is consumed by the glorious plant that brings life to us all. When we look at the small miracles around us, of seeds germinating, of childbirth, of spring, and of winter turning to spring turning to summer, may we have hope that in fact the King of the Universe is not a loop in far off, has come to us, and has made his tent among us, and has rescued us from ourselves. Here are clear, in the name of Jesus, Amen. Amen.