https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=T8sQuhroDBg

 Psalm 95, Come, let us sing for joy to the Lord, let us shout aloud to the rock of our salvation. But it's come before him with thanksgiving and it stole him with music and song. The song begins with an invitation to gratitude. The Psalmist asks us to stop and to look and to express our gratitude to our God. For the Lord is the great God, the great King above all gods. In his hand are the depths of the earth and the mountain peaks belong to him. The sea is his, for he has made it and his hands form the dry land. We already got into this in our reason, in our prayer time. Again, we so seldom stop and ponder the basics of this world that not only make life possible, but make life enjoyable. Jack mentioned this miracle of seed and how with rice seed they come up out of the water and produce abundantly. There's not just rice, of course. There's corn and there's wheat and there's fruit trees and there are animals that we can husband. This world is just replete with blessings and blessings we walk right by. Simple things in physics that that apologists sometimes debate. The fact that water when it freezes, unlike almost most other substances, when it freezes ice floats. If ice sank, life wouldn't be possible in this world. And as you go around in science, you see again and again and again the mysteries built into our creation that actually make life good and possible and potent. And the psalmist reveals this, for the Lord is the great God, the great King above all gods and his hands are the depths of the earth and the mountain peaks belong to him. The sea is his, for he made it and his hands form the dry land. The psalmist brings us to an invitation to worship, which is our expression of gratitude. Come let us bow down and worship. Let us kneel before the Lord our maker, for he is our God and we are the people of his pasture, the flock under his care. Sometimes people wonder, why should we worship? Why should we gather together? Why should we sing psalms? Why should we read these liturgies? Why should we say thanks to God? Basically it's this is what we do out of gratitude. This is where our hearts should go in terms of if you've received, say thanks. Now Psalm 95 makes an interesting turn at this point. Today if you only would hear his voice, which is interesting because again the idea is that God's voice is out there all the time. We see it in creation and again for Jack to look at the seed after how many years have you been growing rice Jack? 40 years. To still look at the seed and say isn't this a marvel? And I think many of us in our own areas of work find things like this and we stop and say isn't it amazing that this is the way the creation is? The psalmist implies that when we see this we hear the voice of God and we hear the voice of God speaking his grace and his love to us and his work on our behalf. But here the psalmist notes that often we don't hear this voice. Today if you would hear his voice do not pardon your heart as you did at Maribor, as you did at the Bay of Manasseh in the wilderness where your ancestors tested me and they tried me though they had seen what I did. They've been working through the Old Testament and you might remember it's here in Exodus that the Lord brings them to a place where the water was bitter and so there was difficulty and as is mostly the case when things are good we kind of trip along and we might write about this and that but when things get hard this is where we're tested and the question is will they continue to trust? Will they continue to believe that God took them out of Egypt and is for them even when times are difficult and Israel fails that test and they rumble at Maribor and they basically tell the Lord okay when things are good I'll accept it but when things get a little bit difficult I'll be your adversary. Those of you who are around quite a bit know I continue to repeat to you misery, deliverance, gratitude, misery, deliverance, gratitude which is basically the shape of the Heideberg Catechism and the reason I do it is because I think this movement of misery, deliverance, gratitude is a way that in fact we can face the adversities of life. Life is hard and life always brings difficult things and so misery will be with you but then we recall the deliverance of our Lord and that turns our hearts towards gratitude. The difficulty is that when we harden our hearts we usually want it this way we have misery, we experience misery and we attempt a self-deliverance either through trying to manipulate God, trying to put God in our debt, force him to give us what we want or need or try to coerce our neighbor and then the sum of this is resentment which is the opposite of thanksgiving and it's actually the opposite of happiness. So often we imagine that life works this way if circumstances are good we're happy and if circumstances are bad we're sad. What you soon discover if you get to know people enough in this world is that there are many people with amazing circumstances and they're miserable and there are many people with very difficult circumstances and they're happy and so what misery, deliverance, gratitude hopes to deliver to us is in fact joy. Misery attempts at self-deliverance usually leads to resentment which is unhappiness. The psalmist continues, for 40 years I was angry with that generation I said there are people whose hearts go astray they have not known my ways so I declare an oath in my anger they shall not enter my rest. We talked last Sunday about the book of numbers and this this whole story is in the book of numbers about the counting of the people, the rebellion at the before they were going to go into the land the first time and then the dying of those people and then the next generation. The point of it is rest the Lord wanted to lead them into their land of rest and that echoes Genesis where on the seventh day the Lord rests and this is all about God giving us what we need and in fact what we really want and the point here of the psalm is all you have to do to receive God's rest is receive. Don't harden your heart don't try to manipulate him or or to plane your way into the kingdom. Now what might be difficult about this psalm is that this is where psalm 95 ends and as I was preparing this the first half of the psalm is this lovely psalm of thanksgiving the second half of the psalm goes back into one of the ugliest points in Israel's story it ends on this note they shall never enter my rest and it's like what kind of a psalm is this if you read the psalms you'll often note that the psalms have flows. Another interesting thing about the psalms that we know in a number of different areas is that the psalms were also intended to be often read in clumps or grooves and so I don't want us to end here at the end of psalm 95 but I want us to continue in this psalm 96 because the flow really does continue so we have the invitation to praise and then we have the the invitation to worship and then we have the application which is when the Lord speaks to you don't harden your heart even if it brings you into something difficult and something testing and challenging don't harden your heart continue to trust them and psalm 96 picks up from there sing to the Lord a new song now a new song for the Hebrews was a song of a new deliverance a new song wasn't just a song that they made up because I think I'd like to write a new song it was a song that God has delivered me again that I was in this tough spot and I didn't know what he would do I did not harden my heart but I decided though he slay me in the words of joe yet will I trust him so now psalm 96 picks up on that deliverance sing to the Lord a new song sing to the Lord of the earth sing to the Lord praise his name proclaim his salvation day after day declare his glory among the nations his marvelous deeds among all the people for great is the Lord and most worthy of most worthy of the most worthy of praise he is to be feared above all gods for all gods of the heavens are idols but the Lord made the heavens splendor and majesty are before him strength and glory are in this sanctuary ascribe to the Lord all you families of nations ascribe to the Lord glory and strength ascribe to the Lord the glory knew his name bringing offerings to the sanctuary come into his course worship the Lord in the splendor of his holiness tremble before him all the earth say among the nations the Lord reigns the world is firmly established it cannot be moved he will judge the peoples with equity let the heavens rejoice let the earth be glad let the sea resound and all that is in it let the fields be jubilant and everything in there but all the trees of the field sing with joy but all creation rejoice before the Lord for he comes he comes to judge the earth he will judge the world in righteousness and the peoples in his righteousness let's pray Lord, what you give us in your word Lord is a story and you invite us to live within and Lord many are making up their stories as they go along in this world and many are trying to figure out how to get better things than what they have to get their desires fulfilled and you ask Lord you ask us Lord to see ourselves within your story and you ask us to see ourselves within the story of Israel and you invite us Lord to take a look at the manifest joys and blessings that you give us to focus on them and to give you thanks and Lord you also warn us that in times of adversity and times of difficulty not to abandon not to manipulate not to betray not to cut and run but to continue to trust that if you blessed us in good times you will see us through the hard times so we ask Lord that we might continue to sing to you a new song a song of your salvation may we see that you are for us may we recognize all the ways that you've blessed us and may we Lord when there are times of struggle may we place our trust in you and may we look to you and see that even in the hard things you bless us still we ask Lord in this year to come that you would be with us Lord we continue to be frail creatures utterly dependent on things we can't control so Lord none of us knows what the new year will bring as a state Lord we certainly pray for rain because without rain the crops can't grow the food can't grow the the fish won't have water in the streams we won't have water to the cities we need your blessing if we would live Lord but the truth is that every day Lord we are dependent on you so may we base on what you've shown us in the past have good trust and faith in your mercy and your goodness moving forward and may we find our hope and our joy and our peace in you as you lead us into the land of rest hear our prayer in the name of Jesus amen okay that the sun shine and soar in fresh and green. All good is around us, for shep, and the moth, and thank the Lord, oh thank the Lord, for all is done. He only is the major of all things near and far. He takes away the power, he likes the England star. Now which hand bears the weight?