https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FZ6-BqE1Bmk

 She figured out how to turn off her mic. She's trying to talk to me now. She hasn't figured out how to turn off the camera. So, if you want to watch her on YouTube after the service, just go to the service. You're a near YouTube star, Nancy. What do you think of that? I've never seen that song. I think of Tim Blackman. I don't know. How many of you know Tim? He's back in the United States and he's now the chaplain of Wheat College in Illinois. That's what Tim's up to now. Okay. Well, Rod, you might have to click on it. By Sunday I checked in for church and it ran fine the whole time. There we go. You yourselves have seen everything the Lord your God has done for all the nations for your sake. It was the Lord your God who fought for you. Remember how I allotted as an inheritance for your tribes all the land of the nations that remain. The nations I conquered between the Jordan and the Mediterranean and the West. The Lord your God himself will push them out for your sake. He will drive them out before you and he will take possession of their land as the Lord your God promised you. Now fear the Lord and serve him with all faithfulness. Throw away the gods of your ancestors worship beyond the Euphrates River and the Egypt and serve the Lord. By serving the Lord seems undesirable to you and choose for yourselves this day whom you will serve. Whether the gods of your ancestors serve beyond the Euphrates or the gods of the Amorites whose land you are living. But as for me and my household we will serve the Lord. Then the people answered partly it from us to forsake the Lord to serve other gods. It was the Lord our God himself who brought us and our parents up out of Egypt from the land of slavery and performed those great signs before our eyes. He protected us from our entire journey among all the nations through which we travel. And the Lord drove out before us all the nations including the Amorites who lived in this land. We too will serve the Lord because he is our God. This is a wonderful text because preachers love to use it and deliver to the congregation a challenge. And they want the challenge to stand up and say as for me and my household we will serve the Lord. That's a wonderful thing. The Pew Research Foundation does a lot of research about religiosity and religion in America. And the big development over the last seven years has been the rise of the nuns. Now with Pope Francis it's not those kinds of nuns. It's nuns, N-O-N-E-S. Religious nuns, a shorthand we use to refer to people who self-identify as atheists or aggastics as well as those who say they're religious, nothing in particular. Now they've got roughly 23% of the U.S. adult population. This is a stark contrast from 2007. The last time a similar Pew study was conducted when 16% of Americans were nuns. During this time period Christians have fallen from 78% to 71%. And now when we say Christians we don't mean people who go to church or people who behave a certain way, just people who would give it a survey, ask what religion are you, will check off the Christian box. Overall religious unaffiliated people are more concentrated among the other adults than other age groups. 35% of millennials, those born between 1981 and 1996, are nuns. Again that's N-O-N-E-S, not N-U-N-S. In addition the unaffiliated as a whole are given even younger. The median age of unaffiliated adults is now 36 down from 38 in 2007, and significantly younger than the overall median age of U.S. adults in 2014 which is 46. So this development has obviously caused a lot of conversation among pastors and church leaders. Many of the stories you can find pretty regularly on blogs on the internet. This one just a few weeks ago by a woman named Goldie Taylor, it was on the Daily Beast called Losing My Religion in the Black South. In the United States the population with the highest concentration of not only people who profess to be Christians, but people who go to church and are active in their Christianity isn't part of that average Americans. And these are her words. Well letting go of Jesus was the hardest part. I cannot point to the day or the hour that it happened, but the notion that there is someone, a man no less, who loves me without condition or borders is now too difficult to embrace. I have earnestly tried to lead a good life, but I suppose it was soothing to believe that a mystical creature had paid for my many coils and saw the best in me when others would or could not. As a black woman living in America, who knows well the spiritual legacy of slavery, to walk away from those traditions has been nothing short of traumatic. Was heaven not accessible before we were chained and dragged to these shores, our bodies plundered and sold as chow? At this God ordained and anointed to middle passage, are the children who now live in war-ridden Sudan, walking miles for water each day, not worthy of this grace and mercy? Are there no gay or lesbian people in this heaven? Where do the transgender people go when they die? If I plant crops side by side and wear garments of mixed threads, who will be in charge of the stoning? Another woman, this article came out last year. The first woman was born and raised in the church, and in fact the article talks about her aunt who states she still greatly admires and talks with remorse about what it means to be a middle-aged African-American woman and not be doubts. This woman was not raised in the church but became a convert in her teen years. This was in Busby about a year ago. But my secret is this, even though I staked my life on an arbitrary historical document for six years, she means the Bible, I liked who I was when I was born again. I woke up each day determined to conquer my sinful nature, my id that was prone to thinking about myself and determined to put others first. What was interesting about this conversation is while the first woman really enjoyed being a Christian but felt moral qualms about the faith, the second woman actually makes the resignation that she was a better person when she was a Christian. I was more selfless. I was more caring and giving friend back then. I listened deeply instead of waiting for my turn to talk. I prayed for people and made care packages and wrote nice letters and volunteered. With a divine outlet compelling me to focus on something besides self-preservation, I felt free from the prison of ego. Which isn't to say that I can't do any of these things now. Today I can go to a beautiful and inspiring concert instead of a worship service. I can join a weekly book club instead of a Bible study to find community. I can still volunteer at the same homeless shelters and make the same darn care packages. I want desperately and intellectually to believe that you can feel those selfless feelings and be all this other focused person in secular minds and realms. But that anti-present inner light or whatever it was that compelled Christian me, as Jesus said in Luke, to deny myself daily, has long flickered out. I know, I think, that Christianity isn't real, but I misbelieving it was real. When I got confused in my career or hurt by a broken relationship, fellow Christians assured me that it was all part of God's plan to lead me to the right calling or the right person. Something that made me calmer and more willing to take risks. Now when things don't go the way I want, I claim to obey everything happens for a reason, sentiment. Or confront the fact that, stop, maybe life is meaningless, because now I can't view a trauma as just a rolling ball in some cosmic group-goldberg machine. These two women are obviously not alone. I know a lot of people in their age group, and older and younger, who have similar thoughts and feelings. And for whom, at some point in their life, might have stood up at a Joshua sermon and declared, as for me and my house, he will serve the Lord. And then it just kind of trickles away. I think if we were to bring these people and Joshua and his community together, probably the strangest contrast would be the Joshua folks not figuring out where this no-Gods land is. If you read Joshua's sermon, the contrast is quite clear. Joshua says, look, there are a lot of gods out there. And in fact, Abraham was a wandering Aramean who had plenty of idols. And the Patriarchs, remember what Rachel hides and steals from her father's household of Lavin, and keeps and verse out. The world was awash in gods. And so Joshua says, now look, there's a lot of gods you can follow, but you should serve the Lord. The idea that I can make life on my own, that I don't really need a god, that basically nature just kind of works by its own mechanisms, and to the degree that I have power and influence, I can kind of make life work by myself, this is a wholly new idea, something that really didn't emerge until 500 years ago. And so the question is, if we can imagine we can live without God or the gods, I think Joshua would ask, who then is your God? And I think the second woman would basically say, my God is me. It is me that I serve. It is me that directs what I do and what I don't want to do. Yeah, I want to be a moral person. I want to be a good person. But basically life is about getting what I want and trying to secure the kind of life I think I want to be to maybe demand or expect. One of the things that you realize in both of these stories is the question, what happens to our feelings? We can in one and both of these women, both of them write about their past when they were deeply involved in church and deeply feeling their Christian conviction, when they would deeply stand up and say with all honesty and integrity, I can't imagine ever walking away from God. I can't imagine ever walking away from God and then just kind of slither away. Some would probably say, well it's about our fears. And in fact, there's a lot to be said about this because one of the things that we recognize is that when we as people get afraid, we get religious. And so in 9-11, when the attacks happen in New York City churches, especially in New York and all over the country, everyone went to church. Two, three weeks later, not so much. When something happens and it grips our attention, oh we pray, that's what I would say. No atheist in the box, oh Lord, please rescue me. And once the rescue comes, we're not so hot anymore. Oh my God. The times are good. Actually Joshua talks about this. The Lord has driven out before you a great and powerful nation. To this day, no one has been able to withstand you. One of you rocks a thousand because the Lord your God fights for you just as he promised. So be very careful to love the Lord your God. If you turn away and ally yourselves with the survivors of these nations that remain among you, and if you get your married with them and associate with them, then you may be sure that the Lord your God will no longer drive out these nations before you. Instead they will become snares and traps for you, whips for your backs and thorns for your eyes, until you perish from this good land which the Lord your God has given you. This is probably exactly the kind of passage that the first woman would say, these cause me problems about Christianity. Would God act this way? Now I am about to go the way of all the earth, Joshua says. You know with all your heart and soul that not one of all the good promises the Lord your God gave you has failed. Every promise has been fulfilled. Not one has failed. Just as all the good things the Lord your God has promised you have come to you. So he will grave you all the evil things he has threatened, until the Lord your God has destroyed you from the good land he has given you. If you violate the covenant of the Lord your God which he commanded you, and go and serve other gods and bow down to them, the Lord's anger will burn against you, and you will quickly perish from the good land he has given you. And again I think a lot of people hearing this will say, well see pastor this is just a problem. Isn't this a means of manipulation and control? Aren't you basically promising that this God gives you conditional love, and that if you are obedient and a good person that good things happen, and if you do bad things that bad things happen. We know this isn't true, and in fact the Bible in many places notes that the evil prosper and the good perish. Does this even, does this God even mean what he says right here? Now what's interesting about this is that in many ways if you take this passage out of face value, you might say God is basically running a skinner box. How many of you know what a skinner box is? I have to go all the way back to high school to remember a skinner box. Does this ring a bell? You put the rat in a little box and you have a couple of different knobs, and the rat pretty quickly figures out if he pushes on one button, he gets a little hell of a food and eats it. If he pushes on the other button, he'll get a little shock from the grate underneath. What do you think is going to happen? The rat might not have a brain this big, but he's going to figure it out pretty fast. He's going to keep hitting that food button, and the food's going to keep coming and whoo-hoo! So on one hand if you read this Joshua passage you might be led to believe that God is running a lot of that skinner box, and Israel is the rat, and God is saying now if you do good things, I'll give you all the good things. And if you do bad things, I'm going to give you a shock. Is that how the story goes? Is this what God is doing? If this in fact was what God was doing, then Israel probably never would have failed, because we would imagine that Israel would have done what was in its own self-interest, and it would keep abiding by the law, and God would keep rewarding them. Why would there have been any problem if in fact God was just setting up a skinner box for them? This is also ironically the heart of the accusation that Satan gives in the book of Job. Satan comes to God's court, and God is sitting there, and God says, God says, okay Satan, where have you been? What have you seen? And Satan looks around and says, ah, people. And God says, how do you consider my servant Job? And Satan says, Job is only good because you reward him. In a sense what he's saying is that Job is like that rat in the skinner box, and he figured out which butt of the bush to get the little pellet, and he's only good because you reward him. How many of you know what happens next? God says to Satan, okay, let's find out. Take away all my blessings, and let's see what Job does. But don't touch his life. And so God does. His children are killed, his property is devastated and robbed, and things get so bad that his wife turns to Job and says, curse God and die. So, is that fate? And here's the other thing about people. People are funny about their skinner boxes. Why is it that people who are wealthy and powerful stumble in spectacularly stupid ways? Don't we see this with politicians doing things that wreck their careers? People with enormous wealth, power, popularity, everything you could possibly imagine, regularly sabotage their own lives. Why? I don't know why. This is how we are though, isn't it? If we're rats in a skinner box, we're awfully stupid rats, because we regularly when we have things good, destroy them for ourselves. You see, I think the truth is that Joshua, in fact, knows this. Because what he says is this. Joshua said to the people, you are not able to serve the Lord. Excuse me? You just said if I follow his commandments, he'll bless me. And if we turn away from his commandments, he'll punish us. And now you tell us we can't do it? He is a holy God. He is a hellish God. He will not forgive your rebellion and your sins. If you forsake the Lord and serve foreign gods, he will turn and bring disaster on you and make an end of you after he has been good to you. But the people said to Joshua, no, we will serve the Lord. Then Joshua says, you are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen to serve the Lord. Yes, we are witnesses against you. Yes, we are witnesses, they replied. Now then, said Joshua, throw away the foreign gods that are among you and yield your hearts to the Lord, the God of Israel. And the people said to Joshua, we will serve the Lord our God and obey him. Interesting. Joshua was in the desert with these guys and their parents. He knows them. We've just for the last number of months preached through Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers. And we've seen all the catastrophes that have happened. This is in fact completely in keeping with our nature and our character. And Joshua makes the point that you've seen this God, he is so holy and so jealous, you're not going to satisfy him. In fact, this whole endeavor is lightly cooked. The next sermon series comes, anybody who knows what comes after Joshua? Judges. You know what's in the book of Judges? Yeah! What Joshua says here is what comes. It's back to the disaster. And then I love the part in this where he says, throw away your foreign gods, which means what? That everybody's got, yeah, we will serve the Lord, but you know what? They all got their little idols tucked in at the house just in case if they're older. If stuff gets real bad, I can still pull out a veil. I've still got one here. In fact, archaeologists, one of the things they noticed when they were reading around in Israel, a lot of them thought, well, we won't find stuff. They find all these little idols. But where do these come from? This is what we do. We will serve the Lord, but I'll keep a little veil over here. Because this is how we are. You know, Pope Francis is all over the news and turn on the TV today and you'll hear people say, I think Pope Francis' trip is going to make a big difference. A lot of people will go to mass. I'm not banking on it. I think the Pope is going to go back to Italy and in a week or a month things are going to kind of grow like they were before. Same thing happened at 9-11. This is always spectacular at weddings because Michelle made a comment two months ago in July. These two people stood up in front of all of their friends and family and swore they loved each other dearly and they were it for life. And two months later, they want to have it. You might say, ah. But this is what we're like. We're fickle. And in fact, if you read the rest of the Old Testament, the Old Testament is a story of failure. God says, okay, I'll give you a skinner box. And we're like stupid rats back. We're only in it for the pellet. And then we mosh it and destroy it. And when Jesus comes, he's not a reward for good behavior. He basically has to come because of all the mess we've made because the skinner box is always greener on the other side. And you don't send a savior if the people just need a little bit of encouragement or a little extra help. You send a savior when you're out in what do you call the light garden when you're out in the ocean? When you're drowning. This is why he comes. He comes because this is our normal state. When you come to church this morning and say, As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. And then we wait. And so Jesus comes. And when Jesus comes and shows up, Israel is all over the map. And with all of the different factions, the only thing that the warring factions can agree on is that they like Jesus dead. And so they kill him. And they raise him up. And so they kill him. And they raise him. And this man who was popular in the Galilee doing miracles kind of in a skinner box way, when the tough times came and everyone abandons him and his own disciples grieve, and then don't even bother showing up at the two months that they mourn him except for some women who are imagining they're going to involve him. This is why we need a Savior, because this is how we are. Full of big promises, full of good intention, and stumbling in the fall of fear. Now, that is why I always talk about misery, who we are and how we are. Deliverance, what God in Christ has done for us. And then gratitude, which is actually the chief work of the Christian life. If you ask someone about marriage, and you ask them, oh, we've got a number in this congregation who have been married many, many years, how have you been able to do it? A lot of forgiveness, a lot of patience, a lot of sometimes enduring what you never thought you would endure before, and a lot of faithfulness. Because faithfulness is actually something that you learn and develop and grow. I remember one of the really fun stories I'll always remember here was, this was a number of years ago, I don't remember if John Bloss remembers it, but someone came into church and they were all excited about the church, and they sat in front of John, had church, and after the church they turned to John and said, how many times do you have to come to this church a month? And John just kind of laughed. It's like, oh, you've got like three times a month churches, or once a month churches, or every Sunday churches. And I kind of chuckle at that because the question reveals something about the attitude of the person. How often should I pray? How often should I go to church? How often should I read the Bible? How often should I extend myself towards the poor, towards the homeless, towards those who are down, how often should I do this for God to pay attention? The question is reversed. How often do you need to do this to become more like Christ out of gratitude? Because you serve a holy and jealous God, and we are flakes. So faithfulness is learned because someone else models it for you, and we see this again and again. The children so often of faithful people become faithful adults. A gift and miracle from God with children of flakes become faithful people. Someone wrote, faithfulness grows in a secure relationship. Faithfulness is a walk of small, good habits. And this morning actually I woke up in the middle of the night, and if you wake up sometimes between 3 and 6 in the morning, your worry is always a failure, so sometimes I'll put in a sermon and the sermon I was listening to was a good one. It was by Tim Keller, and he was talking about the fact that, you know what, all of this faithfulness that we do, all of this stuff that we do, none of it really matters until God, and unless God calls us, gets a hold of our heart, gets a hold of our brokenness, and makes us hunger for him. And this is the truth. And that's one of the things I love about gratitude, because it's always authentic. What we do out of fear, what we do out of honor, what we do out of duty, sometimes those things have to carry us, but what we do out of gratitude is what certainly tears God's heart. So we have Joshua's sermon, and he asks a good question, because we all have to face this question every day. Who will we serve? Will we serve ourself? Will we serve our egos? Will we serve our ambitions? Will we serve our careers? Will we serve the people we're afraid of? Will we serve the people we want to impress? Who will we serve? And I think it begins with a profession. We will serve the Lord, just like a marriage begins with a wedding. Say, I will be there, I will do this, but standing there is not doing it. And being there means being there every day in the good and the bad, in the easy and the hard, even in the times when you were discouraged. So who will you serve? What do you need to do every day to serve him? What do you need to do every week to serve him? What does repair look like in your relationship with him? And do you know where to turn? That's perfect. Lord, the truth is we are all flakes. We are big talkers about our relationship with you, and we want to say that we are Christian and followers of Jesus, and we might brag about the little bits of faithfulness we have actually accomplished, but the truth is, Lord, we are sheep and our hearts wander. And the reason you sent the Savior is because we couldn't save ourselves and we still can't. And so Jesus comes, we fight amongst ourselves and we kill him. He forgives us, and the Father raises him from the dead. And this begins the process of the Holy Spirit working, growing the Church, working in this world, and continuing to work in this world, in the Church. And so we ask, Lord, that we might stand with Joshua and declare that we will serve the Lord. Forgive us, Lord, for all the ways that we fail. May our service at that, Lord, be out of gratitude. May these be ways that we say our thanks to you for what you have done for us. Lord, we are flakes, but take our flakiness and teach us how to be faithful. Teach us what we need to do every day. Teach us what we need to do every week. Teach us what we need to do every month and every year. And help us, Lord, to learn to be faithful, even as we are flaky. And may this all be part of the gratitude we give back to you for what you've done to us. Hear our prayer, in the name of Jesus, Amen. Amen. What do you say? What do you say? I need a Father's love for us. That's the adult male sure That he should give his own son To make a wretched gesture I'll bring the pain of searing call The Father turns his face away And the Father turns his face away And the Father turns his face away And the Father turns his face away And the Father turns his face away And the Father turns his face away