https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KIm7Yfhf_dU

 I'm amazed at how often this subject comes up when I talk to people who, and maybe some of you, who have expressed skepticism about the Bible and Christianity. Slavery, as you know, was abolished by the 14th Amendment in the United States. I put that back to right. It's 14th, right? Yeah. But a lot of people will mention the fact that if you read the Bible, you can't find the place in which slavery is actually abolished. Slavery was a very common thing throughout the Bible. In fact, wouldn't it have been obvious or clear if the Lord had simply put, you shall not own another human being in the Ten Commandments, and wouldn't that have settled it? And if the Bible is inspired, why didn't God just simply outlaw it? Certainly this would have been one of the most obvious oversights. And for many people, this creates doubt and skepticism. How could this supposedly all-knowing, all-good God permit an institution like slavery to exist for almost all of human history? Alvin Plantinga is a philosopher, and he names a number of things called Defeater Beliefs. This, in terms of the Church, might be a Defeater Belief for many, because they would say, why would I want to learn about this God that couldn't even get the slavery thing right? Now, many people who are in this category of spiritual but not religious might like to glean inspiring things from different books. And Christians generally don't look with favor upon this. Christians like to say things like, well, I believe the whole Bible is the inspired Word of God, and we shouldn't glean one thing or another. In defense of the spiritual but not religious, I have noted, however, that most Christians have their own little group of favorite verses within the Bible. For example, when people will say, I'm going to read the Bible, they'll go right through Genesis, all kinds of interesting stories. They'll go through Exodus with the plagues and the deliverance from Egypt and the Ten Commandments. But right after they get out of the Ten Commandments, they kind of bog down. Because there's all these verses about slaves and cows and oxen and women, which we read and we think, oh, this can't be right, or this doesn't look good. And it goes on and on for chapter after chapter about these kinds of things. And I know very few Christians who actually for devotions get up in the middle of the night and say, I want to read about Hebrew slave laws. We just don't do that. We don't do that because when we open the Bible, often we're looking for inspiration. So again, this causes many believers to have doubts about the Bible. And so, well, there's these parts that I really like, love your neighbor as yourself, really nice thought, really hard to live. And there's other verses that talk about love, and those are glorious and wonderful. But then there's all this other stuff in the Bible. In fact, much of the Old Testament that Christians just kind of pass over to try and get to the Jesus Epiles. Right after the book, right after the Ten Commandments, in fact, there's a section in the book of Exodus that's called the Book of the Covenant. And it has rules about what kind of altars you can and cannot use, what kind of laws with respect to slaves, laws with respect to magic and sex and property and sacrifices and courts. All of these laws. And again, Christians read this and most Christians just kind of pass over and say, I don't quite know what to do with all this stuff, but I love Jesus. And so I'll put that away. Here's one of these sections. If you buy a Hebrew servant, he is to serve you for six years, but at the seventh year, he will go free. He will go out free without paying anything. If he came in by himself, he will go out by himself. If he had a wife when he came in, then his wife will go out with him. But if his master gave him a wife and she bore sons and daughters, the wife and the children will be longer than her master and he will go out by himself. And you read this and you think, this doesn't sound good. But of course it continues. But if the master should declare, I love my wife, my master, I love my master, my wife and my children, I will not go out free. Then his master must bring him to the judges and he will bring him to the door of the north coast and his master will pierce his ear with an owl and he shall serve him forever. And this is the reason that we have pierced ears in our culture. And if I go around and I look for holes and I'll see who's slave and who's free, isn't that how it works? I mean, I was in Chipotle the other day and I don't remember what they're called, but you know, a guy had these big holes in his ears. And I thought, well, he must be a Hebrew slave who loved his master Chipotle and decided, I want to work for Chipotle forever. So he and his wife and his children for now and forevermore work for Chipotle. Or not. So we read this and you think, well, love your neighbor as yourself, the Hebrew slave and his wife. And if he comes with her, then he can and he goes. But if she comes and they get married, wow, he's a servant because his master gave him his wife, which also sounds not very good. And then the children and all of this stuff, you beat it. And again, skeptics will see this and look at this and say, see, your God is supposed to know everything. But these are the kind of rules he gives. You can understand why people wonder and doubt. Maybe why you wonder and doubt. Some of this has to do with our expectations of a holy book. Right there, if you pull your Bible off, look at the front, chances are it says right on the front, holy Bible. Where do you think this Bible came from? I think a lot of people believe that the book just kind of floated out of the clouds and here it is. Here's your Bible. Do everything it says and God will be happy with you. And that's how this thing is supposed to work. In fact, just last week I was having a conversation with a skeptic and he basically said, yeah, God gives you a book, you're supposed to do what's in the book. And if you do, then God smiles on you and gives you heaven. Isn't that what Christianity is? No, it isn't. But there are many churches I could go into and declare it that way. And most people would probably say, yeah, that's what the deal is. It isn't. In fact, there are a lot of holy books in this world and most people are a little fuzzy on that. The Quran, in fact, Muhammad asserts that the angel Gabriel appeared to him and began to tell him what to write. And Muhammad wrote it all down. And that was how the Quran began. The Book of Mormon, in fact, Joseph Smith says that the angel Moroni directed him to a place that they got these golden tablets. And there were these seen stones. And with those stones, he was able to write down and begin the Book of Mormon. That is not how Christianity says the Bible came about. But as I listen to Christians, I often think a lot of Christians would like us to say the Bible came about this way. Actually, Christians believe in something called organic inspiration, which means that God moved through writers and through history to bring about the Bible in the form that we have. Now, I know some Christians who say, well, only the King James Version is the right version of the Bible. Weren't there Christians before the 16th century? Yes. And the Bible doesn't first come to us in English. There was Greek and Hebrew and some portions of Aramaic and a lot of different translations over the years. But Christians believe that even with the translations, even if you open the King James Version or the NIV and you put them next to each other and there were differences, this is all the Bible. And it's all God speaking to us through God moving through history. That's what the church has always believed. We imagine that God should be able to write a perfect book for all people outside of time and culture. That assertive problem with this idea is a failure to understand how people and communication work. I can talk to you and tell you some things and most people here don't understand me. True? He knows. We are human beings. We have language. We have culture. When we read this story about this Hebrew slave who decides to go before the judges and they put his ear by the post and they take an owl and they put a hole in it, it doesn't mean that when I go into Chipotle and I see a guy with a big hole in his ears that he's a slave to Chipotle. Most of us understand this. This is human culture. How language works. How context works. Now again you might think, well why doesn't God just make it clear? What language would you like God to speak to you in? Probably English or Spanish if that's how you grew up. Don't you think that God knows all languages? What culture would you like God to present himself to you in? The Christian theology asserts that God accommodates himself to us so that we can understand. Now not only do we have expectations about a holy book, we also have expectations about a holy people. What do you think? Do you think it's right to nurse your baby in the context of a worship service? A lot of people would say a woman exposing her breasts in a worship service would be very awkward and a woman shouldn't do that. When I was in the Dominican Republic, some of these women would not only nurse the baby on the lot, they'd nurse the baby that's in the seat next to them. I don't see this in churches in North America. But many of those women would be wearing baseball caps in church because they didn't believe it was right to go to church with her head uncovered. And so you have all of these expectations of what it means to be holy. Now Marshall quite rightly is wearing a hat. Thank you Marshall. You know observing the biblical requirements here this morning, we appreciate that. She wears a hat every day. And Freddie, except Freddie, you're not supposed to wear a hat in church, so I don't know if you knew that. I didn't know I was here. That's right. And so on one hand we all understand that there is culture. On the other hand, we also have expectations about what holiness looks like. We also understand that just because there's culture and variation doesn't mean everything is relative. Yet on the other hand, it also doesn't mean that there aren't cultural accommodations going both ways. America's sense of right has been deeply in fact moved by the civil rights movement. Americans tend to be fairly relativistic when it comes to right or wrong. You could ask an American, you know, is it true that there are different accommodations in different cultures? Yes. And you say, well in Saudi Arabia a woman can't get a driver's license. Well that's just wrong. Okay. So is right relative or is it fixed or is it in fact somewhere in between? So most Americans basically after the civil rights movement began to say, well, you know, slavery was wrong and racism is wrong. Does that mean racism really goes away? In fact, I find that most Americans rather cheaply appropriate the gains earned by the African American community mostly on their own over hundreds of years of very costly struggle. And there at the end we just say, yeah, I agree with them. Okay. But do you appreciate the blood that was shed and the struggle that went into those achievements? I think in some ways secular Americans have an easy beliefism when it comes to the civil rights movement. And so when it comes to slavery we say, well, that's just wrong and anyone can see it. Well, 200 years ago not anyone could see it. And in fact just about everyone 200 years ago believed that, yeah, you could own another person. They didn't see anything wrong with them. Does that make it right? No. Do you understand that in that context? Probably yes. The difficulty we have is that in fact there are lots of blind spots we have. You know the definition of a blind spot? Brandon knows what a blind spot is. And in fact it's fun to talk to Brandon about what sight is because if you close one eye, a doctor will tell you that there's a little space in the back of your eye where you're not seeing. But why when you close your eye don't you see this little black spot in the middle of your field of sight? Anybody know why? Your brain fills it in and guesses. That's why sometimes I'll come up to Brandon nice and quiet and he imagine he's seeing the room and then suddenly, poof, I pop in like Genie from My Dream of Genie and he jumps. And I do kind of enjoy that, Brandon, but I don't. It's kind of funny to watch you jump. But this is what you do. And in fact there are a number of ways we can test this. Why is it in fact that if you're born in Cuba and you can get yourself to Miami, you can be a U.S. citizen. But if you're born in Haiti and you get yourself to Miami, they'll take you back. This idea of nationality that because my children were born to me in the Dominican Republic, they got a U.S. passport and when we went back for home service, they just came right into the country as a U.S. citizen. Nice and easy. But the baby next to that child born in the same hospital in Santo Domingo, no way. And what are the consequences of my children being able to come to the United States? Public education, opportunity, health care, all of these benefits to that child next to my children in the same hospital in the Dominican Republic, what opportunities do they have? What's the difference? This idea we have of nationality. Now let's say that God comes to us one day and says, guess what? Nationality is a discriminatory idea. This idea that you can only go certain places in the world by virtue of the color of your passport, that's just sin. So no more nationality. What would happen? What would happen? Americans wouldn't like this at all. There would be chaos. Mexicans would come streaming up out of the border. Central Americans would come streaming into Mexico. People all over the world would start moving all over the place. And very quickly the nations would say, no, these laws create order and we need them. Oh, so God couldn't just one day say, let there be no more nationalities. There's another one here. The idea of money. I don't have any money at me. But that little piece of paper in your billfold, what's it mean? Error. What is this? Is this any different from this? What if God one day said, no more money, what would happen? Chaos. You want God to say, no more money? Is it money, the difference between someone having a nice life in a beautiful home and a wonderful car and health insurance and food and travel and all the things that people want? It's just whether they have certain little pieces of paper instead of others, isn't it? What if God one day said, no more money. It's a discriminatory idea that causes some people to suffer and other people to live in affluence, wealth and waste. We don't want God saying that. Another one. I'm reading right now a little book called The Alchemy of Air. Too bad Jack's not here this morning because I'm learning a whole side of history I never knew. At the end of the 19th century, anybody know how many people were in the world? About a billion and a half. Anybody know without artificial fertilizer how many people they suspect this world could maximally sustain if you used all the farmland with organic methods optimally? They say maybe four billion people. Anybody know how many people we have today in the world? Seven on the way to eight. How can they all live? Because at the beginning of the 20th century, a couple of scientists figured out how to harvest nitrogen and change it so that it could be used as fertilizer. And the world has been different ever since. We don't think about it. The consequences of this have in fact been overpopulation, poisoning of lakes and rivers. What if God said this business about using fossil fuels to get yourself to the movie theater and to rejuvenate farmland, you're destroying the earth. No more of this. But we have to tell half the world they have to stop eating and all the rest of us have to eat about half as many calories as we have. As many calories as we do now. Do we want to hear this? But yet we do expect that God would come into the ancient world and say, this idea of one person owning another, stop it right now. What do you think they would do? God says a lot more practical things like, you shall not kill. Does that mean we don't do it? You shall not commit adultery. If that doesn't happen, you shall not steal. We don't often respect even the commandments we agree with. Why would we expect to fulfill the commandments that are unthinkable to us? History has long recognized a large cluster of analogous institutions and relationships extending across the globe and over millennia as variations on a condition called slavery. The most crucial and frequently utilized aspect of the condition is a communally recognized right by some individuals to possess, buy, sell, discipline, transport, liberate, or otherwise dispose of the bodies and behaviors of other individuals. Within this definition would fall individuals who might be agents of supreme political power such as eunuchs of an emperor's court. They might be incorporated into an elite band of warriors as the mainstay of imperial authority and military expansion. Their lives could be materially abundant or miserable. They might be pampered sexual servants of the wealthy. They might be short-term captives whose main value was the subject of elaborate ritual sacrifice or as candidates for deadly medical experiments. They might be subjects to rulers, corporate institutions, or individual members of a society. They might serve economic, military, sexual, reproductive, or religious ends. Such individuals were, at least initially, unprotected by ties to the community. Slaves were usually designated as outsiders either by the fact of initial activity, purchase, or inherited status. What's really interesting is if you read that definition and take out the word slavery, you can think of many kinds of relationships that continue to exist. The question is really how must God deal with us? And Protestant theology has long said this. God speaks to us as if we are a child. My mother this week in fact found this pillow that my wife had made for my parents when we were missionaries in the Dominican Republic. And my son Philip was born and my sister's daughter Kristen was born. It was Kristen Nicole, but they couldn't say all those words. Dear Grandpa, hold baby Cole. Christian, Grandpa, hold Philip's book. Read books. Grandpa, come visit Philip. We'll see Philip. Baby Kristen Nicole. I want to see Grandma. Give Philip new present. Share toys. Baby cousin. Christian, come visit Philip. Share toys. Baby cousin. Kristen Nicole. Grandpa. Grandpa loves Philip. Philip was maybe two. And we all read that and we smile and enjoy it because we see even from an infant, from a baby, those first signs of love and community and relationship. And so what theologians have often said is that through the Bible, in God's speech, he accommodates himself to us and comes into our circumstance and starts to communicate to us and nudge us in the right direction. In fact, people will say, well, the Bible doesn't condemn slavery and therefore slave owners used it. Did you see slave owners in the South bring their slaves after six years? No. Did you see slave owners in the South taking some of these commandments seriously about the year of Jubilee? No. When God speaks to us, he comes to us in ways we can understand, in concepts we can get a hold of, and even then we don't believe or obey often. In fact, in the law, God comes to us and puts limits on us and the law coerces us. Its pursuit is love and well-being, but it usually falls short. What happens, however, is that in Jesus, things take a new turn. I would in fact assert to you that if you look at the history of abolition, it would not have happened without Jesus. Just as Christians don't often read the Old Testament law, there's a little book in the New Testament that Christians often skip over, too. It's one of the smallest books in the New Testament. It's only one chapter, and it's the book of Philemon. The reason Christians don't read it very carefully is because they don't quite know what's going on. But the story is this. The Apostle Paul is in prison in Rome, and in Rome he meets a runaway slave named Onesimus. Now, in the Roman Empire, runaway slaves were a very big deal, and a runaway slave might in fact face the penalty of death for fleeing from his master. The Romans took slavery very seriously, and there are a great many slaves in the Roman Empire. And so somehow, Paul and Onesimus meet, and Onesimus becomes persuaded by Paul's view of the world. And Onesimus becomes a Christian. Onesimus was a runaway slave of a man named Philemon, who was quite likely the bishop of the house church in Colossi. And so what difference would Jesus make to Philemon, the slave owner, and Onesimus, the slave? And what would that, and what would the Apostle Paul do? So at this point, the Apostle Paul knows there is a runaway slave named Onesimus, who is now a Christian, and Philemon, who is the slave owner. What does the law demand? Well, the law would demand that Onesimus would return to Philemon and be punished for his rebellion and running away, and that Onesimus would somehow continue to live enslaved by Philemon. But the Apostle Paul says Christ changes all of this. Because in the concepts of this world, Onesimus is higher, or Philemon is higher than Onesimus, but now in Christ, both of them are children of God. And so Paul has a variety of options he could do. He could write to Philemon and say, Onesimus has now become a Christian, and you shouldn't have slaves anyway, so you should free him. Or Paul could say to Onesimus, you should... Paul should say to... I usually don't get distracted by folks walking outside the door, but this guy just looked interesting. Or the Apostle Paul could say, Onesimus, you're a slave, you should do what's right, go back to Philemon. But in fact, Paul says neither. What Paul wants to do for Philemon and for Onesimus is to begin to understand how the story of Jesus changes both of them. Now, I'm going to do misery, deliverance, gratitude, like I mostly do. Americans, in fact, fought a civil war, and a lot of the North fought that civil war not because they were so generous to African Americans, but because a lot of Northerners did not want what they called free labor invading the North. But they fought the civil war, and Abraham Lincoln invoked the Emancipation Proclamation, which people don't generally understand, which only actually freed the slaves in the rebellious states and didn't free the slaves in the border states. So all those slaves in the border states continued in slavery, but the slaves in the Confederate states were now free. In other words, it was a tactic in the war. And it wasn't actually until the Fourth Amendment that all of the slaves were free. And when they freed the slaves, did they give them food? Did they give them 40 acres and a mule? A lot of slaves, in fact, discovered they were free to starve. If you, in fact, continue reading in the Old Testament, you'll see in the book of Deuteronomy, if any of your people, Hebrew slaves or women, saw themselves to you, which was the way that you dealt with debt in that culture, and serving six years, in the seventh year, you must let them go free. And when you release them, do not send them away empty-handed. Supply them liberally from your flock, your threshed floor, and your wine press. Give to them as the Lord your God has blessed you. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the Lord your God redeemed you. That is why I give you this commandment today. See, the law puts a burden on wrongdoers. The poverty of the law is that if the wrongdoer lacks the strength, moral or otherwise, to do right by God and our neighbor, the entire community remains in poverty. If someone steals from your house, and that person goes to jail, you're still lost. Maybe your insurance will make good, maybe it won't. The community suffers in the original sin or crime, and then again in the punishment. But Jesus came to do for us, because we couldn't do for ourselves. You see, what Paul says to Philemon is this, I'm sending Omissimus back to you. Why? Because he's a runaway slave. Now, when he gets to you, I want you to also know he's your brother. Treat him as you would treat me. That begins to change things. Bley Mizarrab has been turned into a movie twice in the past years. The heart of the movie, in fact, comes from this scene where Jean Baljan, a man who had served his time in prison for stealing bread because he was hungry, gets welcomed in to the bishop's home, and after the bishop gives him a meal that night, Jean Baljan wakes up in the middle of the night and steals the silver spoons and the plates and runs away, and when he's caught by the police, the police bring him back to find out if this, in fact, were the priest's spoons and plates. And to Jean Baljan's surprise, the priest comes, takes the candlesticks, and gives them to the priest. And Jean Baljan does not understand what the priest is doing, but the priest says this. He must use this precious silver to become an honest man. By the witness of the martyrs, by the passion and the blood, God has raised you out of darkness. I have bought your soul for God. What Paul says to Philemon is this. What Christ did for me, I did for you. I was in God's debt, and Christ paid it for me. Now, what I did for you, I want you to pay back to Onesimus. You are in my debt. Pay it to him. Do you understand that the end of slavery is not simply the end of how we treat each other? Slavery is gone, but all of us know we have these gains of status that go on every day. The rich and the powerful are admired and desired, and the poor and the weak are ignored and maligned. We might not call it slavery, but we all know these mechanisms by which we keep ourselves in places of preference in the world. My well-being and your expense is not so easily banished from our hearts and lives on in institutions. Once the slaves were free, then came Jim Crow. And even now, Jim Crow, laws are gone. Are you going to tell me there still isn't discrimination based on race, based on class, based on gender, based on how many different other ways we can look at each other and size each other up? The story of the Gospel says, he who had the highest status made himself a slave so that he could live. In fact, Jesus says this, the greatest among you will be your servant. For those who absolve themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted. So you can read the Bible and say, well, I don't believe a holy God would write this because he left slavery intact. Okay. But I ask you, where is slavery in your heart? Do we treat others as we would have them treat us? What are the ways that we value each other, and what are the institutions we use to preserve our status at the expense of the other? And if he who had everything would make himself nothing for you, how does that invite us to respond towards those who have nothing in the world? That's great. Lord, our skepticism is often convenient. We benefit from the injustices of the world, and we at the same time use them to keep ourselves in positions we like. Help us to recognize the gospel. That a God who did not have to suffer came into this painful world to become our victims and to show us the meaning of love. Help us to realize that you call us to give ourselves to each other. Not because this somehow works for us on the back end, but because you did this for us. He just to love. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand? Would you stand? Oh, the world's nowhere of my soul. Let me find the turn by, while the hill is fallen low. Oh, the world and the still and the tine, I need no white savior light, Will the smoke of my desire, they would have made me blind, But my easy mind's full and mad. Brother, at guilt have I not, and my health is so unbeing. We are weak, we not alone, will suffer and conquer thee. Oh, why trust not me, you see, how I do, thee I bring. I have a life in which to sail, with the shadow of thy beam. And pray with me, hear now, pray to thou, who art my savior, Let my healing see the now, make it be the endure with me. Thou art my work, thou art my life, save me and me, save me and me. Pray thou, I will win my heart, I will love thee, and defend thee. The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you. The Lord turn his face towards you and give you his peace. Amen. I've seen a large sea of the sea, And the golden sea, and the golden sea, And the golden sea, and the golden sea, And the golden sea, and the golden sea, I've seen a large sea beyond the moon, And the golden sea, and the golden sea, Holy, holy, holy, holy, holy, holy in the Lord. Holy, holy, holy, holy, holy in the Lord.