https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QmcKSjCCpR0

 How many of you have read any Elie Weisel? The book Neith is a pretty much a standard text on the Holocaust. He was a 15 year old Jewish boy in actually the same town last week we talked about, Hitzok Rago in a Romanian orphanage. That was the same town that Elie Weisel lived in when he was 15 when the Germans rolled through as their empire was collapsing in 1944. And his family was first rounded up into ghettos and then they were put on trains and taken to outfits. And this is a poem he wrote in the middle of his recollection. Never shall I forget that night, the first night in camp, that turned my life into one long night seven times sealed. Never shall I forget that smoke. Never shall I forget the small faces of the children whose bodies I saw transformed into smoke under a silent sky. Never shall I forget those flames that consumed my faith forever. Never shall I forget the nocturnal silence that deprived me for all eternity of the desire to live. Never shall I forget those moments that murdered my God and my soul and turned my dreams to ashes. Never shall I forget those things even where I condemned to live as long as God himself. Never. Nietzsche famously talked about the death of God in the 19th century. And Bissell and others could not imagine that a God existed who would allow the kinds of things that they witnessed. It's interesting to note, however, that the problem of suffering that has been with us for thousands of years only more recently turned people to imagine not that God is absent or God is silent or God does not act, but that in fact there is no God. Bissell, this is of course famously said things like this, for I am about to fall and my pain is ever with me. I confess my iniquity. I am troubled by my sin. Many have become my enemies without cause. Those who hate me without reason are numerous. Those who repay my good with evil lodge accusations against me even though I seek only to do what is good. Lord, do not forsake me. Do not be far out from me, my God. Come quickly to help me, my Lord and my God. And in fact, you feel this way, many have found comfort in praying the Psalms because they found that in these words the psalmist was speaking their language. But behind it was the assurance that there is a God and he does here. And although we suffer and wonder why isn't he acting? Why isn't he rescuing me? Why doesn't he pull me out of the pit? There remains a hope that God is there. The connection of the problem of evil with the death of God or the assertion that there is no God actually arose after a tsunami and earthquake in 1755 in the city of Lisbon. In 1755 the earthquake struck on the morning of 1 November, the holiday of all saints day. Lisbon being a Roman Catholic country. Many, many men, women and children were in the churches that morning celebrating the day. Contemporary reports state that the earthquake lasted between three and a half and six minutes causing fissures of 15 feet wide to open up in the city center. Survivors rushed to the open space of the docks for safety and watched as the water receded revealing a seafloor littered with lost cargo and shipwrecks. Approximately 40 minutes after the earthquake a tsunami gulped the harbor and downtown area rushing up the Tagus River. So fast that several people riding on horseback were forced to gallop as fast as possible to the upper grounds for fear of being carried away. It was followed by two more waves. In the areas unaffected by the tsunami fire quickly broke out and fire raged for five days in the city. We don't know how many people died. Estimates are tens of thousands up to perhaps 100,000 people died in that tsunami and earthquake and fires. And this was in Christian Europe. And so the philosophers and the poets and the writers wondered where was God? All these people in his church celebrating All Saints Day and the earthquake and the tsunami and the fires? Voltaire, who some of you may have read in high school or college, wrote a very famous poem about this event. The iron laws that chain the will of God? Shall ye, or that yet quivering mass of flesh? God is avenged, the wages of sin is death. What crime, what sin, have these young hearts conceived that lie bleeding and torn on mother's breast? Did Paul in Lisbon deeper drink of vice than London, Paris, or summit Madrid? And these men dance at Lisbon, yawns the abyss. But how conceive a God supremely good, who heaps his favor on the sons he loves, yet scatters evil with his larger hand? What eye can pierce the depths of his design? For that all-perfect being came not ill, and came in from no other, for he is Lord. Yet it exists, O stern and numbing truth, a wondrous mingling of diversities. A God came down to lift our stricken race. He visited the earth and changed it not. Once office says, He had not power to change. He had another Christ, but willed it not. In time he willed no doubt, and while they prayed, the hidden thunders bled from underground, blinged wide the ruins of a hundred towns across the smiling face of Portugal. Voltaire and many contemporaries began to sincerely doubt the entire Christian project that there is a God, an benevolent God, a good God. If there was such a God, and he had power, why would these horrible things happen? And so doubt rested into Western consciousness, which would eventually full bloom into the kind of skepticism and doubt we find in sectimarism today. And so, at about this time in the 1750s, men began to discover the power of science and the power of technology, and the hope was, well if we can find what makes earthquakes, and if we can find out, well we can't prevent them, but if we can build our buildings better so that they withstand them, and if we can kind of get a sense of where they occur, and maybe someday figure out when they can occur, well maybe we can prevent these horrible things from happening. And of course all of us today who live not too far from San Francisco know this project. But then Japan 2011, another tsunami. Japan that was more prepared. I remember the 1989 quake in San Francisco when the Bay Bridge collapsed and a lot of those highways collapsed. Japanese engineers came over here and said this would not have happened in Japan, because they in many ways are the most prepared country in the world for all of this. But then when their earthquake and tsunami rolled in, they were devastated. And the nuclear power plant on the coast still leaks radiation into the ocean that finds its way even to California. So is science our answer? Japan is also one of the most secular countries in the world, and soon after the tsunami, these kinds of stories come up. A fire station in Tagaho receives calls to places where all the houses have been destroyed by the tsunami. The crews went out to the ruins anyway and prayed for the spirits of those who had died, and the ghostly calls cease. A cab driver in the city of Sendai picks up a sad-faced man who has to be taken to an address that no longer existed. Halfway through the journey, he looked into his mirror to see that the rear seat was empty. He drove on anyway, stopped at part of the leveled foundation of a destroyed house, and politely opened the door to allow the invisible passengers out of his former house. A refugee community in Anagua, an old neighbor, would appear in the living rooms of the temporary houses and sit down for a cup of tea with their startled occupants. No one had the heart to tell her that she was dead. The cushion on which she had sat was wet with seawater. Priests, Christian and Shinto as well as Buddhist, found themselves called on repeatedly to quell unhappy spirits. A Buddhist monk wrote an article in a learned journal about the ghost problem, and the academics at Tohoku University began to catalog the stories. So many people are having these experiences, and they have told me it's impossible to identify who and where they all are. But there are countless such people, and I think that their number is going to increase. And all we can do is treat the symptoms. It's funny because we have the God of the gaps, and so critics of Christianity have always said, well, you Christians, you always fill in God in the places that you can't control or don't know what did it. But on the other hand, it's also true that since 1755 and 2011, science is supposed to somehow protect us and make everything well. And here after 200 years, we can't stop. What happens? And the promise is given, oh, but science someday will cure this. Well, a lot of good it did in 2011 in Japan. So both ideas are fundamentally religious. Then in the Ukraine, we have Putin invading Crimea, and President Obama says they're on the wrong side of history. And I'm thinking, are you supposing that nations will no longer invade other nations out of greed? Do you imagine that now suddenly we're going to stop doing the kinds of things we've been doing for 6,000 years? Because you think somehow we've outgrown this? I don't think so. 1944, in fact, Elie Wiesel, 15-year-old, was hearing rumors of this annihilation of the Jews and rights, annihilated entire people, wiped out a population, dispersed through many nations. So many millions of people, by what means, in the middle of the 20th century? Yes, we did it, and it continued. And I don't think it will stop. And then, in fact, if you look into the future, watch how many stories there are on TV. Will robots kill it? Will it be nuclear war? Will it be our destruction of the environment? Almost all of our cute stories of the future paint a very grand picture. Do we really believe we have the power and the might to save us and to rescue the world? One of the best lines out of one of my favorite movies, The Incredibles, is by Mr. Incredible, No matter how many times you save the world, it always manages to get back in jeopardy again. Sometimes I want it to just stay safe. You know, for a little bit, I feel like the maid. I just cleaned up this mess. Can we keep it clean for 10 minutes? It was in the garden when the man and the woman had their first big idea. If we can only have more power, if we can only have more knowledge, we can do a better job than the Almighty in governing this world. And so often when I listen to people who, out of pain, say, How could God allow this to happen in my life? How could God let this happen? Implicit behind that is the message, if I were God, I could have done better. And I understand the feeling. Could God have routed the 20th century around Nazi Germany, around Stalin, around Mao, around Pol Pot? You begin to discover that it's just around, around, around, around that everything is compromised. Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. After fasting 40 days and 40 nights, he was hungry. The tempter came to him and said, If you are the Son of God, tell these stones to become bread. Jesus answered, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God. Then the devil took him to the holy city and had him stand on the highest point of the tempter. If you are the Son of God, he said, Throw yourself down, for it is written, He will command his angels concerning you, and they will lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your foot against the stone. Jesus answered him, It is also written, Do not put the Lord your God to the test. Again the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the nations of the world and their splendor. This is all I will give you, he said, if you will bow down and worship me. Jesus said to him, Away from me, Satan, for it is written, Worship the Lord your God and serve his only. Then the devil left him, and the angels came and attended him. Gregory the Great notes, Jesus dealt with the three temptations, to gluttony, vain glory, and avarice. All three reconfigurated into one temptation of Adam. GK Beale notes the clause, If you are the Son of God, is in Greek a first class condition, and does not suggest that the devil doubts Jesus' sonship, but he wants to find out what kind of son Jesus will be. In each instant the devil tempts Jesus to bypass the suffering that God has marked out for him, and to use his power in a triumphalistic, self-glorifying fashion. Jesus in fact, many times in the gospels, will be like Mr. Incredible, he'll come to the blind man, and the blind man will see. He'll come to the lame man, and the lame man will walk. He'll come to the hungry, and he'll give them bread, and he'll even restore to life from the dead. But in each case, the point that Jesus continues to make is, this is but a foretaste of a much bigger permanent salvation, because like Mr. Incredible, I can raise Lazarus from the dead, but he will die again. I can give you food today, but you will hunger again tomorrow. I can make you see today, but you will take your seeing eyes to the grave. There is a bigger salvation that must be met, that must be done. And the tools that it takes for that larger salvation are not what you imagine. Jesus wants to be more than our made. And so Jesus comes and goes and meets Satan, and in many ways does battle with him. Adam failed, Israel in the wilderness failed, now Jesus goes to meet him. And the terms of this combat are very interesting, because all of us would have imagined it to be quite different. Jesus is hungry and wanting bread. He's hungry and waiting for victory. He's now spent his years in this world seeing the lost, seeing the misery, seeing what the Romans have done. Now Jesus does battle with Satan, and what's interesting is he doesn't argue philosophy with Satan. It's all about what is expedient to say. And now I would imagine Elie Wiesel in Auschwitz would have imagined, what we need is for God to come in and come like a giant and tear up the barbed wire and squash the Germans and set us free. But the question is, and then what? Will he in fact squash the anti-Semitism that has seeded the Holocaust? Will he in fact squash our warring hearts that make the wars? Will he in fact squash the greed that prompts us to do what we do? Jesus in fact uses scripture. And I know for many today that would seem, doesn't he have anything better than this? This is the greatest argument for our use of scripture in the Bible. When Jesus goes toe to toe with the devil, when he has been fasting for 40 days and 40 nights, and he's hungry and he's longing for battle, and he's ready to reach out and grab whatever would soothe his heart and soothe his pain right now, Jesus grabs onto scripture, and that's where he stands. Tim Keller makes this comment in his book, Walking with God Through Pain and Suffering. We see ourselves as able to control our own destiny, able to discern for ourselves what is right and wrong, and we see God as obliged to arrange things for our benefit, especially if we live a good enough life according to our own chosen standards. And so here we see Jesus, and it seems obvious to turn stones into bread. It seems obvious to have an angelic demonstration in the temple. So when people see Jesus, oh, he was the one the angels caught. It seems obvious for Jesus to take the reins of political power and to use armies to instill justice upon the earth, but Jesus knows that the source of all of our evil comes, in fact, from within our own hearts, and that the more power we get, the more evil we do with it, even when we want to use it for good. One of the best parables of this is Tolkien's Lord of the Rings. We take power to do good, and we wind up doing evil instead. Theodore of Moxestia, an ancient pastor living in the fourth century, says this, It is not through miracles, but through patience, long-suffering endurance that must prevail over the devil. We should do nothing merely for show. What does that mean for our lives when we, in fact, each of us in our own ways, that may in fact seem small, deal with the devil and his temptations all the time? We look for a big triumph, a big show, we look for something to smack in death, but what we see in these temptations is that Jesus endures the temptations by not grabbing the fast solution. Weiss, in fact, gets a sense of this. And how many about Jews endured such a death on that most horrible day, even though among those other bad days, when children witness the hanging, yes, of another child who he tells us at the face of a sad angel. He heard someone behind him groan. For God's sake, where is God? And from within me, I heard a voice answer, Where is he? This is where. Hanging here, from this gallows. I can't imagine it was anyone but the Holy Spirit saying to this devout Jew, Eli Bessel, one of your brothers, hung for you. Can you see him here, suffering, enduring in your place? What we have is a preview here of how Jesus will conquer sin and death. Jesus will not conquer Satan for us by acting like Mr. Incredible, but by expressing a greater strength exerted in faith, hope, and love. It will be his trust in the Father's power, not his own. His faith in the Father's goodness, not his ability to resolve short-term suffering and evil. And faith in the Father's love for him and his commitment to this world that he denies himself and refuses to take what appears to be the short expedient path that would in the end not address what lies at the root of our suffering, our inability to trust. We recognize that often it is our self-salvation impulse and our employment of power in this goal that recycles my well-being at your or someone else's expense. Jesus, like the Father, relieves us of our need to play deliverer by delivering us at his expense. This then frees us to forgive, to be kind, to be generous, to love our neighbor not out of an attempt to rescue them, or to justify or make ourselves moral or good, but out of their need and not our own. And that is what Jesus does in the temptation. He withholds out of our need, not his own. What's interesting is that we are not told the answer to the problem of evil. Job, in fact, even when the Lord shows up and meets him face to face, doesn't tell him the back story of why Job suffered. What we are shown, however, is how to endure evil through Scripture, through trust, through patient endurance. Jesus does not relinquish to the devil himself, but holds on, believing that the Father of the world will, in fact, rescue him. We are not told why we suffer, but we begin to see in Jesus how to suffer in faith, in patience, and trusting in the Word of God. What does this look like? We don't conquer evil, we endure it. Many of our self-saving attempts perpetuate it. What Jesus did at the temptation, we he will complete in the cross. It's exactly what he's done in the temptation that he masters on the cross. While they're mocking him and saying, he saved others, but he cannot save himself, when in that moment he is saving others by not saving himself. And in fact, every good parent knows this, who gets up in the middle of the night because a child needs them, who continues to love even if a child has gone astray. This is the kind of love, even commonly, that saves the world. Yet when we are in the midst of suffering, it is so easy and so tempting to grab the easy way out, and Jesus says, endure with me as I have endured for you. Now we work from gratitude, from joy, from hope, from faith, from love, to learn to forgive, to learn to bear, to learn to endure, because we know that he has conquered, and we know that our joy will come. That's great. Lord, it is easy to fall into despair. It is easy to grab the quick way out, to throw the people who are causing us pain under the bus, to resolve our own suffering at the expense of the guilty. But that's exactly what you refuse to do. While you did in many ways, and you still do today, sometimes fix our problems like Mr. Incredible, all that way of fixing never finally solves our need. And so you went to the cross to finally resolve our need, and you came out of the grave to finally demonstrate your victory, and you ask us to endure for just a little while, and you give us the strength to do so. So Lord, when we are tempted, may we turn to you, may we believe in you, may we stand on scripture, may we pray with the psalmist, why have you forsaken us, may we continue to beseech you, just like Jesus did, but on the bottom of it, may we trust that in fact you have overcome the grave, you have overcome evil, and all that we suffer today will finally be laid to rest, and you can use even the evil that is done to bring us glory and to meet our needs. Help us to believe in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand?