https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=txcjhP0mUuw

 Come on up, Arianna. Every couple of years, Sierra Leadership Network, together with Granite Springs and Calvin Seminary, we do a class out here in California called the Gospel Preaching Class. And that's where students from Calvin Seminary will come out and, I don't know, how long you've been here? Two weeks. Oh, two weeks. Yeah. So, Arianna actually was here last summer for a ten week? Five week internship. Five week internship at Granite Springs. So this is her first time to Northern California. She grew up in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Some of you know the word, right? Michigan. Calvin CRC. And so last week she visited us, got a sense of our church, and she's been working at a sermon all week. And this is her first time preaching ever. I got a chance to listen to her yesterday, and all the church planters and pastors coming were all, you know, how are they going to be, how are they going to do? And I was like, how's she going to do? And she did great. So I can sit and relax and welcome this morning. We're so glad you're here. And yeah, be prepared. So once again, I wanted to thank you all for letting me be here. And this opportunity, it's been a wonderful experience so far. I hope it goes well. Let's start by reading of scripture for today. It's Mark chapter one, verses 14 through 20. Starting at verse 14. After John was put in prison, Jesus went into Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God. The time has come, he said. The kingdom of God has come near. Repent and believe the good news. As Jesus walked beside the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew passing a net into the lake, for they were fishermen. Come, follow me, Jesus said, and I will send you out to fish people. At once they left their nets and followed him. When he had gone a little farther, he saw James, son of Zebedee, and his brother John in a boat, preparing their nets. Without delay he called them, and they got their fathers and feet in the boat with the higher men and followed him. I've never been fishing, but I imagine it's a peaceful experience. From what my friends and family have told me, it involves a lot of patience, quiet, waiting around. I've also been told that I would be a terrible fisher, because I'm not a patient, quiet person. And I would become so agitated, we just had to sit around. I also play loud, so if we're just sitting around, I want to talk and laugh and have a good time. But apparently that would scare the fish away. But maybe you're the quiet type, who would enjoy sitting on a still river in this peaceful atmosphere, let alone fish and your thoughts of nature. But whether you enjoy fishing as a half-time or not, let's imagine the activity for a moment. So you gather up all your equipment, go down to the riverside, and pick a spot that seems nice where there might be a lot of fish. There you do this thing with words that I don't want to think about, and put it on, and then whatever. And then you throw it into the river, cast a line, right? And then what do you do? You sit there and wait. And hopefully the bait will be attractive enough for the fish swimming around, coming back. But first century fishing looks a lot different than our modern day version. Fishing back then was a strenuous lifestyle. Instead of a fishing line abroad, fishing around the river. Our biblical characters used a circular net that had weights on the ends. And then they would go up to the sea and cast out this wide heavy net and gather in this whole group of fish. And after the net was full of all these fish, they would haul it back into the boat. It was extremely heavy and physical. And they had to do this over and over and over again. So when Jesus meets Simon, Andrew, James, John on the shore of the sea of Galilee, they're in the middle of this laborous lifestyle. So in the first century, boys often attended school until around the age of 13. There they would study the Torah, the law, books and Bible. And only those top few students would get to move on and continue studying in hopes of becoming a rabbi. But special students would seek out a teacher. Then if the teacher agreed, would learn under them and become his disciple or followers. However, the other students, the ones who didn't show promise in their early studies, would lack the funds to learn a trade such as carpentry or fishing. So Simon, Andrew, James, and John, one of those other students, both not good enough to study under a religious teacher. Instead, you see James and John working at the family business with their father somebody. Simon and Andrew are most likely freelancers or working for everything in the fishing business. So imagine how they felt. You so call nobody. When a teacher comes to them and tells them to follow the family. This isn't how things work. Teachers don't go out and look for disciples. Teachers need to pick from room. Students beg to learn under them. But Jesus comes to these lonely fishermen and chooses left. So why would Jesus, the son of God, the ultimate teacher, choose these middle school dropouts? Why not pick the best of the best? That's kind of amazing. And then, Jesus should just let them mess up. Don't cut their life altogether. This is just the beginning of Simon, Andrew, James, and John's ministry with Jesus. But, you know, we have the advantage of looking at the whole story. So, we can see that they didn't learn very quickly. Time and time again, they misunderstood Jesus. When we told them he would suffer and die, they'd be angry and confused. When Jesus needed them most in the Garden of Gethsemane, they fell asleep, left him, abandoned him, and renounced his name. Yet Jesus still calls them to be his. Holy knowing that they are underqualified and will certainly mess up the earth. Jesus still asks them to be his disciples. And even after their betrayal, Jesus returns to them. Jesus meets them again in their misery and grief. He has endured their pain and suffering, but has come back victoriously. He has suffered the cross, endured the grave, but rose again. And he wants to share that victory with them. But why? The Apostle Paul gives us some insight. If we look in his letter to the Corinthians, in Chapter 1, he says, God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. God chose the lowly things of the world and the despised things, the things that are not, to know by the things that are. So that no one may boast before him. It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus. So it has become for us wisdom in God. That is our righteousness, holiness and redemption. Therefore, as it is written, let the one who boasts boast before. Jesus calls these other students because they will give him the glory. They will fail and fail and fail again. But when we do succeed, everyone will know it is in Jesus. Because of Jesus, in him and through him. They won't be able to claim their actions. Because they were not in the form. So let's return to the shoreline of the Sea of Galilee. Where Simon and Andrew are casting out their nets. And James and John are mending their nets with their dad and co-workers. Jesus is walking towards them. The water lacking at his ankles. His standing footsteps behind him disappearing. Here is where Jesus chooses his followers. Simon and Andrew and James and John have been in shock, right? But they know the importance and the deep honor of this opportunity. So they immediately jump up. Set aside their nets. Leave everything behind. And follow Jesus. As Jesus calls them, he said, I will make you fishers of people. Fishers of men, for those of us who remember this story. Remember, this isn't the type of fishing you automatically envision. It isn't casting out a hypothetical line. And hoping some people will swim by and take the bait. This is type of fishing that is strong and persistent, strenuous. Throwing out a wide net to gather people into Jesus. So maybe Jesus actually chose the right people for the job. He chose men who were used to working at a difficult day's job. Who have the necessary raw materials of a persistent will. A hard work ethic and a strong back. These newly called disciples are going to need all of this. Because they have just signed up for a difficult task. Just as fishermen endure the harsh realities of rough waters and strong winds. As they cast out their nets to gather their fish. So too will the disciples have to endure. Rough conversations and strong protesters as they cast out the message of the gospel. But Jesus goes with them. He is right next to them. Teaching and encouraging as they learn. Jesus strengthens them when they are weary. Empowers them when they are weak. And he gathers them in when they wander away. Have you ever felt not good enough for your emails? Maybe you have a personality kind of like the first disciples. So a quick short temper just like a sign of a heater. Or maybe you are kind of quiet and passive like James. You may think why would Jesus want to use shy, timid meat. Or how in the world is Jesus going to use rash, spicy meat. I know I felt that way. Except Jesus wants you. Us. For those exact reasons. Jesus wants to meet us where we are. As those worn out, exhausted, rough around the edges fishermen. Jesus doesn't call the ones who have their life on a scale. Jesus doesn't call the ones who have their life all together. For the perfect students or high up influential members of society. Sure, Jesus uses those people. But no matter who he calls, he asks them to leave it all behind. Leave that status they have created for themselves behind. Drop their old lives and be in a new one here. Jesus meets us where we are and brings us into him. So that we can meet others where they are and bring them into him. Each of us are specifically chosen by Jesus. We are uniquely prepared and given special gifts to reach certain people. But we cannot strengthen ourselves. We must first rest in Jesus now. Or not by our own strength that we have been saved. In fact, despite our natural tendency to mess up, God saved us. Jesus comes to show us his love. He meets us where we are in this broken and story world. In the midst of all that turmoil, Jesus says, follow me. That's it, prayer. Please join me. Heavenly Father, thank you so much for this day. Thank you for being with each of us here in this moment. And thank you for being with us today. Thank you so much for this day. Thank you for being with each of us here. Even though we may not have come this morning, or maybe we were super anxious to come this morning. We thank you. We thank you for bringing us in and gathering us into your men. Lord, equip us to go out into the world and be your disciples. And be your fishermen. Amen. Put your stand. Lord, you have my heart. And I will search for you. Jesus, take my life and lead me not. And I will search for you. Jesus, take my life and lead me not. Lord, you have my heart. And I will search for you. Let me be to you a sacrifice. And I will praise you, Lord. And I will sing of love come down. And as you show your face, We'll see your lonely face. You have my heart. And I will search for you. Jesus, take my life and lead me not. Lord, you have my heart. And I will search for you. Let me be to you a sacrifice. And I will praise you, Lord. And I will sing of love come down. And as you show your face, We'll see your lonely face. Lord, bless you and keep you. Lord, make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you. Lord, turn his face towards you and give you his peace. Amen.