https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WM-oJb5I5e8

 Probably at no time in my life in North America, we've been without what we often call a culture war. And this is a nation deeply divided over a number of different nations. Divided over behavior. Divided mostly over morality. I know sometimes people say, one of the interesting things about the culture war right now is both sides of it feel themselves to be deeply moral and feel the other side to be deeply morally compromised. And so in many ways, both sides point fingers at each other and essentially say, you're no good. The conflict, I think in many ways, is a question of the basis of moral authority. How do we make decisions about what is right or wrong? Traditionalists will say that morality is about alignment with past texts, past authorities, religions, etc. Just this morning there was an article in the Washington Post that made the point that Bill Clinton was impeached by a Speaker of the House who had to leave for the same reason that he was being impeached was going to be replaced by someone who had to step down and now the third speaker of the House himself is in trouble over similar issues. And so I posted on Facebook this morning, so which is it? Should people keep the rules or should people express who they really are deep down? Because right now in the culture, both sides say this is the answer to hypocrisy. Traditionalists will say people should keep the rules and if everyone would just abide by the rules, life would be okay. What I might call egalitarian passionists of the Golden South might say we are individual free moral agents who are best served by systems that maximize access to what we desire and deploy this for as many people as possible, as equally as possible. This I think is pretty well summed up in this quote, the big goal is to be able to do and to get what we want, as much and as equally as possible. Desires are all equally desires, so they all equally deserve satisfaction. Nothing is exempt from the system, so everything becomes a resource to be used for our purposes. I've just got to be me and the world should help me be me. The end result is an overall project of reconstructing social life to make it a rational system for maximum equal preference satisfaction. A couple weeks ago I mentioned David Brooks' new book, The Road to Character, and I think he sums it up quite well in this quote. If you were born at any time over the last 60 years, I'm 51, so I'm at the underside of this, and any of you are older than 60, if you were born at any time over the last 60 years, you were probably born into what the philosopher Charles Taylor has called the culture of authenticity. This mindset is based on the romantic idea that each of us has a golden figure at the core of our self. There is an innately good true self which can be trusted, consulted, and gotten in touch with. Your personal feelings are the best guide for what is right or wrong. In this end-off, the self is to be trusted, not doubted. Your desires are like inner oracles for what is right and true. You know you are doing the right thing when you feel good inside. The valid rules of life are those you make or accept for yourself and will feel right to you. Our moral salvation, Taylor writes, described in the culture, comes from recovering authentic moral contact with ourselves. It is important to stay true to that pure inner voice and not follow the conformities of a corrupting world. As Taylor puts it, there is a strict way of being that is my way. I am called to live my life in this way and not in imitation of anyone else's. If I am not, I miss the point of my life. I miss what being human is for me. From an older tradition of self-combat, we move to a self-liberation and self-expression. More authority is no longer found in some external, objective good. It is found in each person's unique, original self. A greater emphasis is put on personal feelings as a guide to what is right and wrong. I know I am doing right because I feel harmonious inside. Something is going wrong at the other end when I feel my autonomy is being threatened and when I feel I am not being true to myself. In this ethos, sin is not found in your individual self. It is found in the external structures of society, in racism, in equality, and oppression. To improve yourself, you have to be taught to love yourself, to be true to yourself, not to doubt yourself, and to struggle against yourself. As one of the characters in one of the heist musical movies sings, the answers are all inside of me. All I've got to do is believe. Now, since you are in church, what you may be expecting is this. I am going to disappoint you. You will not get this, I hope. Because, interestingly enough, while not identical, a lot of the elements in our current conflict are there actually in the Book of Romans. In preparation for the sermon this week, I did what one of my seminary professors exhorted us to do, and he said, if you have only time to read one book on a passage, read the book that it's in. And so, since I'm an auditory listener, I sat in one sitting and read the entire Book of Romans. And if you listen to the Book of Romans, or read the whole Book of Romans in one sitting, you very quickly get the sense that Paul is appealing to a church in conflict. And in this church, there is conflict between two different groups. There are people who have come into the church from the pagan Roman empire, and there are Jews in the church who come into the church from their life, growing up, as Jews. And there are impasses, there are conflicts between these two groups at very particular points. Now, what you might expect to hear from Paul would be, follow the law! Obey the law! If you accept that, you probably haven't read quite enough Paul. Paul begins in Romans 1 with a critique. And it's a critique of Roman society. And Paul, in a sense, says, you all began this world as passionists, you followed your passions. But he looks at Roman culture and says, what we see in Roman culture is the result of a whole bunch of people following their passions. Can anybody guess who the emperor was when Paul was writing this letter? Nero! Now, you know Nero probably from Fiddling, Paul Romer, but Nero was not necessarily unusual when it came to Roman emperors. Roman emperors could have what they want and do what they want. Some Roman emperors were famous for walking down the street and if they see a political enemy, they would beat him or have the soldiers go and rape his family, or a particular emperor, in fact, would just go on to rape the man himself, just to humiliate him politically. They would not have their house destroyed or their children burned or this is the life of Roman emperors. And if you Google top ten worst Roman emperors, you will read things the likes of which you probably would never have imagined. So Paul looks at Roman society and says, if you are all about your passions, this won't necessarily lead you to the place you imagined it will. This, of course, in striking contrast, if this being commencement season you go to high school or college commencement exercises, this is pretty much what you will hear. As Adam DeGeneres put it in the 2009 commencement address, my advice to you is to be true to yourself and everything will be fine. Celebrity chef Mario Riccioli advised graduates to follow your own truth, expressed consistently by you. And Whitman urged other audiences to have the courage to honor your character, your intellect, your inclinations, and yes, your soul by listening to its clean, clear voice instead of following the muddy messages of a timid world. Steve Jobs had one of the most famous commencement addresses where he told everyone, don't listen to conventional wisdom, what other authorities in your life have to say. And he said to Seth Stanford, I wonder, would anyone stand up and say, then why Steve should we listen to you? The irony of all of this is, of course, that nearly every world religion has had questions about the self. Taoists, Confucianists, Buddhists, Stoics, Pragmatists. One of the funniest things I find is that while Buddhism is a very popular thing, many people say, well, I'm kind of into Buddhism now, but I believe you should follow your passions. And I wonder, have they read Buddhist Four Noble Truths? Buddhism in a sense says, your suffering is caused by your passions. So why would you on one hand say, I'd like to be a Buddhist, and on the other hand, exhort all the graduates to follow their passions? Do you wish all your graduates misery? If you're a Buddhist, that's what you're saying. It's also striking that we have this passionate vision in a society where we also have psychology and sociology, which on the other hand says, all of our passions are really products of our biology and our upbringing. If you Google, if you Google how to fall in love, one of the things you'll find is a very interesting New York Times article that reports on a social psychologist who said basically, if you want to fall in love, you can meet anyone in a bar, and if they're willing to engage you on 36 questions, at the end of the discussion, you too will be in love. Why? Because feelings of love are a product of mutual self-disclosure. So what about the self? You see, the Jews in Rome would have been very much down on this stream of conversation. The Jews would have said, look, the God of the universe has revealed himself to us. The God of the universe has given us the law, and the God of the universe has told us, if you follow the rules, everything will be fine. Are you getting the picture? At graduation, they will tell you, if you follow yourself, everything will be fine. If you listen to the traditionalists, whether they be Buddhists or Taoists or Confucianists or almost any other religion, they'll say, if you follow the rules, everything will be fine. The irony, of course, is that if you look around the world, you find people who follow their passions and people who follow the rules, and things aren't fine in either camp. And so you possibly fall in a sense, and Romans 1 says, following your passions will lead you to a place where you discover your passions don't satisfy you, where your passion is simply replaced by another, and you spend your whole life on following your dreams only to realize that at some point, you get too old or too sick or in a corner, and you can't follow them anymore without hurting other people. The other camp says, I followed the rules all my life, and what did it ever get me? And so Paul says in Romans 2 and 3, okay, there's the law, follow it. What will it get you? Paul makes the point that it didn't come to choose, did it? In Romans 3 he says, what even more frustrating is you can't fully comply with the law. And in a pluralist society we would say, and neither can we agree on what should be in the law. So where are we? And in Romans 8 verse 1 to 4, Paul says this, there is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. For the law of the lightning spirit in Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and death. For God achieved what the law could not do so because it was weakened through the flesh by sending his own Son in the lightness of sinful flesh. By sending his own Son in the lightness of sinful flesh and concern in sin, and concern in sin, he condemns sin in the flesh so that the righteous requirements of the law may be fulfilled in us who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the spirit. Now, I can't summarize the entire book of Romans for you in the amount of time that we have, but I'm going to try and make you points. Basically, Paul says, if you follow your passions, you will be miserable. Ironically, Buddha makes the same point as does Confucius, as does almost every other sharp observer of human nature. Your passions are terrible masters. They can be good signals, but they're terrible masters. Everyone else pursuing their passions will at some point decide it will come at the expense of another. Let's imagine a mother who says, you know, this child is just a pain in the neck. Cries, wants to eat every day. I just need to be me, and I need to go out and find myself. What happens to the child? Passions are illusory. They keep changing. Sell them fully and finally satisfy. Ask someone, what did you want ten years ago? Did you get it? Did you not get it? Whether or not you're satisfied, probably doesn't matter whether you got it or didn't. Or the experience of someone who, they're lonely and they just want someone to love. Actually, what they want is someone to love them. And then they get that person, and then they'll come to me years later and say, oh, I just want to be rid of this person. I thought this person was going to make you happy. Passions don't necessarily get us where we want to go. People become self-interested free agents, cutting ties when these ties no longer serve for them. What we essentially get are selfish, unsatisfied people. But Paul goes on to make the point that the law also brings misery. And like passions, laws can be good signals and good guides, but understood in their overall context. We know about the spirit of the law and the letter of the law. And we all understand the difficulties that law brings. In one sense, Paul says about what the law did in the role of the Jewish nation was the law became a honeypot. And Paul for some of us said in the book of Romans, once sin saw the law, he said good. Now I know how to own these people. Because legalists can be just as miserable as passionists. The frustration of the passionist is nobody will let them have their passion. The frustration of the legalist is I am the only moral person in the world and everyone else is a hypocrite. So you won't wind up lonely. Plus if you're a legalist, you never know how much is enough. How have I done enough? Did you see the end of Schindler's List? When Oscar Schindler asks, could I have saved more? Have I done enough? You never know this as a legalist. And so Paul says the law was a honeypot. And by the law, the Lord exposed the fact that laws alone can't fix us. And that life is lived out in Israel. But then when sin saw Jesus, it thought it could happen too. And so Jesus, in a sense, the law dies with him. And sin dies in him. And so Jesus was the honeypot to show that sin cannot be done. And Paul says that it's actually in the cross of Jesus Christ where the law and the passions die because Jesus freely begins to live and shows us the meaning of your well-being at my expense. So there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. Sin's power over you has been broken in Christ Jesus. But the question still remains, are you a passionist or are you a legalist? Because most of us will defer to one or the other. And Paul says this. So then, brothers and sisters, we are under obligation, not to the flesh, meaning the passions, to live according to the flesh. If you live according to the flesh, you will die. But if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. See, Paul's ethics says we don't live by rules. Because rules will make you self-righteous. Paul also says we don't live by our passions. Because in either case you are a slave to them. And what Paul says is now you are free in Christ Jesus. But that then asks the question, what will you do with your freedom? For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God. If you do not receive the Spirit of slavery leading against your fear, but you receive the Spirit of adoption by whom we cry, Abba Father. The Spirit Himself bears witness to our spirit that we are God's children, and children that heirs, namely heirs of God, and also fellow heirs to his Christ. If indeed we suffer with them, so we may be glorified with them. Now this is a little complicated for us, because in a sense we are left with a quandary. Because we say, but I just want to be clear on what I need to do. And at the heart of this is exactly that point. Because what Paul says is, you are locked in misery. You may be a slave to your passions, or you may be a slave to your traditions. What Jesus does is set you free from that. And then he asks you, what now will be your new master? And he says, may your new master be the Spirit. And what you say frustratingly is, but I can't control the Spirit. Or the Spirit doesn't give me all the answers that I want. Or the Spirit just lets those other people do whatever they want, and they say, well it's just by the Spirit. And part of that is the point. Because you begin with misery and realize you're slavery, then you look at deliverance and realize that this has been accomplished for you, and the next point is, in fact, gratitude. You see, you are no longer passionists. Passions are terrible masters of gods, but beautiful creatures. What the Spirit begins to do is realign our passions, and make us begin to want what God wants. But that then throws us into the other camp and says, well God wants the law. Well, if you read the letter of catechism, can you summarize the law? Love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength, and love your neighbor as yourself. And you might say, well pastor, I want specific answers. And I'd say, well, you and I can talk, but if I gave you specific answers, if you agreed with that, you'd cheer me. If you disagreed with that, you'd curse me. And so it isn't really true that you just want specific answers. What Paul is inviting you into is what Christ has given, which is the Holy Spirit. One of the things I love about Earl is that often after Sundays, he will tell me, you forgot something in your sermon this week. And that's fine. I've loved Earl for a long time, and you're a man I greatly respect, and I appreciate all the work that God has done with you. One of the things Earl told me about my sermon last week, he said, you forgot the most important point. I said, what's that? Receive the Holy Spirit. It's a command. And Earl was exactly right. Receive the Holy Spirit. And so the invitation is this. If you are living to your passions, you are a passionate, and I promise you it won't take you where you think you want to go. If you are a legalist, I promise you, you cannot fulfill the law. Christ came to abolish the law. And you might say, well, where does that need be? And I'll give you Earl's admonishment. Receive the Holy Spirit. Because what the Holy Spirit does is free us from the law, but also frees us to fulfill the law. And this is what the Spirit does. You see, laws are supposed to help us communally, love God and each other. And so laws are good. It happens, motivates and energizes us to be sub-creators in God's beautiful world. So passions are good. But neither can be our God. The Spirit is part of the Trinity. God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit. This is the life we live out. The Christian life is the working out of these things. The Christian life is the work of the Spirit to reshape us through prayer toward resurrection. You might say, well, Pastor, there's so much more you should say. I've got all these other questions. And this is exactly why we have the Church. Be filled with the Holy Spirit. Because your passions, if they are your masters, will lead you to destruction. And the law, if you make it your master and if you make it yourself, will also reveal to you and reveal you to the world to simply be self-righteous and full of yourself and not all the lover of God. We are bound in this prison, and that is our misery. Christ has saved us by giving up himself, by surrendering his life and being raised again by God. That is the deliverance. Gratitude then says, I am free. What shall I do with freedom? I would like to please God. How can I please God? By loving God with all my heart, soul, mind and strength and loving my neighbor as myself. This is the Christian life. Let's pray. Lord Jesus told us, in this world you will have trouble. And we have trouble in this world from the time that we are born until the time that we die. And we are ardent self-salvationists, Lord. Some of us grab onto the law and say, this is the answer. If I can only get other people to comply. And other of us say, oh, the true path is inside of me. If I can only get the rest of the world to cooperate with what I see is good. And you show us, Lord, that the problem is in fact ourself. And Jesus showed us what to do with the self when he put his self last for our well-being. Lord, may we receive your Holy Spirit. Because it's only your Spirit, Lord, that brings us life and hope. It's your Spirit that raises us from the dead. It's your Spirit that changes us from the inside. It's the Spirit that keeps our case before the Father. It's the Spirit that makes us new. Help us, Lord, to receive this Spirit. And make us one. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. When you say it.