https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lxb5y-twNo8

 I'm looking in the book of Judges. The book of Judges in many ways asks the question, how can this world be fixed? And it looks at a number of the answers that we intuitively give. Two weeks ago we looked at the question, why doesn't religion work? Last week we looked at the challenge of if I were God, I could do a better job fixing this world. This week, in many ways, we looked at what we do when we have power. A couple of weeks ago I picked up the Sacramento News and Review that had the camera story, What would Jesus say about poverty? What was interesting is how little many of the people asked about the question referred to the Bible and the record we have of Jesus' life to actually look at what he did with poverty. I often hear about religion and politics, Christianity and politics. There's a lot the Bible has to say about politics, but a lot of it doesn't easily fit into our questions. In fact, today's passage has a great deal to do with politics and leadership and rulers. We picked up on the story last week of Gideon. Gideon, that man that God answered directly. Gideon, that man who God had given so many signs, direct signs, so that Gideon could believe, Gideon could act, and Gideon could save Israel from the Midianites. So after Gideon saved Israel from the Midianites, the Israelites said to Gideon, Rule over us, you, your son and your grandson, because you have saved us from the hand of Midian. But Gideon told them, I will not rule over you, nor will my son rule over you. The Lord will rule over you. And again we see Gideon very much exemplifies God's vision that Yahweh, the Lord, was king over Israel. Gideon believed that and in some senses implemented that. But then Gideon goes up and he said, I do have one request, that each of you give me a earring from your share of the thunder. It was the custom of the Israelites to wear gold earrings. They answered, we'll be glad to give that. So they spread out a garment and each of them threw a ring from his thunder on to it. The weight of the gold rings he asked for came to 1700 shekels, not counting the ornaments. The pendants and the purple garments worn by the kings of Midian are the chains that were on their camels' necks. Gideon made the gold into an epa, which he placed in Orpah, in Obra, his town. All Israelites, all Israel prostituted themselves by worshipping it there and it became a snare to Gideon and his family. So I want you to see Gideon come and say, I will not be your king. I will not set up hereditary rules so that my sons and my grandsons rule over you. But on the other hand, he kind of follows the way of Aaron and collects the earrings, creates a gold epa, which was an ornamental priestly robe, and the epa was also connected with the Urim and Havim, which was the way to find God's messages to Israel. And this epa, which Gideon made, became, as the text says, a stumbling block, which meant that, like the bronze serpent a couple of generations before, the Jews were able to use the truth they can to trust in this epa and use it in place of God. Thus Gideon was subdued before the Israelites and did not raise its head again. During Gideon's lifetime, the land had peace for 40 years. Now, often when the Bible gives numbers, like 40 years, there's a connotation beneath a number like that. And 40 years in Israelite language is kind of a span of a happy lifetime or a happy reign. Saul's reign was 40 years. David's reign was 40 years. And so when it says Gideon had a reign of 40 years, we're beginning to get the sense of kingship. And we're going to get more of that sense. Jerub-baal. Now pay attention to all the times you see Baal in this story. Now Baal is the term of the Canaanite god, but Baal in quite literal language in Hebrew means lord. Gideon, if you remember the story from last week, Jerub-baal, made Baal content, was one of Gideon's names because Gideon defied Baal by tearing down the altar of Gideon that his father had erected. So when the town wanted to kill Gideon, Gideon's father said, if Baal is upset with my son destroying his altar, let Baal contend with my son. And so from that point on, one of Gideon's names was Jerub-baal. Jerub-baal, son of Joash, went back home to live. He had seventy sons of his own, for he had many wives. Now pause. If you read the book of Samuel, you'll discover that David had many wives. If you read the book of Kings, you'll discover that Solomon had many wives. So not only does Gideon echo Moses and Aaron, Gideon also precedes David and Solomon. And now in the ancient world, polygamy was not unusual, but if you had enough wives to have seventy sons, that means that there were also daughters not counting, and that all these are wives. He also had, as we'll see in a moment, concubines, who are women that he's sleeping with and having children with, but he's not giving them the official status as wife. So we begin to see that although Gideon quite ceremoniously said, I will not be your king. Gideon, it seems, decided, like in that Mel Brooks movie, that it's good to be the king, and that he was going to go around and have wives and women all over and have many, many children. So he had seventy sons of his own, for he had many wives. So if you had a number around number like seventy, kind of gives the connotation that there were many. This concubine who lived in Shechem, probably not his only concubine, and this probably not her only child, this concubine who lived in Shechem, also bore him a son, was named Abimelech. Now Abimelech basically means my father is king. Now pay attention to all of this language. How many bales? How many times my father is king? And what my father is king does throughout this story. Gideon, son of Joach, died at a good old age and was buried in the town of his father Joach in Oprah of the Israelites. No sooner had Gideon died than the Israelites again prostituted themselves to the bales. They set up Baal-Berit. Now Baal-Berit in Hebrew quite means Lord of the Covenant. And those of you who are used to reading the Old Testament will say, wait a minute, isn't Yahweh the Lord of the Covenant? Here in Shechem, one of the principal Israelite towns, they set up a very large temple. In fact we know it's a very large temple because archaeologists have discovered the ruins of this temple. A very large temple to Baal called Baal of the Covenant. And to not remember the Lord their God, who had rescued them from the hands of all their enemies on every side, they also failed to show any loyalty to the family of Jerub Baal, that is Gideon, in spite of all the good things he had done for them. Now in Bin Laden, again my father is king, son of Jerub Baal, went to his mother's brothers in Shechem and said to them in all of his mother's plan, ask all of the citizens, now in the NIV you'll notice that they'll translate this particular Hebrew word citizens. In the New English translator it's leaders, in the King James version it's men, but in Hebrew it's quite literally the Baals of the town. So ask all the Baals of Shechem, which is better for you, to have all 70 of Jerub Baal's sons rule over you or just one man, remember, I'm your flesh and blood. So don't think that democracy is necessarily such a modern process. When the brothers repeated all of this to the Baals of Shechem, they were inclined to follow Abimelech, my father is king, for they said he is related to us, if you're going to have a king, don't you want him to be part of the family? They gave him 70 shekels of silver from the temple of Baal-Berit, which shows very much that the Baals of the town ran the Baal temple of the covenant, and so they were able to take from the treasury of the Baal temple. Abimelech used it to hire reckless scoundrels who became his followers. These reckless scoundrels, the connotations he threw at that, these were rough guys. These were guys who had clubs and swords and were ready to basically do what had been like what. They, for lack of a better term, were a gang. He went to his father's home in Okra and on one stone murdered his 70 brothers, the sons of Jerub Baal. But Jokin, the youngest of Jerub Baal, escaped from hiding, then all the Baals of Shechem and Beth-Milo gathered beside the great tree at the pillar in Shechem to crown Abimelech king. Then Jokin was told about this. He climbed up to the top of Mount Gerizim and shouted to them, Listen to the Baals of Shechem so that God may listen to you. One day the trees went out to anoint a king for themselves. They said to the olive tree, We are king. But the olive tree answered, Should I give up my oil? By which both gods and humans are honored to hold sway over the trees. Next the tree said to the fig tree, Come and be our king. But the fig tree replied, Should I give up my fruit, so good and sweet, to hold sway over the trees? Then the tree said to the vine, Come and be our king. But the vine answered, Should I give up my wine? Which cheers both gods and humans to hold sway over the trees. What you see here in the middle of the book of Judges is a wonderful example of a Hebrew fable. It's a lovely fable where all of the trees come together and want a king. So they first come to the olive tree. But the olive tree in a sense says, I already blessed the world. Should I stop blessing the world by giving them olive oil just to be your king? So then again to the fig tree. And the fig tree says, I already blessed the world by giving it fruit. Should I stop my blessing the world to be your king? And then to the grapevine. And the grapevine says, I already give wine and grace to please the hearts of gods and humans. Should I stop doing that? To be your king. And if you know fables, what's always the special number of fables? Three. So we've asked three trees to be the king of the trees. But all of them decline. So finally, all of the trees said to the thorn bush, come be our king. The thorn bush said to the trees, if you really want to anoint me king over you, come and take refuge in my shade. But if not, then let fire come out of the thorn bush and consume the cedars of Lebanon. And what does this little fable mean? Now it's very interesting that the three trees that were brought out before are prominent plants in the Hebrew context that blessed the world. Olive oil was the staple of life. You anoint your head with oil. You use oil as a medicine. You use oil as cosmetics. You eat with oil. Oil is a blessing of the world. Vicks. Vicks are another prominent plant and prominent produce for the land. Vicks were highly valued. Grapes making wine also the same. But the thorn bush, what quality does the thorn bush have? Its trickers point out, keeping you away. The olive, the fig, and the grapevine all say, why should I stop blessing the world in order to hope sway over you? But the thorn bush says, I'll be your king. And if you don't like me as your king, I'll destroy you. Abib-el-el. The bales. Politics. We say, if I were God, I could run the world better. Miss Fable asks, how do we run the world? Have you acted honorably and in good faith by making Abimelech son of the king? King. Now there's also something going on here because if you remember, Gideon had many wives. And with those wives he had 70 sons. Is Abimelech one of those sons? No, he's the son of the concubine. But the son of the concubine stands up and says, I'm the son of the king. Have you been fair to Jeroboam and his family? Have you treated him as he deserved? Remember that my father fought for you and risked his life to rescue you from the hand of Baniac. But today you have revolted against my father's family. You have murdered his 70 sons on a single stone and have made Abimelech the son of his female slave, king, over the bales of Shechem because he is related to you. So have you acted honorably and in good faith towards Jeroboam and his family today? If you have, may Abimelech son of the king be your joy and may you be his too. But if you have not, let fire come out from Abimelech and consume you and the bales of Shechem and Beth Milo. And let fire come out from you, the bales of Shechem and Beth Milo, and consume Abimelech, the son of the king. Then Joseph fled, escaping to Beer. And when I posted this on Facebook, one of my friends say, isn't that the way it always is? He ran away and went and got a beer. Joseph fled, escaping to Beer, and he lived there because he was afraid of his brother, Elinor, the son of the king. Now if this afternoon you go home and you want to read the rest of the story, you can read how in fact the fable comes true. How Abimelech and Shechem, first everything seems grand, Abimelech is going to be king and everything is going to be wonderful. But in time what happens? They eat at each other and eventually they destroy one another. So how do we rule the earth? How do, what do we do with power? How do we coerce? When we are given power, what do we do with it? I'm sure Abimelech meant well, maybe. Where does our administration of the world lead? What does this fable tell us? The olive tree says no. The fig tree says no. The grapevine says no. The corn bush says, oh yes, I will be king. What happens when the Baals of Shechem have the son of the king? This fable points us to another saying in the New Testament. You all know the saying, those who live by the sword, die by the sword. Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them. One kiss is that the one I kiss is the man arrested. Going at once to Jesus, Judas said, greetings Rabbi, I kissed him. Jesus replied, do what you came for, friend. Then the man stepped forward, seized Jesus, arrested him. And with that one of Jesus' companions reached for his sword, drew it out and struck the servant that the high priest, cutting off his ear. Put your sword back into place, Jesus said, for all who draw the sword will die by the sword. Jesus obviously knew the story of the Bimalek and the fable of the trees. And Jesus knows how we rule over one another, how power works, and what we do to try to establish the world in the image we imagine it should be. Jesus comes to us and says this, I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. The higher hand is not the shepherd and does not own the sheep. So when he sees the wolf coming, he abandons the sheep and runs away. When the wolf attacks, the flag scatters it. The man runs away because he is the shepherd. The man runs away because he is a higher hand and cares nothing for the sheep. I am the good shepherd. I know my sheep and my sheep know me. Just as the father knows me and I know the father. And I lay down my life for the sheep. I have other sheep that are not of this sheep and I must bring them also. They too will listen to my voice and there shall be one flock and one shepherd. The reason my father loves me is that I lay down my life only to take it up again. No one takes it from me, but I lay it down for my own accord. I have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again. This command I receive from my father. Now here is the thing about power and thorn bushes and swords. They work. You can coerce, you can get people to do what you want. What we have going on now in our country is this long two-year process. Canada just picked a new leader in 11 weeks. We have two years of talking and punditry and fundraising and speeches and debates. And we will elect a new president and that president will rule over us and we will see if it goes well or if it goes poorly or if we can even agree on how it goes. But Jesus says the standard of leadership is servanthood. The higher hand, when the wolf comes, runs. Why? Because he doesn't care for the shepherd. Because he doesn't care for the sheep. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep and the message of the gospel is exactly this. That the good shepherd has come and has laid down his life for us. The question is, do we believe him? Is this real? Has Jesus done this? If in fact we are invited into this kind of leadership, even with each other, this kind of servanthood, if we lay down our lives, will God raise us up? If you believe Jesus was raised, you can have hope. If you don't believe Jesus is raised, the parable of the thorn bush holds. You see, it's costly to be the olive tree. It's costly to be the fig tree. It's costly to be the grapevine. The only way it makes sense to live Jesus' life is if you believe in his resurrection and imagine that the parable of the trees and the adage of Jesus are truth. And if we have the courage to actually follow, let's pray. Lord, we see the patterns in this world. But each of us has to ask ourselves, how will we live? Will we believe Jesus? Do we imagine that the God of the universe will in fact vindicate the olive tree, the fig tree, and the grapevine against the thorn bush? This has been, Lord, the question of the people of God as they have suffered, as they have sacrificed. And this is the question that we live every day. Help us, Lord, to believe. Help us, Lord, to understand our nature. We are by nature thorn bushes. Help us, Lord, to understand the deliverance that the good shepherd has laid down his life for the sheep. Help us to believe, Lord, that he took his life up again. And may we, Lord, follow. In the name of Jesus, amen. What do you say?