https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=olFjJuMvASw

 A group of young people who have basically been sold into virtual slavery and the sex trade. And a wealthy and powerful person comes and wants to liberate them. And so this person, perhaps using the police or whatever laws may be available, takes this community of people out of slavery and releases them from the bondage that they were in. The first thing that someone who has been a slave faces is, okay, what do I do now? So let's imagine this wealthy and powerful person takes these former slaves and says, I have a great estate and I'd love you to come and live on this estate. And there'll be land to work, there'll be animals to tend to, you and your children and your children's children can build a life on this estate. Now imagine that this liberator takes these people out of slavery and brings them to the estate and lands them there and then goes off. What would happen to this group of people? Do you think having been slaves, they would suddenly say, oh, this is grand and they would all work together and they would listen to one another and they would be in harmony with one another? We like to imagine that people who have suffered somehow understand suffering and are therefore naturally generous and kind and organized towards one another. But in most cases that probably wouldn't happen. What the people probably would work out of are all the patterns that they knew when they were living in slavery. And so what should this wealthy and powerful liberator do? This wealthy and powerful liberator should probably set down some rules and help the people learn how to live together, how to organize themselves, how to cooperate, how to not abuse one another, how to not use power to advantage one person over the other person. Now, let's imagine that this wealthy and powerful liberator was also a humble person. We might imagine that someone who is wealthy and powerful wants to seek more attention for themselves. I was actually going to use Donald Trump as an illustration in this sermon. Someone who can't seem to find the TV cameras enough. But let's imagine this wealthy and powerful liberator was actually humble and told the people, I don't want you to go putting pictures up of me all over the place. I remember during the Gulf War when the armies invaded Iraq, there were statues and banners and posters of Saddam Hussein everywhere. Let's imagine that this liberator decided, don't make images of me. What I want from you is actually to live together, to work together, to prosper, and the means and the manner by which you live with one another should be so exemplary that all of my neighbors will rejoice your presence on my estate. Those of you who have been following our journey through the Old Testament know that this in some ways is just simply a retelling of the story of Israel, where God takes these slaves out of Egypt and is going to bring them to the promised land. The difficulty is, what will these former slaves do? Well, in the desert wanderings we saw all of the different ways that the slaves simply reenacted all of what they assumed about life in Egypt, that the powerful take advantage of the weak, that each of us should look to do what's right in our own eyes and to live this way. But what God asks of them is in fact something different. We've been through the book of Genesis, we've been through the book of Exodus, we've been through the book of Numbers, and now we're at the beginning of the book of Deuteronomy. And in fact the entire story of the book of Deuteronomy is the second giving of the law. This is also Moses' swan song. Moses is not going to join them in the promised land. And so the entire book of Deuteronomy is in some ways Moses' grand speech rehearsing the history, going over the law, and again and again and again Moses is going to say, now listen to this and live this way, and if you live this way, God will bless you. If you don't live this way, he's not going to let you live in the land. Now again as I asked the children this morning, do you have rules in the house? The answer is yes, and some of the better rules were don't jump on the couch and don't jump on the bed. And so I asked the children, if you jump on the couch and if you jump on the bed, will you mother kick you out? And one kid said yes, but then upon further questioning he said, no not really. Because these children feel secure in the land. But we can very much understand the fact that if a great liberator brought these people into the land and settled them there, and the people continued to be a problem for the neighbors, and the people continued to be a problem on the estate, at some point the owner of the estate will decide that they've had enough and they will in fact put the residents out. And this is why the law is given. The third thing about this law, about the book of Deuteronomy, is that many scholars have noted that the format of the book is almost precisely like a lot of other ancient Near East documents that archaeologists have found. That again and again they found documents where a great emperor will agree to let a less powerful people live in his empire, be protected by him, but they in turn must agree to certain situations. If for example you decide to rent an apartment, you want to move into that apartment, the landlord will probably come with a lease. And in that lease there will be a number of stipulations that will say some things that you can and cannot do. You may not be able to sublease the apartment. You may not be able to have pets. But the goal of the landlord is not simply to be mean. The goal of the landlord is that the people in this apartment will honor the value of the apartment, honor their neighbors, and in fact life in the apartment complex will be harmonious. And so in a sense what the book of Deuteronomy is about is house rules that God is giving to them. And again and again what you'll read in the book of Deuteronomy are passages like this. Now Israel, here are the decrees and the laws I am about to teach you. Follow them so that you may live and may go in and take possession of the land the Lord, the God of your ancestors, is giving you. Do not add to what I command to you and do not subtract from it, but keep the commands of the Lord that I give you. Now what is interesting is that once this is in the Bible, funny things can happen. Because we rightly privilege the Bible and hold it up and say this is God's revelation of himself to us. But once we get those ideas in our heads we tend to take passages like this in a rather strange direction. So sometimes we will read the book of Deuteronomy and we will say, oh look, here are the rules. And so if I do whatever is in the book of Deuteronomy then God will bless me and if I don't do what is in the book of Deuteronomy then God will curse me. Well that is an interesting idea. And then there is another idea. That the book of Deuteronomy tells us who goes to heaven and who doesn't. So people who do what is in the book of Deuteronomy go to heaven and people who don't do what is in the book of Deuteronomy go to hell. That is another idea that we have. And then there is a third idea. Oh, the book of Deuteronomy is about the church. So people come into the church and say, oh I kind of like the people in this church, I kind of like how they hear one of the rules. Oh here is the book of Deuteronomy. You do what is in the book of Deuteronomy and you can stay in the church and if you break the rules of Deuteronomy you will have to leave the church. Okay. So others come to it and say the book of Deuteronomy is full of iron age rules that abide to people that we don't understand or know. So anyone who listens to the book of Deuteronomy is an Indian. And such people are religious zealots and deserve to be ignored or cast out of society. In fact you will find all of these applications to the book of Deuteronomy in the culture today. Some will say read the book of Deuteronomy and you will be blessed. Some will say do the book of Deuteronomy and you will go to heaven. Others will say listen to the book of Deuteronomy and you can stay in church. And many others say the book of Deuteronomy is just simply folly and I don't know why these people listen to any of it anyway. Beneath these conversations are other conversations and realities about us. And one of the realities is we like rules. Jay is sitting here and Jay once told me, I'll use this story, Mason and Mike are both out, right? Okay. Jay once told me the story of eating breakfast and he told Mason that Mason was going to be in charge of cereal. And so Mason is how old? He just turned six. He just turned six and Micah is four? Well the first thing Mason did with his new power was decide that he was going to be the ruler and the decider of whether or not Micah got cereal. This is an enlightening thing when it comes to human nature. We like rules. And so the truth is that if you have children in your house, you will very quickly establish rules, not because the children need to learn not to jump on the couch or not to jump on the bed, but also because children derive a certain sense of comfort knowing that there are rules. Rules help children order their lives and understand where boundaries are. You can read psychological books that talk about this. Because it's helpful for us to know what the rules are. So if we stay within the rules, then we are generally affirmed and accepted. And if we go outside the rules, then we have trouble. Another situation, a certain man who used to come to this church, he's passed away now. The first Sunday he came to this church, he walked into this church, having been to a number of African American churches, walked into this church just dressed to the nines with a hat, with a suit, with everything. Came to this church, looked around and said, oh, I'm overdressed. So he came back the next week, he was dressed like more like a number of us. Why did he do that? Was he uncomfortable because he was looking good? No. He just kind of intuitive, oh, in this church, I don't necessarily have to be all dressed up. Rules help us feel comfortable. So we really like rules. And ironically, we really like rules when they help us look good. And when they make some of those people we don't like look bad. With rules, however, in our contemporary age, we have what we call the post-minor hermeneutic of suspicion. Once rules come up, then we begin to ask, oh, who's making the rules? How are those rules biasing and privileging those in power and keeping impressed those who are under it? Sometimes, as when Mason became king of the serial, he very quickly got the idea that the serial position could be held to his advantage and he would have leverage over his brother Micah. This is a very human thing. But then we advance in our rule conversation a little bit further, and we begin to realize that we judge rules on the basis of my own well-being and ignore questions of bias. So when a child says, that rule about jumping on the sofa, why do we have this rule? We have this rule because of what? Well, I don't like this rule. I would like to jump on the sofa. Well, did you ever consider the fact that maybe your parents had a rule about the sofa because they don't want the sofa damaged? Rules do express our biases, and sometimes when we make them, we make them in a way to express our biases, and so sometimes when we see a rule, we interpret it in how many different ways? One of the things that we should look at when we look at the book of Deuteronomy is understand the complex world of rules and how we interact with them. If someone picks up the Bible and says, pastor, I read here in the book of Deuteronomy, I would say, well, first of all, you should read the entire book, and secondly, you should pay attention to one little tidbit about the Bible. The Bible was written for us, but not to us. But what do I mean by that? I mean, if you read the book of Deuteronomy, what you will find is in fact a contract. It's an agreement between a great emperor, which is the Lord, and the vassal, which is Israel, and this was written to Israel. So not everything you find in the book of Deuteronomy will be directly applicable to you. The book of Deuteronomy was written for you, but not to you. The rulemaking in the book of Deuteronomy should be kept in the context of the little liberator story I told you. Israel is being taken out of Egypt, and the Lord would like Israel to embody something different in the land. If you continue to read Deuteronomy chapter 4, one of the things that you will notice is that God has a very ambitious project in Israel. God in a sense is saying to Israel, I want you to go into the land, and I want you to embody my will in this world. Within your cultural reference, within something that your neighbors would understand, within a culture that you will understand. I want you to embody this. I want you to teach this to your children, but I'm not going to use all of the normal ways that many of the other nations embody authority, which is statues and images. I in fact want the quality of your community to embody that image. Zach and Peter here this morning, and I remember one of the stories that Neil told me when he first came to this church. This was, what year did Neil first come to this church be? 81. 81. Okay. So Neil came into this church, and Neil was looking for a church, and poor Dee. You know, some of Neil's tastes were not Dee's tastes. And so Neil comes to this church, and one of the things he notices is that the children are sitting quietly and listening. And Neil looked at that and thought, what kind of a place is this? Well, this children sitting quietly with their parents was an expression of a culture that in fact had been developed for generations. And now I personally, those of you who know me, I don't have a problem with children make noise. They're children. But what Neil picked up on and what attracted Neil to this community were values in the community that he had not found in other places. And so Neil pretty quickly said, this is a community I want to be a part of. That in a sense is what God is doing with Israel. And God is saying, I'm going to give you these rules and I want you to embody them. I want in fact you to absorb them and to have the context of your community express me. No statues of me, no making images of me with the things of this world. But I want your relationships to image me. Now that in fact, if you come into a church, is one of the key features. If someone comes into a church and they're asking me, pastor, how should I evaluate a church? One of the things I would tell them is you shouldn't just go and say, well, the preaching is great. Good preaching is nice. You should go and say, well, the music is what I like. Well, music is fine. The thing that should characterize us is in fact the quality of our relationships with one another. Because in a sense what God is telling the children of Israel in Deuteronomy is, that is how I will be known. By how you relate to one another. The third thing I think Christians need to bear in mind when they read the book of Deuteronomy is that Deuteronomy is part of our broader story. The broader story of Deuteronomy is that in fact Israel came into the land and God gave them the rules. And as any parent will know, once you lay down a rule, the kids will find a way to break it. And that is another fact of rules in our world. St. Augustine tells a story of when he was a boy. And when he was a boy, he looked and there were some pears in a neighbor's orchard. And he didn't particularly like pears, but he and his friends stole into that orchard and stole the pears and took them. And like I said, he didn't particularly like pears. They weren't very good pears. In fact, in the end, he just gave them to some pigs. And so later in life, Augustine asked himself, why did I steal those pears? And he had to reflect on his own heart to understand the old adage that forbidden fruit tastes sweetest. There is something in us that resists rules. And so when the book of Deuteronomy comes around, we read it, we bristle. And then I personally have an aversion to signs. I remember that song out of the 60s, signs, signs, everywhere a sign. And when someone says, don't do this, part of me deep inside of me says, I want to. I want to not, whether or not I actually want to do that thing, I just want to do it to defy it. I just want to do it to be an individual. I just want to do it to express myself. And so what happens with Israel in Deuteronomy is in fact, if you read the entire book of Deuteronomy, you'll discover at the end of the book of Deuteronomy, the story goes like this. If you come into the land and you listen to the Lord your God, you will flourish. But if you come into the land and you worship foreign gods, and if you mistreat your neighbor, and if you take advantage of one another, at some point the Lord will lose his patience, and he will put you out of the house. And this is in fact the way the story goes. A lot of us imagine, and we will hear this with an election coming, we will hear a lot about this. The way to make life at all in this world is to have rules and enforce them. And on one level that is true. If you have a community without rules, it will be chaos and life will be miserable. We need rules. On the other hand, there has never ever been a culture in this world that has brought in the kingdom of God by having strict rules and enforcing them. I have another story of a friend of mine who was for much of his life a very bad man. He was a very scary man. He was a very violent man. He was a very strong man. And so the woman that he had three children with and who lived with him, he knew how to keep her because she was afraid of him. And she would never cross him. She would never divide him. She was in many ways very much a rule keeper because she knew if she stepped out of line at all, there would be consequences. First there would be threats. But always the threats were understood as being real. He could hurt her and she knew it. And then this man began to examine his life and he began to examine his heart and he began to see the kind of creature that he had become and he hated this creature. And so he turned to God and decided to begin to live a life moving towards God instead of away from him. And what that meant was he became softer. What do you think happened to the relationship with his partner? She no longer feared him. So then what did she do? Well, now she started doing a number of things he didn't like. Whereas before she wouldn't dare do this, she started going to clubs. She started meeting other men. She started defying a number of the other rules he had in his house. And so now you might say to the man, well see, if you had only kept enforcing the rules, then life would have been better. But what he understood was he never really had a relationship with this woman, which was the kind of relationship he wanted. She feared him, but she didn't love him. And what he really wanted from her was love. And so while the liberator tells the former slaves, live this way in the land and you will be blessed, former slaves do not have bondages that are so easily undone merely by taking them out of a bad context. Most of our worst bondages are in our hearts. And so here is our misery. If God gives us rules and enforces them, then we can comply, but we will never love. What if God wants to change the script? And what if God wants to live on the estate with us in a context of love? Well Israel breaks the rules and becomes suspicious of the rule makers. How do we know the liberator isn't just getting us on his estate? How do we know the estate isn't just another form of slavery like we had before? How can the liberator show that what he has at heart is in fact our well-being, a well-being beyond even our personal biases or choices? The way in fact is for the liberator to become flesh and to dwell with us and to come into our midst. And when the liberator comes into the midst of the former slaves, they take him and they abuse him and they kill him. And what would we expect from the father of the liberator to have his son abused and killed? We would expect that father to come down with an army like that angry man and abuse the spouse once more. But instead what the liberator does is raise his son. And say, did you see the drama? Did you see how much I love you? Did you see what life can be like? That puts us to the third phase. If the liberator has rescued you and if the liberator has brought you to his estate and if the liberator says, with these rules you can learn to live well together, how should we look at the rules now? It would be very difficult for the woman of the strong man that I told you about to love him. And in fact she never made that turn. The relationship broke up and their relationship today continues to be contentious even as that strong man laments the man who used to be. But what happens obviously in the story of Jesus is that we who were abused by others became the abuser of God. And after we abuse him, God raises him and forgives us still and invites us into a new life in which gratitude now motivates obedience, not fear and not compliance. And this is the Christian story. Now the question is, what will you do with it? Do you obey God because you're afraid? Or do you obey God because you're grateful? That is the question. Lord, we know the book of Deuteronomy and its rules, but we know those rules in a much larger story. And in fact in some ways we know rule making and rule keeping in our own stories. And we recognize, Lord, that our hearts are rebellious. And when you give us rules, we brisk. And in many ways, Lord, the only path forward is the path through, not around. And it's only when we see that we ourselves are the abusers. That we ourselves are the abusers. That we ourselves are the controllers. That we ourselves, when given the power and opportunity, become the kinds of people that others hate. That maybe, Lord, we will soften and recognize our role in the bigger story. That when the God of the universe became for our sake weak, we abused him. And he forgave us and invites us into his love. Help us, Lord, to return him. Help us to become beautiful like the son of the liberator. And play his part in this story. In this world which is cruel. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus. Amen. Will you stand?