https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YKDju3Hm9WM

 Nobody played pretty Super Bowl teams today. Diner fans don't really want to see the Seahawks win. A lot of West Coasters don't want the Patriots to win. I think I'm going to become the Yankees again, I thought. I'll adjust this a little bit. Got Nancy and Clarence and Brian on the screen today. Marcus Seckel was a Jew and he married Lencha Hyman. Now those of you who know Dutch are going to have to forgive me because I can't pronounce most of these Dutch names. They had four children. Two sons and two daughters. Their oldest son, Isaac, became a rabbi. And they lived in the province of Groningen in the Netherlands. Marcus Seckel was born in 1719 and died in 1808. Isaac was born in Loppersum as was Hartog, Marcus van der Klay. They took the names, the last names, van der Klay and Van Berg, the two oldest sons. We don't know why. Quite possibly because of Napoleon. Napoleon had conquered and so people were supposed to take last names. And so Marcus, who was known as Hartog Marcus, took van der Klay and Isaac Marcus, his brother, took van Berg. Now as you'll notice from the names that what they would often do was take the father's name and take that last name. And as we go through these names, you'll find Hyman's and Marcus and Hartog repeated by a number of people. Hartog Marcus van der Klay, the second son, married Sarah Jacobs van der Woodie. Now Sarah Jacobs was quite likely also a Jew. And it seems like their children, their eight children, all married, those who married also married Jews. And you can find a lot of Jewish names in there. Cohen, Lazarus, Michael Cohen, Hartog, Solomons, Jacobs, Solomons, lots of good Jewish names. Their daughter, their third daughter, I have no idea how to say their names. Interesting woman, was a tradeswoman, working woman, never married, had two sons. One at age 37 and one at age 42. Why this woman in the 19th century, excuse me, the 18th century, had two sons and no husband. Her sons took her last name too. We have no idea. But she did. The family seems to have moved quite often between Groningen and Friesland, back and forth. They seem to have a number of places they were back and forth. Hartog's son, Hyman's Hartog, married a girl whose parents' names were Keller and Zwir. Not looking very Jewish anymore. We don't know if the move was something that had to do with leaving the synagogue. We don't know much of what happened there. But his sixth son, the youngest, Hartog Hyman's, his father's name was Hyman's Hartog, so his sixth son he named Hartog Hyman's, is the man pictured there. He, out of all the children, had the number of sons himself. What's interesting is we have no record of his place, the Jewish circumcision. He himself seemed also to have married a woman, probably a Frieslander, from parents with the names of Kramer and De Brees. Neal tells when he got to this church years ago, there was a pastor named Bob De Brees, and there was Joe De Brees. And so Neal was sure, they must be brothers because how many De Breeses can there be? Well, those of you who have been around Dutchman know there are lots of De Breeses. But that's not a Jewish name. And Hartog had seven children. You'll notice the third daughter, Anshah, lived only about a year, and then they had the fourth son, Saka, who was born three years after Anshah. But since Anshah died, they had a daughter after Saka, and they named her Anshah again. Often in that time, if a child would die and another girl would come, they'd give that girl the same name that they gave the previous girl. Something in our culture we likely would not do. We have no idea why, but for some reason it seems that Hartog sent Saka to America. And on June 10, 1893, Saka got off the Rotterdam from Rotterdam, Holland, and had a asylum in New York, and got immigrated and went to Spring Lake, Michigan. Two years after that, his sister and her husband, his oldest sister, would follow Anna. And another year after that, the rest of the family that was still alive in the Netherlands would follow. And they all settled down in Spring Lake, Michigan. Saka is the one who's got the picture around him, and he's standing there with his father, Hartog, to the left, and Hartog's wife, I can't say her name, sits to the left of him. Below Saka is his wife, his first wife, Katie, that was her English name, and all of those below are his children. The oldest, the largest boy, his name was, guess what they named him? Hartog, after his grandfather. And the boy, two to his left, was Hyman's. Hartog and Hyman's were both renamed in English, Hardy and Hyrum. The girl to the right, Hyrum, is Saina, who died at the age of 10, and then the other children. Katie would give birth to their last daughter, which they also named Katie. But the family member who was helping with the birth tied off the baby's umbilical cord, but did not tie off the umbilical cord of the mother, and she bled to death. Saka was, so Saka was the father of Hyrum, who was my grandfather, he's down at the bottom there, that's his wedding picture. Hyrum and Grace had a stroke the morning of their wedding, and so the wedding was cancelled. Hyrum and Grace had a call to a church in Wisconsin, and they were to move the next day after the wedding, no honeymoon. And so Hyrum and Grace had a private wedding with the pastor, and stayed most of the night with their father as he died. Old Hartog would outlive his son by five years. One of the things, some of this history, we didn't know, especially the Jewish part of it, because that became a family secret. We were to be Dutch, not Jews. And it wasn't until later that we learned, oh, we were Jews. Once we found out a little bit more of our history, we began to notice that the immigration to the United States basically saved that section of the family. So this weekend, actually, I drew back Hartog and Marcus's family. Seven of his children had children and grandchildren who would live into the 1940s. And if you go down the list, Auschwitz, age 85, Auschwitz, age 79, Sobovore at age 65, Auschwitz, age 65, Sobovore at age 41, Sobovore at age 35, Birkenau, 39 and 41, Auschwitz at age 34, age 38 at Auschwitz, age, her husband, age 38 at Auschwitz, age 34 at Auschwitz. And it was striking to go through the list to recognize that that whole family, once Hitler came through, just was wiped out. That choice that Marcus and Sokka made to come to America 40, 50 years before the Holocaust saved the family. They could have at that point had no idea the consequences of that choice. Just a couple of weeks ago, Jared had a chance to go to Europe, and here he is smiling with his classmates in the hiding place in Cory Ten Boom's house. And if you want to read her story, you can read that book, The Hiding Place. And it struck me as I looked at his picture smiling through that wall and looked at Sokka's picture over here, his great-great grandfather, the strange consequence of choices. We imagine that our choices govern our lives, and in many ways we do, and for those reasons sometimes when we have a choice to make, we agonize over that. What will this choice bring to me? Will this choice bring good things? Will this choice bring bad things? What we see in this long family history is that we have no idea of what our choices will bring us. We make choices all the time. Where to work? What to do for work? Whom to marry? Christians commonly want to find the will of God, and so many Christians will say, Lord, I want to find the will of God. I want to find your will for me. Implicit in that is the idea that if we just pick what God wants, things will go as we would prefer. Going back to the story in Numbers, one of the most interesting things about the story is how God leads the people through the wilderness. On the day of the Tabernacle, the tent of the covenant law was set up, the cloud covered it. From evening until morning, the cloud above the Tabernacle looked like fire. That is how it continued to be. The cloud covered it, and at night it looked like fire. Whenever the cloud lifted up from the tent, the Israelites sat out. Whenever the cloud settled, the Israelites encamped. At the Lord's command, the Israelites sat out, and that is command they encamped. As long as the cloud stayed over the Tabernacle, they remained encamped. When the cloud remained over the Tabernacle a long time, the Israelites obeyed the Lord's order and did not set out. Sometimes the cloud was over the Tabernacle only a few days. At the Lord's command, they would encamp. And at His command, they would set out. Sometimes the cloud stayed only from evening until morning, and when it lifted in the morning, they set out. Whether by day or by night, whenever the cloud lifted, they set out. Whether the cloud stayed over the Tabernacle for two days or a month or a year, the Israelites would remain encamped and that set out. But when it lifted, they would set out. You can imagine how the planners would have been frustrated because the cloud sets and everyone says, are we going to be here a day? Are we going to be here a year? They don't know. They just wait for the cloud. At the Lord's command, they encamped, and at the Lord's command, they set out. They obeyed the Lord's orders in accordance with His command through Moses. Now I know a lot of us when we're trying to discern God's will for our life would probably say, I wish the Lord would communicate to me like He did to the people of Israel through the cloud. It was obvious. If the cloud went, you went. If the cloud stayed, you stayed. No decision necessary. But if you read the story, you discover that the cloud was by no means a guarantee that they would have everything they wanted. Sometimes the Lord led them to places where there wasn't enough water. Sometimes the Lord led them to places where they would be attacked by enemies. Now, we might imagine, doesn't God know everything? Couldn't God look at a map and say, there's water here, here, and here? We'll get them there. Couldn't God say, oh, the Ammonites are here. We'll avoid that area. But it appears that the Lord didn't do any of that. Sometimes He brought them to places that the Israelites, I'm sure, liked, and sometimes He brought them to places that the Israelites, I'm sure, didn't like at all. But go, they must. This brings up this blue sky God that we've talked in a number of ways, because in many ways we imagine, well, God must be there to give me what I want. God must be the guarantor of giving me things that are nice for me. If God is good, He only wants good things for us, right? But notice we're defining the good. Bad things come when, and I hear this from Christians often, we fall out of the will of God. And I've always thought that's kind of a strange idea, that this is something we can fall out of. But the truth is, we don't know. So, Christians will tell you, we're very hard to stay in His will. And I remember many times in my own life and the lives of other Christians where people are, I just want to be in the will of God, I just want to be in the will of God. But underneath that is often the idea that if I can be in the will of God, then I get what I want out of life. This is also, I think, the source of a lot of people falling away from God, because when something bad happens, they say, it was God's job to make sure this didn't happen to me. What did I do to deserve this? What did I do for God to allow these bad things to happen to me? Now, doing wrong will often yield bad consequences, but doing right doesn't always yield good. In fact, sometimes doing the right thing will give you hardship. What you have is an implicit formula trying to use God to get the outcomes you want out of life. And if that is the case, then you're not really serving God. You're really asking God to serve you. I believe this is the source of a lot of skepticism and doubt about God. It's this implicit idea, this implicit understanding that we nourish, so that when things go wrong, we say, there can't be a God, or there isn't a God, or God hates me, or God doesn't work. The God in this system is yourself, and God becomes the tool you try to use to get what you think you want. And as, if you've lived long enough, you'll know that what you wanted when you were 18 or 20 or 30 or 40, sometimes you get what you want only to discover, I wanted something that wasn't good at all for me. Now, this also makes us wonder about the idea that if God is a tease, if God is insecure and thinks, well, I've got some good things in mind for my people, but I'm going to hold them back unless they come and they schmooze me, unless they come and they kiss up to me, unless they come and really, because I'm a little insecure and I don't feel good about myself, unless I have their constant attention. Do you imagine that God is like an insecure lover that teases and manipulates because he needs our attention or worship for his own validation? Jesus makes this comment about God. So I say to you, ask and it will be given to you, seek and you will find, knock and the door will be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and the one who knocks the door will be opened. But which of you fathers, if your son asks for fish, will give him a snake instead? Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion? If then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to him who asks him? The difficulty that we have is we don't know if we're asking for an egg or a scorpion. We don't know if we're asking for a fish or a eel. I think about our talk in Highlands and all of these people and the decisions that they made and how the decisions that they made influenced everything in subsequent generations. We have no idea because usually when I'm making a decision about what I want for myself, it's because I think I know what I want and need and how I want my life to unfold. What if I decided I only want three children? Where would Ben be? Would he be in the A.V. booth? I don't know what I want and need in my life. I don't know. But this then sets us up for this idea, Lord, if you'll only show me and tell me what will be best. But did the cloud tell Israel we're only going to stay three days here? No. They had to watch. Did the cloud say we're going to be here for a year? And again, I'm sure many of the people in Israel and Israel would have said, if the Lord would only give us a timetable and lay it out before us, then I could make my plans. And the Lord gives them none. He simply asks them to trust. When the brilliant ethicist, John Kavanaugh, now an ethicist is supposed to help tell people what is good and not good. When the brilliant ethicist, John Kavanaugh, went to work for three months at the House of the Dying in Calcutta, he was seeking a clear answer as to how best to spend the rest of his life. On the first morning there, he met Mother Teresa. She asked, and what can I do for you? Kavanaugh asked her to pray for him. What would you like me to pray for? And the prayer before she asked, he voiced the request that had borne thousands of miles from the United States. Pray that I have clarity. She said firmly, no, I will not do that. When he asked her why, she said, clarity is the last thing you are clinging to and must let go. When Kavanaugh commented that she always seemed to have clarity, he laughed and said, I have never had clarity. What I have always had is trust. And so I will pray that you trust God. We want God to say, the cloud will be here three days, then it will go here and it will be there five days, and then it will go here and it will be there a year. And so he was just to basically say, you be the God and I will just be your activity arranger. But God says, no, I will bring things into your life that you don't understand. I will do things that you don't find welcome. This is because I am not. You must learn to trust. See, here's the thing. When we actually say, Lord, I want to be in the center of your will so that I can have everything the way I want them, in a sense what we are asking God to do is to eliminate our will. Because we want God to choose for us and we play these games with each other. Oh, if God only chooses for us, then here's the thing. He gave us a will, He gave us intelligence, He gives us freedom. Why would He take these things away from us? C.S. Lewis notes that in fact these are the things that the demons want for us. This in his screw-tape letters where things are a little reversed, it's one demon writing to the other. To us, meaning the demons, a human is primarily food. Our aim is the absorption of His will into ours, the increase of our own area of selfhood at its expense. But the obedience of the enemy, meaning God, demands of man is quite a different thing. One must face the fact that all the talk about His love for man and His service to being perfect freedom is not, as one would gladly believe, mere propaganda, but an appalling truth to the demons. He really does want to fill the universe with a lot of loathsome little replicas of Himself, again, loathsome for the demons. Creatures whose life in its miniature scale will be qualitatively like His own, not because He has absorbed them, but because their wills freely conform to His. We want cattle who can finally become food. We want to suck in who can finally become food. He wants servants who can finally become sons. We want to suck in. He wants to give out. We are empty and would be filled. He is full and flows over. Our war aim is a world in which our Father below has drawn all other beings into Himself. But still distinct. Tim Keller is a preacher in New York. He's got a large church of about 5,000. And most of the people in his church are young, single adults. And so often people will come to him and say, Pastor, how can I know the will of God for my life? And the first thing he tells them is, make a decision. Make a decision and you will see the will of God played out in your life. Don't advocate your choice by looking to Him. It's not one or the other. It isn't that God doesn't care. It's that He's not simply working for our comfort in this life now. And this is where our secular world does us wrong. Because when we say, you only live once or God, you have to give me what I want today, what we do is we say, all that matters is what exists in this little box right now. But what if in fact you are a preacher that death will not extinguish at the age of 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100? What if in fact your life here is but a small portion of a much longer story that will go on beyond the grave? What if in fact what he's doing in your life now is in preparation for the life that you have no idea of at this moment? What if in fact he is working on all of these levels and you can only see this tiny little glimpse? Little Mason was having a little fit this morning over here and I don't know what that was about. But Little Mason's idea was about this big. But what was Mason upset about Jay? A donut. So right now for Mason, that donut is the middle of his world. Now Jay could say to Mason, Mason I realize the donut is now important to you. But this donut of this Sunday morning is such a tiny insignificant sliver of a much longer and bigger life you will never be able to imagine. So Mason, no donut this morning. And this is how we are. And I believe God wants to invite us into a much bigger picture. Could God explain to Israel when the cloud was moving? Why the cloud was moving? Could God explain that 3000 years ago that the cloud was moving? 3000 years later we would all be sitting and talking about that cloud in a room in a lamp that they could never even imagine? The angel of the Lord led them through the desert. Through dry places. Through places where they were attacked. And he went with them in the cloud. But when Jesus comes and goes to dark Gethsemane and onto the cross he leads them through the cloud. His son came and went into danger not only with them but for them. Albert Camus, not a Christian an existentialist, poet and philosopher, makes this observation about Christianity. Christ the God man suffers too. Evil and death can no longer be entirely imputed to him since he suffers and dies. The night on Galilee is so important because the divinity ostensibly abandons its traditional privilege and lives through to the end. Despair included. The agony of death. God does not use his position to exclude himself from our pain but comes into pain for us. Even greater than the agony of the doughnut. Corey Tamboum makes this observation when people are talking to her after the war. This woman that she was a Dutch woman she did not have to endanger herself. She did not have to. She was a Christian. She did not have to hide Jews. She did not have to do any of this. Her sister would die in the camps. Her father would die in the camps. We commented to Corey about the practicalness of the things she recalled and how memories seem to throw a spotlight on problems and decisions we face here and now. But she said, this is what the past is for. Every experience God gives, every person he puts in our lives is the perfect preparation for a future that only he can see. You see gratitude turns duty into choice. People sometimes will come to me and say, Pastor what should I do? The first thing I'll tell them is you are free. You are free in Christ. You are free in grace. You can make a lot of different decisions and maybe not all of them but many of them are probably good. But what you should first see is that all of this is within the freedom that Christ gives you and then you can ask the gratitude question. You see, how did Jesus use his freedom? He used his freedom for us. And I think he invites us to use our freedom for him. We want to follow him even if we don't want to. We want to follow him through dark places, even with mixed feelings because we want to be with him, suffer with him, conquer with him because that's what he did for us. T.S. Lewis in his conclusion makes this comment and I imagine this as basically seeing Jesus as the cloud in this wilderness that you live in. A class has opened in the pitiless walls of this world and we are invited to follow our great captain inside. The following hint is, of course, the essential point. That being so, it may be asked what practical use is there and the speculations in which I have been indulging. I can think of at least one such. It may be possible for each to think too much of his own potential glory thereafter. It is hardly possible for him to think too often or too deeply about that of his neighbor. The load or weight or burden of my neighbor's glory should be laid on my back. A load so heavy that only humility can carry it and the backs of the proud will be broken. What Lewis is saying is that the Christian life is in gratitude doing as Jesus did. Jesus freely saves us and he invites us to freely bear each other's burdens with humility. So the Christian life is not saying, I am only the path that I may have things as pleasant and as easy as possible. The Christian life is saying, Lord may I walk with you to the darkness of others. And the choices we don't know. We don't know Hartog sent Saga to America. I'm glad he did. We don't know the choices that your ancestors made or the choices that were made upon your ancestors that brought you to this place. We don't know. But what we do as Christians is we come before this table and we sit with Jesus. And I would imagine the disciples when they're sitting around having this Passover meal are completely unaware of what would happen even later that night when Jesus would be arrested and completely unaware of what would happen later in their lives when they travel all throughout the Roman Empire and begin to embody Jesus in all of these cities. And almost all of them die in his name in places that they could not have possibly known that night. But Jesus comes to them and he takes bread and he breaks it. And what he says to them is, this is my body broken for you. Whenever you eat this, remember me. And so those disciples will go out from that place and they'll go into churches all over the Roman Empire, even into India and they will break bread and they will say, and Jesus told us and he held up that bread and he broke it and he said, remember me. And so when you're making your decisions and you're asking, Lord, what should I do? I would pray that your motivation not be, Lord, what will make it easiest for me? But your motivation might be, Lord, can I follow you in your glory? Can I follow you in your path? How might I in fact be useful to you? And that long story, the life of which today is a moment of crying over a doughnut. This is the meal that is being offered to you and this is the invitation that this meal is giving to you. Do you believe? Do you trust? Do you trust not only that he has forgiven your sin, do you believe that he is guiding your steps and taking you into a life of such glory you cannot imagine and you ask that he use you to lead others to that glory? The table is free. Let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing, let us sing. I'm still gonna be Let us bring stars together, gonna be Can I fall on my knees If I face the reward of life I'll fall on my knees Can I fall on my knees Take, eat, remember and believe That the body of your Lord was given For the complete forgiveness of all your sins He took the cup And the next day they would see his blood shed on that cross And they would despair Because how could such a tragedy be used by God? And what they didn't understand was that his blood being shed on that cross Was for them and for you This blood is given for you Thank you