https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FiHSLk28_4s

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to give a big thank you for many of you who wrote, sent money into Living Stone CRC, increased your Patreon support of me as a response to my What Do I Want, Where Do I Want to Go video. I'm still making my way through the emails trying to give personal responses to everyone. And again, thank you for this. It's a huge encouragement to me. It was more than I expected, frankly, and quite gratifying. I impressed my church leadership. The elders were excited and the deacons were nervous. The elders were excited because they saw all the opportunities and the deacons were nervous because how far can we stretch our pastor? And what if all these people from the internet want to talk to our pastor? I reassured them that that's been a reality for quite some time already and we're managing it. Maybe not to the liking of everyone, but that's part of the reason I'm not as available as I always would like to be, especially online. In person, I'm quite more available than online, but that's sort of the way things go. There have been a lot of questions and if you don't listen to the Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer sessions, a lot of those have come through there and I've answered some of them this week. I'll probably post this video Monday and then the question and answer session Tuesday. Again, as I said before, I'm thinking of starting a clips channel where I'll have probably some of the questions and answers broken down so you don't have to listen to the whole thing if there's particular questions and answers that you're interested in. But a lot of questions about the two ideas, Living Stones Online, what is Living Stones Online, what is Estuary? And I'm getting a sense of who would like to be involved in what and that's been very interesting. Part of the experience we had in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server was partly because I'm a Christian minister and because at least a significant portion of my YouTube following are Christians. Part of the difficulty is that Christians can sometimes overwhelm the non-Christian elements in estuary type spaces and that's part of the reason I started Living Stones Online. So for those of you who very much want, or I'm starting, I'm still very much in the process of building it out, those of you who want Living Stone, those of you who want specifically Christian content, that will be Living Stones Online. Those of you who don't like discussions that necessarily entertain heresy, that will be estuary and I'll get into exactly sort of how to distinguish those two things as they are. Anyone can be involved in both. You can lurk in both and yeah, a lot of us do I need any help. I'm not even sure what kind of help I need yet so I'm talking with some people and actually the questions that I keep getting asked from those of you via email or on the Discord server or in other ways that people talk to me, those have been really helpful in helping me sort of sort out questions and think about it so keep the questions coming. Now Living Stones Online, this is the way I described it to my church council. I said now imagine hundreds of people silently creep into your church every week and silently stand in the back watching. They don't say much of anything, most don't say anything. We don't greet them, we don't know their names, and they can come and go and we wouldn't know it. Now if this were actually happening in a physical real life church, we would be horrified with ourselves because we wouldn't be paying any attention to these guests. Churches shouldn't do that, we should show hospitality and so part of Living Stones Online is going to encourage those who want to to sort of come out of the shadows and be known and become a part of a community. In real life this situation would be a horror, but now with COVID it's happening all the time and many churches have recognized that they have larger followings online than they had necessarily in real life and that means that a lot of people are lurking and I think that's a good thing. So what I'm trying to do is actually be a better church with Living Stones Online. Now is it okay to lurk? Sure, just lurk away if that's where you're at right now, but we do want to encourage those who are lurking to come out and be known and to take greater steps in involvement. Watching something on the internet is very different from showing up in person as anyone who's showed up in person in a strange church would know. You have skin in the game when you show up in real life and so part of Living Stones Online will be increasing that function. How can we do that? We're still figuring that out. Many of you sent contact information. As I figure out the new church management software that I've been working to get to know in the last couple of weeks, I'm trying to figure out how to use forms and so I'm going to be sending out a form. I'm going to put it on the church website. I'm going to create a Living Stones Online section of the Living Stones Church website and ask people to fill out a form and so once we have an email address and we know who you are and you say that this is the kind of thing you're interested in, I'm not going to spam anyone I hope, that isn't the intention, then we can hopefully begin to find out how we can have relationships over the internet and how we can know each other online and thinking about if I've had a men's group that started online since COVID and we have a couple of guys from Australia that have joined the group and that's been great fun and I was a little nervous how the in real life local Living Stones people would take to it but they've really been enjoying it and so bit by bit I'm thinking that we could really have some interesting groups online and really help people get to know each other because I'll tell you something about Living Stones, it's a, this shouldn't surprise you having seen who I am, it's a very diverse group with a lot of different ideas and the church has always been that way and most people are pretty open and so people like conversations and getting to know new people so I'm excited about the possibility of creating online community that involves in real life and online connections. I'm thinking about, so the, when COVID hit we closed down our Sunday school class, that Sunday school class was one of the more popular things for people to watch on YouTube and so I'm thinking of having an online Sunday school class, the streaming increasingly in Living Stones is going to, it'll still be on YouTube but it's also going to be on the church website and they'll be, if you download the church app and once I've got that all set you can, I'll give the link to that, if you download the church app you can chat on the church app with other people from Living Stones and other people who are watching and again that's probably where I'll take the questions and interaction that were a part of my Sunday school class and you know I'm thinking about Zoom groups or Discord server discussion groups, I'm thinking about making special videos for Living Stones online that online groups can talk about. The elders had talked about Bible study material, I frankly don't like a lot of the off-the-shelf Bible study material that I see, I just don't like it, it's too churchy and I'm talking Living Stones online here okay because I've always had this issue with churchiness in some ways, I know that's weird as for a pastor but that's the way I am and then I think you know for people who commit themselves to Living Stones online and make a commitment you know then I think pastoral care and obviously and you know I've done some pastoral care in the videos that I share on my own channel, I've done a lot more pastoral care offline, this is the area that my deacons are worried about me becoming overwhelmed with, you know I'll probably have two levels as I do, I mean when someone from my in real life church contacts me, you know they're at the top of my list because they're my first, you know they're my, I'm the first response, I'm their real life pastor, probably second is going to be people who are committed to Living Stones online and in that group and for pastoral care so again I'm going to have to work this out as it goes. A number of people have asked and I got this question on the discord server again today, is this church? Yes and no. You'll notice I didn't use the word members for Living Stones online, partners, participants, if you're a, if generally speaking if you're an online partner or participant you're not formally a member of Living Stones Christian Reformed Church. We have in the past had incarcerated members, official members of the church where you know CRC pastors or Living Stones pastors or elders would visit. I think membership means an online thing and now if there's a strange circumstance for someone where you really want to be a member of our Living Stones Christian Reformed Church, you know we would talk about that and there's possibilities for that, would come in for a visit, get to know the elders, meet with the council. Generally speaking to become an official member of Living Stones Christian Reformed Church either you transfer in from another Christian Reformed Church or you have a council interview where we talk to you about your faith and that's a member of the church. Now participants and partners and online leaders wouldn't necessarily need that level of commitment to Christianity. Anybody can walk through the door of the church and listen and go to a Bible study and churches are very very open that way and that's something that I insist upon because I want churches to be places where people can have their questions answered about Jesus Christ and about the gospel and about church and but all of that is in church stuff and if you see the picture that I'm posting here it's pictures of inside the church. That's Living Stones online, it's church okay. Difficulty with sacraments absolutely. Right now even with COVID I administer the sacraments online and people participate at home. How to think about that theological reflection on that I'll leave for another day but it's obviously complex and we'll be exploring where the lines are in this these new tools of complexity. Now estuary I was really impressed by all of the interest in estuary as opposed to Living Stones online and I don't think that's a problem at all and to try to distinguish in them in some ways Living Stones online is sort of at the gate. So if you imagine the church with a building Living Stones online is sort of at the door and it's in and out of the church building. We have partners, participants, small group leaders who aren't necessarily members of Living Stones Christian Reformed Church. Anyone can participate. If we get some small groups developing and I need online leaders I'm probably going to look to people that I know in Living Stones online to have a history of Christian commitment and participation in a local church. Things like that to be in a sense vested with that level of authority for Living Stones online. Estuary is a very different animal okay. Estuary is outside the walls and here's a picture of this this beautiful village. Estuary is in a sense I actually was looking for a picture of a monastery and came up with this because Sherry on the Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer today asked if actually I think it was Jeff that asked if estuary was a totally new thing and I don't think so. I think estuary has always been with the church. I don't know what St. Paul did in the temple of Tyrannus and I keep forgetting is it Ephesus or Corinth. I think it's Corinth. I see that as estuary in many ways in the medieval villages monasteries were estuaries. These were places where the living water of the church flowed out through the countryside into the sea. As I talked about on the Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer today I think a big part of the problem of the church is that churches are building reservoirs and they're keeping the fresh water and being miserly with what goes out and maybe I sound like Greenpeace to all sorts of Bureau of Reclamation projects in California. Part of Livingstone's unique history is I don't know if Livingstone's would have grown if California didn't build so many dams in the 1950s and 60s and so many Dutch water engineers didn't move to Sacramento to work for the state and they built dams because California is a place that needs its fresh water. Well and now there's a lot of questions about those dams in terms of fish migrating upstream, salmon runs and all that so in a sense my estuary project is about taking down the dams Christian churches, opening up the rivers, letting the water flow out into the sea and letting the salmon swim upstream and doing that work. Estuaries outside the walls but it's water from the church flows into it and goes out to bless the world. In my opinion every or almost every church should have an estuary. I think this is for churches the missional space churches need to have and I think churches do do that regularly. All over the United States churches bless their communities with all sorts of work and projects and many places in California there's like Love Rippon and Love Modesto and again and again these are churches trying to bless the world around them. Tim Keller once said something of the church that churches should be the kinds of places that if they were to go away cities would have to raise taxes to try to make up for all of the good that churches have done. So churches are not estuaries but every church should have one. A lot of what I've already done is estuary work. The Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup that was estuary. The Bridges of Meaning Discord and that Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup we're likely going to rename it and reposition it now but that meetup was exactly an estuary because look at what what Joey and Rick and Tyler and James and and and others in the estuary built. They they built the Bridges of Meaning Discord. They you know they've done all kinds of other things and at our at our last meetup meeting we meet outside to you know be safe from COVID and and honor the requests of the state of California. We meet outside and and they have other dreams and visions of blessing the community and helping people. That's what estuary should be and the Bridges of Meaning Discord server is another example of estuary and so I'm Living Stones on the Living Stones website that I'm developing it's going to there be going to be a section for Living Stones estuary because that's what we're doing. I'm working with John Van Dunk and his church in Chino, California. They're going to start an estuary. The the meetup tour that we started in Tucson, Arizona and Bellflower, California that we had hoped to go up to Salem, Oregon and Portland, Oregon and and Seattle, Washington and Vancouver, British Columbia. My dream would be to help facilitate churches to have a vision to start their own estuaries there and to meet up with with people who are not Christians whether they be skeptics or atheists of other religious background or no religious affiliation to start their own estuary groups and bless their city and that's what I want to see happen and and so you know Chicago had their meetup and when they had difficulty finding a place I contacted the Wheaton Christian Reformed Church and I talked to the pastor and I asked him if he wouldn't open up a room and of course the council had to meet and agree but you know an estuary started there and amongst the Chicago guys they've got some very estuarial ideas about big things they want to start. That is what estuaries are when the wealth of the church flows out into the world and blesses the world and and the stream is flowing one way and but I believe that what happens is that that you know salmon will swim upstream and and and sea monsters will come into the estuary and river creatures will get to know sea creatures and and new plants will form. I look at I look at what happened with the the YouTube channels of the Meaning Code and Mary's channel and the work of JP and the conversations I've had with Jonathan Pigeot and John Verbeke and and and Sevilla's quality Sevilla's quality channel and I look at all of this as estuary they're not in the church but the church just as Living Stones has has been supporting me in in doing this work to bless the world we should all be doing this and so to have conversations when I think about Nuance Forum and and and what that has been doing and having these you know 10% conversations as as Rod talks about and you know and and and and and and and that's what I want to see happen in estuary. That's different from Living Stones online in church you know I mentioned this before I'd always get sometimes criticism in the comments section from Christians because you're not you're talking about Jordan Peterson too much you're not talking about Jesus and so I say if you want to hear me talk about Jesus come into the church space. I talk about Jesus all the time there in this space I'm going to talk about John Verbeke and Jordan Peterson and and and heretics and skeptics and atheists and this place will be an estuary where where we can meet and where we can have productive fertile conversations and I want churches to use their resources to bless the world. That is why God gives the church resources to bless the world. Now how can I facilitate this? I registered estuaryhub.com. Whoever has estuary wants fifty thousand dollars for it and right now my pockets don't go that deep and and I'm not looking to control estuary I'm looking to facilitate estuary and so I've so I'm getting my church off of a Squarespace site and since I already paid for it I might as well move create an estuary website for that and so I'll lay out some of my philosophy and theology behind it and so people who are looking for something that I've written about estuary can find it there and I'm going to have a direction be a director should be a directory of estuary plants and animals so things that that people are doing in this space I can list things there and so once I get the website up if you want to be listed and if you want to be Paul VanderKlay adjacent or estuary adjacent let me know and we'll see if we can adjacent together and maybe but beware because we might be adjacent to people that you might not like and that's going to be that's going to be the thing about estuaries you know they're they're not safe spaces sea creatures come up into estuaries so we will have creatures of the sea visiting us so get ready for it you can complain and you can and and I would just ask that in your complaints attack ideas and not people and and debate ideas strongly and bring your bring your strongest case into the arena that's that's what estuaries are for so we'll have a directory of plants and animals in the estuary eventually you know part of why we're working on the streaming things is we don't have a big facility at living stones but we can hold events the the church in southern California has a much bigger facility maybe if you know as that relationship develops maybe we'll hold some events down there in the crosspoint church in Chino California who knows they they like Sacramento have a nice manageable airport I like that about smaller airports Sacramento is easy to get in and out the the Ontario airport is easy to get in and out lax not so easy so I like these places with good good airports so events I hope to do more retreats like I did in Connecticut if anybody wants to pony up a whole bunch of money my wife and I are looking at you know we dream my wife always dreams about having a a a see since I had five kids and they're all growing up you know I think someday I'd like to live in a compound and have little casitas for me and my wife and then have a big central area for for group gatherings and so my kids can live semi-independent but close at hand and we can have space for and and as my wife and I talk about that it's like boy that would be a great place for west coast that would be a great place for west coast retreats you know when I did the when I did the event in Connecticut that was a terrific event it was an overnight event we had 12 people and that was about exactly the right number we had wonderful conversations for those 24 hours and I'd like to do more of those events and those would very much be estuary events okay churches over there estuary is over here and the blessings of church should flow out into the estuary but should flow out unhindered gifts are gifts so um part of what I'd probably do is training and consulting with churches and so if if you're a church and you want to be and you want to have an estuary we might even endorse groups because there might be a case where even with my probably the way to not be endorsed by me as an estuary is to be a little too much church online or a little bit a little bit too churchy so it's it's got to be free um that's that's my bias and so if you're a church and you'd like to explore doing more of this and you want to you know probably you'd bless living stones with a gift and get some of my time that would probably be the way so that's these are sort of the kinds of things I'm thinking about right now and again keep your questions coming let's keep the conversation about estuary you know it's it's it's the word that I thought of and it's what I've been pursuing on my channel from the first day I made my Jordan Peterson video and and you've seen me live this in my conversations when I first started doing the conversations I started getting emails especially from Christians basically telling me I was doing it wrong and and my standard answer for you're doing it wrong is if you've got a better idea go do it yourself the right way and prove me wrong I'm happy to be proven wrong so that's what I want to do and so hopefully within the next I'm giving myself kind of August to keep working on this website stuff and maybe by September I'll have more stuff out there but especially estuary this is something that we are building together and I'm especially speaking to you all who are not Christians and don't identify as Christians because if it's only Christians it's not an estuary it's part of the river and the river is beautiful and the river is glorious and and the river is wonderful but if it's only Christians it's not an estuary it's just the river so I'm so push back challenge me because it's your push back and challenges that I grow with and I'm not smart enough to do this I only learn as I talk to you and so let's be bold and fearless with one another what are the differences in many ways my church channel the Living Stones Christian Reformed Church YouTube channel yes I do have one and and only it has you know almost a thousand subscribers now but most a lot were on for the Sunday School lesson and kind of dropped on curious that's Living Stones online okay estuary continues to be my channel I on my channel I talk to whom I want to I say what I want to you know I'm a minister in the Christian Reformed Church so you know I am one person and I am accountable to to my church but my channel is estuary the the Living Stones CRC channel is is Living Stones online okay that's one way to differentiate it a number of you sent in money to the church and said I want to support estuary and then well if you send in money to the church are you supporting estuary yes because Living Stones pays my salary and if Living Stones goes away you know some of you have said well you can you can be full-time estuary might that day come yes but I think it's essential that I do so as a pastor because again part of estuary is leaning on to the church and saying be more generous with the world and and and estuaries are places that in the words of a friend of mine people can entertain heresy and and Anselman said yes but there should be a voice for orthodoxy well well absolutely the point of estuary is there will be voices and so just as I don't want Christians overwhelming estuaries because then they're no longer estuaries nor do I want um Christians abandoning estuaries estuaries are the riches of the church flowing out into the community a free open-handed gift because why Christians I'm talking to you now because while we were yet sinners he died for us and the work of Jesus Christ is grace upon grace it's gift upon gift and so estuary is our gift to this world and so this is why we're open and again I've I've gotten more criticism from Christians on my channel than from anyone else and I don't have a problem with that I understand that I understand Christians are have I talked about this in in this question and answer chris Christianity always has an element of the antithesis and so I won't banish antithetical claims or noises by Christians I won't do that and I know a lot of non-Christians want Christians to stop talking that way well I won't I won't participate in that there are always antithetical black and white claims but there are also um center set there are also center set nuances and variabilities and so both are there both are needed and so many of you I I expected Patreon to kind of hollow but it didn't a number of you increased your Patreon support so thank you for that too um both go to me um Tively takes less money than go to me um Tively takes less money than Patreon and according to KG Guy I guess Patreon's in trouble and so if Patreon goes away I'll go to Subscribestar or something like that but Tively isn't going away and so anyway that if you support the church you're supporting me indirectly like I said my salary is probably 70% of the church's budget um if you support me on Patreon that comes directly to me and so all of your support is welcome and so and so thank you for that I I I sat and I thought about the amount of time I spend on week each week with my videos and then I thought about what I was getting from Patreon and I thought well I realized if you if you only considered Patreon for my videos I'm making less than minimum wage and so I decided I better not quit my day job but um that that that kind of changed my mind about that kind of surprised me when I thought about it in that way so before I was much more ambiguous about Patreon than I am now because I I see it more and again this is I did I was reluctant to even start Patreon when I started this thing because I was afraid of some handcuffs and Patreon does handcuff me in a certain way because after you get used to money and the fields you know it helps pay bills and it's kind of like yeah it's kind of important so yeah I'm still working out my stuff I'm still working out my stuff but um I'm going to continue to develop this and I'm going to try to continue to take this area more seriously the church always has and has wanted me to lean into it more and so I'm going to try and do better. Next steps I'm working on a form that I'm going to send out if I can figure out how this church management software works and so that will give people to sort of sign up for one for Living Stones Online or Estuary or the other and once I get that sort of differentiated I'll be able to kind of see where things are at and get some contact information I don't know if I'll do a MailChimp or just continue to use this church management software again I'm working all this out and in some ways I started a third job with all this and I'm figuring that out so yeah be patient with me. Part of this is growing for me because I've always been a small church pastor and what I love about being a small church pastor is I can relate to each of you as individuals. Already between the numbers at Living Stones and now the numbers who have contacted me the small church threshold is about 150 to 200 and I'm above that so there's some growing edges for me too and so I'm working on communication systems and if you're really interested in Living Stones Online subscribe to the church channel the link to the church channel is always down below in the notes of almost all of my videos so that's just a little update on this there'll be more information to follow I expect the two to differentiate. Again my channel should probably be mostly Estuary the Living Stones stuff will be over on Living Stones Online and we'll see how it goes so once again thank you for the financial and emotional and encouragement support that you've been giving me and giving the church and we'll continue to work on it and again I can't stress this enough you all are teaching me how to do this I don't know there's no class in this and this is something we are building together and so you know I read YouTube comments you know this other email is just sort of this stuff so it isn't as cluttered as my main email box that some of you have but I don't check it every day it's not on my phone so I'm just trying to manage my time with these things too so thanks for your support and keep watching and those of you who sent me an email look for another email that I send because I'm still not sure how this all the software works so I'm figuring that out so thanks again