https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qjf6l5vT6wI

 It's also difficult because when we look at our aging parents, we look at a map of the road ahead of us. And that can be emotionally difficult. If you're raising a child, there's always a certain amount of hope that you pour into that child. There's dreams of what that child will grow up to be and what they will do. So, continuing for each other as we age is far more difficult, I think, on that score. Many families are broken. Old wounds persist. If I go to a nursing home to visit one person, how often aren't there how many other visible souls who are just looking for some basic human contact to just look at them and acknowledge them and smile and say implicitly, you are a human being? It's often interesting when I will talk with someone that I don't know and one of the questions will be, where is your family? And if they are able, they will tell me a story. And the story will be about brokenness and pain and, well, we just don't see each other anymore. The more I reflected on this commandment, the more I realized, deep beneath this commandment is the command to love your enemies. Now, we should love all the way up to and including our enemies, so we should also love our friends. But I'm also struck at how often our enemies are not al-Qaeda living across the world or our enemies are not some bad person somewhere who I don't know. Most people's most tangible enemies are the people they love the most in an ironic way. If a woman shows up murdered, who is the first suspect the police automatically turn to? The husband or, did someone say the pastor? I don't know. The pastor. No, if anyone had known murdered, no one's ever come and said, well, you were her pastor. It's someone within the family. So often, the closest people to us are both our closest and our enemies. And so the command to honor your father and mother that your day may be long is a command for some of us to love our enemies. And I'll tell you, it's a lot easier to think, well, I'm not going to think such bad thoughts about al-Qaeda or about the Russians or about some other group of people that's a long way from me. The command is to do good to those who have hurt you, to do better to those who perhaps have not done as they should have to you. The truth is that broken relationships within the family, especially parental relationships, are the most complicated enemies to love. And because, in fact, if you begin to talk to someone who was very poorly treated by their parent, who was neglected or abused, and you talk long enough with them, one of the things you will learn is that on one hand they hate that for what they've done, but on the other hand, they can't. It would be easier if they could just exile them with the evil and banish and destroy. But how do you hate your parent without hating yourself? And in fact, what we find with parents is that they become an enemy that we have to love, and we don't know what to do with it. And we begin to see that, in fact, hating enemies, hurting enemies, hurts ourselves. The book of Ephesians knows that this is the first commandment that's given with a promise, that you may live long in the land which the Lord your God has given you. And I think this speaks not so much to that you'll live a long life if you do right by your parent as some kind of automatic equation, but rather if you don't resolve the relationships that are closest to you, you will not live in shalom. You will not live in well-being. You will not find peace in any land if you can't somehow deal with these foundational relationships. And then I know for some of you this might seem easy. I know for many of you for whom these relationships are difficult, this is not easy. And this is not theoretical. This is utterly practical. And for some of you this is a daily thing. Now, there are many things that we can do, and there are many good things that we can do, but for many people finding a good therapist and talking through these issues and figuring out why we have difficulty trusting, and we have no idea why we have difficulty trusting, we don't even know that that we have difficulty trusting. And we just don't understand why our personal relationships are so disturbed and why it is that everyone is always crossing me, and why do I get easily offended, and why am I always angry? It must be everyone else's fault. That's a prison that we live in, and there is help available. And that help is blessed, and often I'll recommend and say, I think you should really talk to someone about that and explore that. But this kind of prison, I think about little Itzhak running away from this family that rescued him out of that Romanian home. Why? Because he probably thought they were trying to do all kinds of bad things against him. And I'm sure they weren't perfect people, but the odds are those issues were within himself, but he couldn't see it because all he could see was through his issues. And sometimes, you know, a good therapist can, if you're in fact willing and eager to explore this, can help someone find that. But the ironic truth of this is you need to be able to embrace the condition in many ways, like an alcoholic, before you can even take the step to seek help in something like this. And so what tends to happen then is that we have, as I talked about a number of weeks ago, we have a whole world full of emotional relational burn victims that on one hand want to get close to people, but whenever we get close, it hurts, and so we back up. And so all of life is trying to move close and trying to move back out of sub-preservation, back and forth, back and forth. Therapists will tell you, sometimes we make progress. Sometimes people will say, I'll feel better. Sometimes people can do a little bit better in their relationship. But every therapist will tell you, we can only get so far. And I, as a pastor, can tell you, for every one or two people that I see who are actually working and making progress on this stuff, I see 10 to 20 who are just living inside their prison of distrust, often because of the seeds planted in their youth. And they will never seek help. And they will go in their lives, they will go through these cycles, doing it again and again and again. And nowhere will they be able to see and answer the question, why can't I have productive, life-giving, sustained relationships with other people? Why do they always break down? Why am I always hurt? Why is my skin so thin? And they will wear the great white clothes. And I see it all the time. About a decade ago, it became Amant-Garh theology to contend that the classical Christian theory of atonement was nothing less than divine child abuse. That is, the image of a father punishing his son for extracting retribution at the expense of his own son or punishing his son for the good of others, each of these became a way of deconstructing classical atonement theory. Unfortunately, this approach works from a very simplistic image. A father, a son, and a brutal death, and attributes, it attributes intention to the father as one who brutalizes the son. As an image, it connotes abuse. The image, however, abuses the Bible's image. And in fact, I do hear this from people I know who are not Christians or ex-Christians or post-Christians. They'll say, you know, you believe that God beat up Jesus because of our sin. Well, that's simply child abuse. Why would a father treat his son that way? Jesus, in fact, on the cross says, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Another way to look at this, however, is to reflect that if you were wounded in your childhood by a parent who either intentionally or because they were wounded themselves, unintentionally wounded you, that Jesus knows your pain. And Jesus knows in the crucifixion what it's like to be abandoned by the father and to know that rejection. Jesus, in fact, in the moment of his crucifixion honors his father even while he was feeling the pain of his divorce from his father. Richard Dawkins, who wrote the book The God Illusion, calls the God of the Old Testament arguably the most unpleasant character in all fiction, jealous and proud of it. A unjust, unforgiving control freak, a vindictive, bloodthirsty, ethnic cleanser, a misogynist, homophobic, racist, infanticidal, genocidal, filiacidal, pestilental, negomaniacal, masochistic, capriciously malevolent bully. I don't think Richard Dawkins is right. But some of you may have had parents that in fact meet some of these words. And I often will tell elders or deacons if we'll go on a house call or visit someone, I'll always remind them, you do not know what goes on behind closed doors. You never do. And you ought not to presume one way or the other that what's happening in a home is either very good or very bad. We don't know. But what I do know is that on the cross, if you believe that God the Father is like this, Jesus, by honoring his father in many ways, redeems him. If this is true of this Jesus Father, then out of love on the cross, Jesus honors and redeems him for us, as well as all other fathers and mothers in this world that have failed their children and look to him for rescue. The people who have hurt you may never say they're sorry, they may not even own that they hurted you. They in fact may be such emotional relational birth victims that they blamed their children for the way that they treated their children. This happens all the time. But Jesus goes to the cross and says, I will honor my father and I will redeem my father from the sin of my father. I will love him and I will redeem other fathers. And I will invite you into the ability to forgive and to love even those people who don't deserve or ask for forgiveness and love. You see, what we very quickly see if we look at the world through this lens of fathers and mothers and parents and children is that I don't care if the government pays for all of the therapy anybody and everybody wants. We cannot banish this misery from this country or the world. It will not be done. We need a savior who can come in and teach us to forgive out of his own power and out of his own grace. And when we begin to receive that forgiveness, it's in that moment that we can maybe begin to honor fathers and mothers that perhaps were not honorable. We cannot fix this world where children are not adequately loved nor are we parents loved, honored or cared for. On the cross, Jesus shows us the meaning of honoring an abandoned parent and in that moment sides with all those who are wounded and have suffered loss in this way. While wounded parents may never repent or acknowledge what they have done, the grace of Jesus can free us to do what he does, to bless those who are unworthy, to forgive, not because the guilty deserve it. Us being the guilty, but because we need to forgive and our enemies need to be forgiven. It is then graceful gratitude that provides the power of the cross and the resurrection to do what the law was unable to accomplish. A life of shalom cannot begin when we forgive. A life of shalom can begin when we forgive, but we allow the hurts in our lives to heal by releasing the guilty from our death. We can then begin to untwist the puzzle of loving enemies who are our own flesh and blood. What if parents who do not deserve our love, get who we must love for our own reasons, but from the power of the one who loved his father who abandoned him in his moment of greatest need. A God who would become sin for us because we needed him. Which of course brings us to this meal. Because what we believe in this meal is what we profess, that we believe that Jesus on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he didn't give us this meal or his body because we deserve it. And he didn't give us this meal or this body because we earned it. And he doesn't give us this meal or this body because we somehow qualify for treating everyone as well as we should. He gives us this meal and his body because we don't. Because we need his grace and because what this world is, is for us to give grace to the rest of the world that doesn't deserve it. So on the night he was betrayed by his friend, he took bread and he broke it. And he said, this is my body given for you. As often as you eat this, remember me. And he said, this is my body given for you. Remember me. Thank you.