https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LiVIOwy2_bU

 Most of you living in Northern California probably recognize these two, don't you? Who are they? Scott and Lacey Peterson. It was about a decade ago that this murder trial and murder case, many of us followed it closely. Why was this case so captivating? I think in many ways it was so captivating because we have these expectations of what murder, murderers, and murder victims look like. And for a population with all kinds of biases, here was someone who was educated, middle class, attractive, white, seeming like picture Californians, and we discover this guy killed his beautiful pregnant wife, hit her way over the body, and for what? Why? He didn't want his life encumbered with a wife and a child. Tim Keller in his book on suffering notes what many psychologists have noted that in fact when we hear of a tragedy there is a deep-seated psychological defense mechanism that goes to work. We think to ourselves that such things happen to other people, to poor people, or to people who don't take precautions. Or we tell ourselves that if we only get the right people into office and get our social systems right, that these things don't happen. And I think the story of Scott Peterson, why it grabbed our attention was this was a guy who simply wanted what everyone else seems to want. And look what he did. He was a monster. But he was a regular guy monster. Because did he really want anything that almost everyone doesn't want? They want romance in their life, they want a nice job, a stable career, a good home? Well, Scott wanted all of these things and he wanted them in other ways. And to have a wife and a child limited his lifestyle. As the trial went out and as the evidence was looked at, it's pretty amazing because I looked at all of this stuff again this week. There was almost no physical evidence that convicted him. And in fact he could very easily have gotten away with it if not for the sheer fact that he was simply so cavalier. He didn't want a wife or a child to cramp his lifestyle. He had an image of the life he always wanted and increasingly his life of four or five years was an obstacle. And so he did what was the reasonable thing to try and simply erase them from the world. But of course people can't be erased from the world. He didn't want a divorce or a child necessarily drawing on his money. So he did them in and in fact in many ways he nearly got away with it. The obstacle in Scott Peterson's pursuit of life, of the life he always wanted, was that he lived in this world with other selves. He enjoyed other persons to the degree that they gave him what he wanted. And I think if most of us look into our hearts we will see, isn't there something deep within us that looks upon each other that way? Well I'll like you if you do to me what I want you to do to me. And if you get in my way I will shove you or move you away or try to control you and manipulate you, maybe with withdrawal, maybe with anger. Given a string of romance as both before and after his marriage to Lacey, he clearly liked women. But he wanted them to enhance his life by making him seem to himself to be the kind of self he valued and cherished. Again this is not unique to Scott Peterson. This is true of all of us. Our selves are reflected selves and we derive our sense of self to a degree based on how others see us and treat us. To the degree that Lacey Peterson, their son and her family and friends would not go along with the program Scott Peterson had for his idealized life, they became obstacles to his desire and he tried to use power and opportunity he had to eliminate those obstacles. In this case too, a third element called the law was present that required that Scott not simply dispose of others, of inconvenient selves, demanding that Scott must respect those other selves and not use force or power against them. Because that law which now incarcerates him and greatly limits his freedom and may eventually take his life. I would imagine, don't know what I know about the public, that there are probably many young women who continue to write Scott Peterson. I wouldn't be surprised by that in the least. So we look at Scott Peterson and I think we have to ask ourselves, well maybe he did something extreme, but in his heart was he really that different from any of us? The first murder in the Bible is one brother taking the life of another. And if you remember the story you know that it was simply because God accepted Abel Saffer-Pleis more than Cain. And Cain saw this as an assault on himself. Why is it when I'm driving my car and someone cuts me off, I take it personally. I know rationally that the driver of the other car does not know me at all, probably. If I were someone on the road, maybe Nina's cutting me off, but I forgive her. Rationally I know it's not personal, but why do I feel slighted? Why does something in myself get hitched? And I get angry and connected because somehow my pride has been violated. And in the story of Cain and Abel, it's just this that grabs Cain and he nurses him and he eats at him. And he plots the death of his brother. And the Lord meets Cain. So Cain was very angry and his face was downcast. Then the Lord said, Then the Lord said, Why are you angry? Why is your face downcast? If you do what is right, will you not be accepted? But if you do not do what is right, sin is crouching at your door. This is one of the most evocative images in the whole of the Bible because you almost get the sense that what is inside of Cain is like a tie. And it's raining to spring and the Lord says to him, It's right at your door. It desires to have you, but you must rule over it. What's really interesting in that turn of phrase is it echoes the curse of Eve. And part of the curse that Eve receives at the fall is the Lord says to her, Your desire will be for your husband and he will rule over you. And here in Cain's story, sin desires to capture him, but Cain must rule over it. But as you know, now Cain said to his brother Abel, and in courts of law this would be sufficient for first degree murder, because you notice even in the economic words of the Hebrew scriptures, he plots this. Now Cain said to his brother Abel, Let's go out to the field. While they were in the field, Cain attacked his brother Abel and killed him. The command says, You shall not kill. And Peter Enns looks at that word a little bit, the Hebrew word translated often in the NIV, murder. It's a common one in the Old Testament. It is a restricted term, generally referred to killing of someone who is not an enemy of the people. In other words, it is not used in context of war or just punishment for a crime. It can however refer to unintentional killing, a circumstance in which murder is not an appropriate term. Thus perhaps murder is not as straightforward a translation as might be assumed. If the circularity is not too frustrating, at the very least, we can state that there is a legitimate and illegitimate killing in the Old Testament, and that this commandment refers to any type of killing that God disallows. In other words, the command basically says, God gives life, and it is his to dictate, and you must respect that. But what we see both in Scott Peterson and Cain's case is that the life that God gives us is not just strictly biological life, it also means that God has given the people around you freedom, and they will use that freedom. They will use that freedom in good ways and bad ways, and to one degree or another, you must respect that freedom and not impinge on their personhood. Jesus expands the commandment rather considerably. You have heard it said to the people long ago, you shall not murder, and that anyone who murders will be subject to judgment. But I tell you that anyone who is angry with a brother or sister will be subject to judgment. Again, anyone who says to a brother or sister, raqqah, now raqqah is a term of derision in Aramaic, raqqah is answerable to the court. And anyone who says, you fool, will be in danger of the fire of hell. Now again, we listen to this in the Sermon on the Mount, and we think, this is a little extreme, isn't it, Jesus? But as we'll see in some of the following commandments, then we could use Scott Peterson for most of them, because from Commandment 6 to Commandment 10, Scott Peterson pretty much broke them all. The idea here that Jesus implants is that there's something in this which threatens our lives, and in fact can send us all the way to hell, some seed here that begins at something so small and so common and seemingly so innocent and natural, but that we, like Cain, should look at it as a crouching tiger and say, we better look at that, or it can have its way with us. In fact, the Heidegger Catechism has some of the most dramatic things to say about this commandment, as any, so I'd kind of like us to read it together. I'll read the question, and you can read the answer. What is God's will for you in the sixth commandment? I am not to belittle, insult, hate, or kill my neighbor, not by my thoughts, my words, my look or gesture, and certainly not by actual deeds. I am not to be hardy to this and others. Rather, I am to put away all desire for revenge. I am not to harm or recklessly endanger myself, either. Prevention of murder is also why the government is armed with the sword. Here's the next one. Does this commandment refer only to killing? By forbidding murder, God teaches us that he hates the root of murder. And be hatred, anger, vindictiveness, in God's sight, all such are murdered. Is it enough then that we do not kill our neighbor in any such way? No. By condemning evil, hatred, and anger, God tells us to love our neighbor as ourselves, to be patient, peace-loving, gentle, merciful, and friendly to them, to protect them from harm as much as we can, and to do good even to our enemies. Every time I read this, I think, first of all, I think, oh man, I subscribe to this? How often don't I violate this? I can think of a few higher standards for human conduct than what is described here. And this for a commandment that I look at and think, murder? I haven't killed anyone. But I think, how much isn't that little seed in my heart so common? And I always get struck by, and not take party to this in others. Because I think how easy is it for, and we talked about, Janice, you mentioned bullying this morning. Isn't this the heart of bullying? When all of these kids get together and they're picking on this one kid, maybe for no other reason than the kid is weak, and they get energy from this. And you all know how it goes. We've all lived through this on one side or the other, or both. And then I hear this commandment that I think, number one, I fail at this all the time unthinkingly and naturally, and number two, this is exactly however, how I want to be treated. I wish everyone else were like this. In fact, I was reading, I ran across some YouTube thing via Twitter about, the friendly atheist gives 78 questions for Christians, and I read that, and I listened to it and I thought, why on earth would the world not want me to be a Christian? Because if in fact, I treated people in the world as is described in these Heidegger catechism articles, I want everyone else in the world to behave this way, don't I? I wish the world was like this, but I'm not like this, and the world certainly isn't like this. One of the things that we see at Cain and in Scott Peterson is, he very much lived my well-being at Lacey's expense, my well-being at my unborn son's expense. What if, and Cain thinks, I somehow will have a greater life if only I can remove able from it. And there are many ways to remove someone from your life. It might be, I'm not going to think about that. It might be to punish them passive aggressively. It might be to gossip about them. If I'm too gutless or don't have the opportunity to actually assault their body, I'll attack their reputation. And we all play this game in our relational economy, and this is again so utterly common. We learn about it in the families we grow up in. We take sides. If there are more than two siblings, we gang up on the other sibling. We side along with the parents, even people in your own nuclear family, develop reputations one to another. And we continue to encourage this and build on it and maintain it, because it maintains us at a certain perspective. So Cain goes and kills Abel and imagines, somehow Abel has offended me, and if I get rid of Abel, then what Cain? Is your sacrifice more acceptable to God? But we actually see with Cain is after he kills Abel, he's in worse shape. And then God comes to him, and it's an amazing story in Genesis 4. God comes to him and says basically, before you just had kind of an inferiority thing, now you're afraid of everyone else in the world that they'll mark you as a murderer and hunt you down and kill you. So the Lord puts a mark on him to protect him. In other words, God shows Cain the kind of mercy, far greater mercy, than Cain was willing to extend to his brother, Abel. And this is the way we are. Cain was, he had a reflective self, he was defensive, he was fragile. I often note how in our current public conversations, how fragile we are. Well I just can't help but get angry when I think that people are saying horrible things about Christians. Am I that fragile that I can't bother to harbor the thought that somewhere out there doesn't think the world of me? What an incredibly fragile person I would be. But yet, this has kind of become our common standard. And then when we look in fact in contrast at the Lord himself, and how God makes us, and I think about this sometimes, the Lord makes all of these people, all of us with a million different judgments and ideas, many of them about him, and gives us this freedom, hoping that we use it to thrive. Most parents know this about your children, you give birth to this child, and you sacrifice for this child, and you raise this child, and you really hope that everything that you've done for the child will be put to good use. But does it always? God however is the illuminating source of all of this freedom. He's never under threat, always generous, always unassailable, and in fact however, this is the type of self that the Lord wants all of us to have as well. Scott Peterson and Kane very much chose the natural option. His wife Lacey was an obstacle, and somewhere in his mind he concocted the idea. Divorce would be messy, it would cost me money, it would limit my freedom. Lacey and my unborn child Connor, they would always be out there, and it would be an obstacle. How much better if somehow secretly I could simply dispose of them, and again as I noted, the only bit of physical evidence they had was a hair on a tool, and that was it. Everything else was circumstantial, because everyone else noticed, Scott, you don't see Kane seem terribly upset that your wife and your unborn child are gone. You're still acting like a single plate one. Everyone in the world began to say, there's something to this. Enough at least to convince twelve jurors to send them to the death penalty. But he used the power to eliminate the threat. And this is an extreme example, but look at all the tools we normally use. We normally belittle, insult, hate in our thoughts, in our words, in our gestures, and we take part in it in others. We do this all the time. And so when we look at Scott Peterson or Kane on one hand we can say they're monsters because they took it to a horrible degree. But that same monstrosity lives in each of us. C.S. Lewis in his book, The Screwtape Letters, I think really articulates and illustrates this well, that there's two fundamental positions with respect to other selves in the universe. Now when I read this it's a little bit inverted because the premise of C.S. Lewis' book is that you have one demon talking to another, so the enemy in fact is God, and you'll get it as I read through it. But the one demon says to the other, to us a human is primarily food. And when you look at Scott Peterson you kind of get that sense. Lacey was, well, to the degree that Lacey was instrumental in helping Scott experience the things he wanted, she was welcome. But to the degree that she became a problem, needed to be eliminated. To us a human is primarily food. Our aim is the absorption of its will into ours. In other words, why are human beings so difficult to get along with? Because they have thoughts and ideas, and they don't simply bend to us. The increase of our own area of self-worth at its expense. But the obedience which the enemy, and again C.S. Lewis being God, demands of men is quite a different thing. One must face the fact that all the talk about his love for men and his service being perfect freedom is not as one would gladly believe near propaganda, but an appalling truth. He really does want to fill the universe with a lot of little, and again in the eyes of the demons, loads of little replicas of himself. Creatures whose life on its miniature scale will be qualitatively like his own. Not because he has absorbed them, but because their wills freely conform to his. We want cattle who can finally become food. He wants servants who can finally become sons. We want to suck in. He wants to give out. We are empty and we would be filled. He is full and flows over. Our war aim is a world in which our Father below has drawn all others into himself. The enemy wants a world full of beings united to him, but still distinct. And of course the question in terms of our own hearts and our own intuitions and our own instincts is how fragile are we really? When someone cuts us off, do we want to chase them down and show them the finger and somehow do them harm? Can we actually live with another human being and recognize that their decisions right and wrong are theirs? And that, do we actually have the capacity to love? The truth is that to love is to lose in this world. And love always costs and seldom is perfectly complicated or satisfied in the age of decay. I'm amazed that everyone will say love is the most wonderful thing. And what we all implicitly mean by that is being loved. Because to actually love aims to sacrifice. And it always does. Scott Peterson was rational and miserable. Think about it. What kind of misery gives birth to such a thing? And I wouldn't be surprised as I said before if there continue to be multiple women who write to him and want to be in relationship with him and you just think, that's the way, strange way this world is. Kane's killing didn't win him the acclaimed desire, but instead made him terrified. And think about all the little ways we kill each other in our minds through our anger, through our passive aggressive or manipulative ways. Does it make us any happier? Sure, for a moment you can say, well I got it over on them. But that little fragile self of yours will once again be threatened by another fragile self out there and you spend your whole life trying to get even or trying to secure yourself and it never works. There is in fact a double bind we are in. Because even if you take this Heidelberg Catechism statement and say, I'm going to make this statement my own. I am going to be really careful about never saying anything bad against anyone else. I'm going to be really careful about always being nice and always being kind and never letting anyone else see the truth deep inside of me that I'm just as fragile and just as sensitive as anyone else. I'm going to be able to on the outside be so good and polite and perfect that everyone will say at me, oh he's wonderful, kind and loving. What then? Suddenly one of two things happen. Either I get exhausted trying to be nice to all the creeps and weirdos out there and everybody will watch something. Or suddenly I'm superior to everyone. I saw them gossip over there, I never gossip. I saw them bullying over there, I never bully. I'm just a self-righteous fantasy. And so we're in this double bind. Either we go off with all this sniping and bickering and eating each other or I act above it and either way there's no end to it. That's why I talk about misery, deliverance, gratitude, misery. I can't stop this in myself. It's instinctive in my heart, I do it naturally and even if I cover it up, I act like because there's an article recently that the pastor put on a blog, 10 things pastors don't like to admit about themselves. One of the things that he said was, you know, if someone cuts me off and I give them the finger, suddenly someone's going to tweet, so I'll pastor Vanderclay and give him the finger on I-5. Well actually the church is so small that nobody cares, but who cares? This is the double bind we're in. And so Jesus knows our double bind. And so what he does is out of his own love he comes and says, look, you can't beat this. Do you hate each other? Yes. You're in competition with each other? Yes. You feel threatened by each other? Yes. You try and get even with each other in these relational economies? Yes. This is who you are. Admit it, confess it, it's your nature. And he comes and loves sinners. The sinners around him who fail to love and the self-righteous who also fail to love. And by his death he delivers us from the penalty of our sins and by his resurrection he delivers us from the age of decay and he comes to us and says, I want to give you this gift. I want to give you a life that cannot be threatened by this world. I want you to give you in fact the life of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit have enjoyed eternally in the Trinity and I want to give it to you. Will you receive it? If in fact we can begin to imagine that he has saved us from everything that we need to be saved from. If in fact we begin to imagine that his love is so self-giving that he gives us this freedom and he says, although you completely destroyed this world, although this is what you do to each other, I still come to you and forgive you and want you to be with me. Can you tolerate me? If you look at famous murderers in the Bible, you don't have to go far. Moses, David, the Apostle Paul. These are murderers. These are murderers. And I don't know if Paul actually did anything by his own hand or just orchestrated the murder of other Christians. The Gospel comes and God says, I know what you are, I know who you are, and I know what you've done and I've given myself for your forgiveness. Will you enter into my gift? And what that gift enables actually is a beginning to love out of gratitude. Because here's the thing, if I want to be nice to you because I want to be the perfect pastor, I'm a hypocrite and I'm still a jerk. If I'm insecure because I see you as threatening my own existence, well then I'll act towards you in a certain way. But he comes to us and says, look, give yourself one to another. Try to love. Learn to love. Love is patient, it is kind, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it doesn't keep a list of wrongs. It always hopes, always trusts, always forgives. Do this one to another and you say, but if I do this they will still hit me back. And he says yes. And we say, if I do this they will take my life. And he says yes because they hit me and they took my life. But what happened that Easter morning? It was given back to me again. Do you believe this? We're free to embrace the life-limiting kinds of love that Scott Peterson couldn't tolerate to give one's life to another. We take the loss with the joys and glories that accompany it. And we know that this is just the first short chapter of a far longer story. When I was in Massachusetts I had a chance to look at tombstones and family pictures this trip. The guy with the circle in red is this tombstone that's here on the lower left, East Brown, Potma, came to Whiten'sville with the cows after the cow fluke. That clock has stopped. That's a very dangerous thing. You better replace the batteries in that. I keep thinking, boy I'm not using any time. Like I said, it's a dangerous thing. My great grandfather came over with the dairy cows to Whiten'sville, Massachusetts after a cow fluke. The stories in the family are that he was not a nice man. He did not treat his wife Annie well. Sometimes the adult children were called into the house to break up the fights. There's one story where, I think I have this correct, he threw her down the stairs. Today, a lot of this probably wouldn't have been tolerated by the law. But at the beginning, early in the 20th century, it was just kind of the way things were. He in fact was so unreasonable and so difficult to get along with, he shared a duplex with an in-law and because they couldn't agree on what color to paint the house, this silly duplex was painted in two different colors. And for everybody who knew the story, it communicated to the whole neighborhood that this guy can't get along with anyone. And so he did this and he lived his life and he died in the 50s and his wife two years after him. And of course, she was the little girl shown in this picture over here, a picture probably taken 20 years before. That's her grandmother. Above her and her daughter, the little girl in the green circle down here, is my grandmother there and that picture in the 20s in her wedding dress who passed away in 1992. And she's the mother of the woman right here in her wedding picture, my mother who is seen here, talking, looking at a picture book with my daughter, telling the stories of all of these relatives and I get the sense life is short and hard. And we spend our days with these petty jealousies and petty rivalries, eating and gnawing at each other. And what Jesus does is gives us an invitation. And Jesus' invitation is to be an extravagant lover, to enter into a love motivated self-denial from a position of gratitude based self-security given by the resurrection. That is the gospel. He has given you new life. He has secured everything that this world can't possibly secure for you and he asks you to go out and do the most appalling thing which is to love other self-centered, fragile, insecure, reactive people in a selfless, costly way. There is nothing natural about it. But that is the gospel. And we all want to be treated like that. We all want to be in a community where everyone else treats us that way and forgives us and tolerates us and loves us, but we don't want to extend it to others. So on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And in that circle of friends was one of his friends who had betrayed him. And he said, whenever you eat this, remember me. And he took bread and he broke it. And he took bread and he broke it. And he took bread and he broke it. And he took bread and he broke it. And I lost great friends together on a knee. When I fall on my knees, when I pray to the Lord sometime, oh Lord, have mercy on me. He remembered and believed that despite the way we treat God, he sent his Son, who gave himself for you. And this is for the complete forgiveness of all of your anger, of your vicarying, of your hatred, and your manipulation. He took a cup and he poured it out. He said, this is a new covenant in my blood. This is a new relationship. Whenever you drink this, remember me. And I lost great friends together on a knee.