https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XB0uPvFrSVQ

 I'm not texting anyone, I'm just trying to continue to work on our new little computer system so I'll see if this works. There it is. Nancy before the service came up and said, oh we should pray today and I said, you're not going to ask me to pray for the 49ers are you? Philip was definitely not going to pray for the 49ers because he's a Raiders fan, which means that he lives in purgatory every season. What's the last year the Raiders made the playoffs? 2002. Wow, that's a long time ago. I remember when he told me he'd be a Raiders fan I said, well I'll let you live a life of pain and misery. We got that from Curtis. But Nancy was remarking because on my Facebook page I was having some dialogue with some Nancy was a little surprised that, I don't know where did Nancy go? There she is. What are you surprised by the conversation Nancy? Where is there hope? Where is there hope? And the, I'll listen to Philip again and he'll tell you some of the podcast now that he does and he's gotten into some interesting discussions with Peter Bogosian who wrote a manual for creating atheists. And then the purpose of this little book is to get people, the conversational tools to get people out of their faith and help them embrace reason. And I have a number of friends who are atheists and so if you're my Facebook friend, if any of you want to be my Facebook friend just send me an invite. I'll be your friend on Facebook. And then you can follow some of the discussions I have with some of my atheists friends about faith and morality and life. In his book Bogosian follows attacks by a physicist. About belief, he often asks people one of his strategies for challenging people in terms of their faith or whether or not they have it is he asks them the question, what would it take for you to abandon your faith? And so people often turn it back on him and say, well what about you? And this is his answer. I'll use a variation of American physicist Lawrence Krauss's example and this is a debate with William Lane Craig. If I walked outside at night and all of the stars were organized to read, I am God communicating with you, believe in me. And every human being worldwide witnesses in their native language this would suggest, but far from conclusive as it's a perception that it would be an illusion. So in other words, he says that for me it would be enough if I walked outside and there in the stars God said, Peter this is God, I exist, believe in me. And that would be enough for him. And I think he's honest enough to say, but I might be deluding myself. Which goes to the fact of how much evidence do we really need? And is it really about evidence that this is about? Because Bill Maher doesn't have much more humorous answers of course. I'm real glad that Bill Maher has humorous responses to whatever paper he reads. He just started coming down from the sky during the halftime show at the Super Bowl and turning nachos into bread and fish. What's interesting is that in fact many of my atheist friends will say, I don't believe in God because I can't find him. Because I can't see him. Because he's not accessible. I can't go to his house and knock on the door and have him enter the door. I might say to them, Peter, you can do this for the President of the United States. But they hit a good point. If God is so real and so important, why doesn't he show himself and present himself to us? The story we're looking at this morning in Exodus 19 is the one story in the Bible where God in fact does this. After God delivered the children of Israel from Egypt and they come out of Egypt and they've been in the desert, there around Sinai, God shows himself to them. And he does it publicly. He does it in a way that no one who was witnessing it could in fact conclude otherwise. God shows up as real to them as thunder and lightning on the mountain. Now, believers often point to a book. But many will say things like, well, how do I know that the book tells me the truth? In fact, there are many holy books with many conflicting details and even Christians who all have this one holy book can't even agree on everything. Why should I believe if God doesn't make an appearance? Basically, the project that my atheist friend says is this. If God could show himself with certainty, then I would believe. Absolute certainty and validation in God's identity and command. If God told us what was right and wrong, this is right, this is wrong, no more discussion than we would have. And I know that a lot of believers sometimes approach it this way. We can agree upon accountability, there could be complete compliance. Basically, it goes like this. There's certainty in the message and if there's accountability and fear of not fulfilling it, then people will behave and comply and then there won't be war and fighting and then the world will be better. Jonathan Edwards, in fact, called this common virtue and he noted it works. In fact, if I'm driving down the road and I'm driving too fast and I see a police car at the side, what do I do? I slow down. I'm not uncertain about the speed. I'm not uncertain about this officer's ability to give me a ticket and so I comply. And the idea is if the world would run this way, it would be a better world. Okay. I think that's true. Now on the first day of the month, after the Israelites left Egypt, on that very day they came to the desert of Sinai. After they set out at Rephidim, they entered the desert of Sinai, an Israel camp there in the desert in front of the mountain. Then Moses went up to God and the Lord called him from the mountain and said, This is what you are to say to the descendants of Jacob and what you are to tell the people of Israel. You yourselves have seen what I did to Egypt, how I carried you out on evil's weight and brought you to myself. Now if you obey me fully and keep my covenant, then out of all of the nations you will be my treasured possession. Although the whole world is mine, you will be for me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. These are the words you are to speak to the Israelites. So Moses went back and summoned the elders of the people and sent them before them all the words the Lord had commanded them to speak. The people all responded together, we will do everything the Lord has said. So Moses brought their answer back to the Lord. On the morning of the third day there was thunder and lightning with a thick cloud over the mountain and a very loud trumpet blast. Everyone in the camp trembled. Then Moses led the people out of the camp to meet with God and they stood at the foot of the mountain, Mount Sinai, and it was covered with smoke because the Lord descended on it in the fire. The smoke billowed up from it like smoke from a furnace and the whole mountain trembled violently. As the sound of the thunder grew louder and louder, Moses spoke and the voice of God answered him. Can you picture the scene? God comes down on the mountain and lets someone say, well that's just a volcano or some cosmic thing. Moses speaks to the Lord and he answers him from the mountain and the entire nation hears. No one certainly at that point could have any question that this was the God who delivered them from Egypt and this God is enormously powerful. And in fact, as the story goes on, we'll see no response. Then the Lord said to Moses, come up to the Lord, you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and 70 of the elders of Israel. You are to worship at a distance, but Moses alone is to approach the Lord. The others must not come near and the people may not come up with him. When Moses went and told the people all the Lord's words and the laws, they responded with one voice, everything the Lord says we will do. That should pretty much fix everything, shouldn't it? Lots of creatures still bang on this drum and say, here's the Bible, believe it, do it and everything will be great. How does that work? Does it work well? If you read the Old Testament, one of the things you'll begin to notice is that the project is an utter failure. Moses, in fact, the people will see this light show up on the mountain, they'll be terrified and the thing they'll say to Moses is, you go talk to him. We don't want to hear his voice. So Moses will go up on the mountain and he'll be up a little longer than they imagined. And then what do they do? Aaron, make a golden calf for us. The first thing God says from the mountain is, you shall have no other gods before me. The second thing God says from the mountain is, you shall not make for yourself a graven image. In less than a month, they will have broken commandments one and two. After they all saw him and they all heard him and they all agreed to do everything he said, what's with us? The irony, of course, is that for my atheist friends, it's the same project. Now they say, we don't need a god to tell us what's right and wrong. We, with reason, can figure this out and if we only set up the right structures and give the right education and have the right rules, then people will do what's reasonable and obey and everything will be okay in the world. This past couple of weeks, a man named Ryan Bell, who was a Seventh-day Adventist pastor and a lecturer at Fuller Seminary in Azusa Pacific, declared that he was going to spend a year living atheist. And so he has begun this project and he has started a blog. It got quite a bit of splash in the press and I think he'll probably get a book deal. And so he's decided to basically say for the next year, I will live like an atheist. And if you read his blog, you'll learn that he's had some doubts about God for a long time, but in a sense, he's coming out and declaring, I don't believe in God anymore, I'm going to be an atheist. And this is what one of his blog comments said. Two weeks ago at the beginning of this journey, I asked a question. What difference does God make? This is a question for theists, for those who say that God makes all the difference or a significant difference. What is that difference? I have found in the past that I have attempted to answer that question. Atheists and some agnostics have answered that they experience things I attribute to God without meaning of God. The answer I have most often given, which I discussed with a friend just this evening, is hope. One of the most significant theological concepts for me as a progressive Christian was the notion of hope, especially as articulated in one of my favorite theologians, Jurgen Moltmann. But simply, God is the horizon of history and the driving force moving history towards its fulfillment. Many atheists I've spoken to also express a deep sense of hope, but instead find a source of their hope in people and the power of people to create the future they desire. Without a need for God. Now many of my friends are skeptical about God. I myself am more skeptical about us. And that doesn't mean that I don't think we exist. It just means when I look around, if their hope is that people can fix this world, I have a lot of doubts about their hope. Alexander Solzhenitsyn is a name whose many of you who are older will remember him. He was a citizen of the Soviet Union and spent a good number of years in the Gulag. And he wrote about his experiences there. And this is what he decided. It was only when I lay there on a rotting prison straw that I sensed within me the first stirrings of good. Gradually it was disclosed to me that the line separating good and evil passes not through states, nor between classes, nor between political parties either, but right through every human heart and through all human hearts. This line shifts inside of us. It oscillates with the ears, even when the heart is overwhelmed by the thoughts of the evil, even when the heart is overwhelmed by evil, one small bridgehead of good is retained. And even in the best of all hearts, there remains a small corner of evil. This is him when he was a prisoner in the Soviet Gulag. If only there were evil people somewhere insidiously committing evil deeds, and it were necessary only to separate them from the rest of us and destroy them. But the line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every human being. And who is willing to destroy a piece of his own heart? You know when I read what Ryan Bell has to write, I have to agree that for many of us the difference that God makes in our life is small. And many of my atheist friends stand up and say, I don't mind a lot of difference between us and the Christians. And again I have to agree. But where I really differ on is when I imagine that we can actually, that what we can actually accomplish by ourselves. Because I stand with Solzhenitsyn and say, in my atheist friends, there is much good. And in my Christian friends, there is much evil. And if I were to try and separate the good people from the bad people, well, most folks are on both sides of the line. So can I really fix the world? Can we really fix the world by just agreeing on a set of things and trying to make sure everyone complies? Another book I'm reading is by an atheist psychologist, an evolutionary psychologist named Jonathan Hape. And he's written a fascinating book called The Righteous Mind. I have titled this book The Righteous Mind in the debate of the sense that the human mind is designed to do morality. Now remember Hape is an atheist evolutionary psychologist, so he's asking the question, why do we behave as we do? Just as it's designed to do language, sexuality, music, and many other things described in the popular books reporting the latest scientific findings. But I chose the title The Righteous Mind to convey the sense that human nature is not just intrinsically moral. It is intrinsically moralistic, critical, and judgmental. Many of my atheist friends will say things like, well, if it weren't for religious, people would be kind and good and nice to each other. And it's only because of religion that they're moralistic, judgmental, and critical. Hape, who is not a religious person, is a complete atheist, says, and this book is really a fascinating book, he says, basically by our evolution, we are moralistic, critical, and judgmental, and bent on destroying each other. But it also appears in the self-righteous, which means convinced of one's own righteousness, especially in contrast with the actions and beliefs of others, narrowly moralistic and intolerant. I want to show you that an obsession with the righteousness, leading inevitably to self-righteousness, is the normal human condition. It is a feature of our evolutionary design, not a bug or an error that crept into minds that would otherwise be objective and rational. He has this image of how we are is really like an elephant, a rider on an elephant. The elephant is the evolutionary package our subconscious gives us, and the rider is this many-conscious self that thinks we're driving the elephant. He says, and a good many of other evolutionary psychologists say, we're fooling ourselves if we think we're driving the elephant. The elephant goes where he wants. The central metaphor of these four chapters is that the mind is divided like a rider on an elephant, and the rider's job is to serve the elephant. The rider is our conscious reasoning, the stream of words and images of which we are wholly aware. The elephant is the other 99% of mental processes, the ones that occur outside of awareness, but that actually govern most of our behavior. And so what Haight would say about Christians and atheists is, the reason they behave so much alike is because of the elephant. They say this is why I'm doing this for God, or I'm doing this because humanity is good, but Haight says, that's a bunch of garbage. You've been programmed to do this by your evolutionary development, by the family you grew up in, and by the culture that surrounds you. When I read Haight's book, I'm really amazed because what I think he actually says is something I was taught as a young boy. What does God's law require of us? The Lord teaches us this in the summary of Matthew 22. Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength. This is the first and greatest commandment, and the second is like it. Love your neighbor as yourself. All the law and the prophets can have these commandments. And I can tell you, what you learned in church today. Pastor told us to love each other and to be good. You don't need to pay me to do this. How many of you know you should love each other and be good? You all do. So why don't you do it? Can you live up to this perfectly? No. I have a natural tendency to hate God and my neighbor. Haight and I say the same thing about us. We're bent. We're moralistic, critical, judgmental, and I think I'm right even if the rest of the world is wrong and don't want to admit that in truth. A lot of what I believe I simply absorb subconsciously. If you read Romans 7, Paul talks about himself and he says, He says, And it's a mystery for me. He's saying, I'm like a rider on an elephant. And I think I'm steering this thing, but if you've ever stood next to an elephant and seen it straight, you know that elephant doesn't want to listen to that rider. There's not a lot that rider can do. And so here we are. And so I'm amazed that sometimes Christians and atheists have the same project. Well, if God can tell us and we know, or if reason can tell us and we know, and then we'll clamp down and make sure everyone complies, and then the world will be grand. And we've been trying this for thousands of years, and every time it works out the same way. It doesn't. Fear, uncertainty, fear, and compliance. God showing up to Israel makes no difference. Within a month they'll be building a cap and worshiping it. Even after he showed up, they couldn't doubt it. He told them exactly what to do, and they did the opposite. And if you read the entire Old Testament, it's all the same. Even in fact, when we comply, what it produces in us is self-righteousness. And then you have Christians saying to atheists, Well, you're an atheist, you're the problem in the world. And then you have atheists on the other side saying to Christians, Oh, all you religious people, if it weren't for your religiosity, we wouldn't be moralistic and judgmental. Oh, so you're lacking in moralism and judgmentalism. Me and my atheist friends are just as self-righteous as my Christian friends. Just over different things. Who can save us from this? You've been around enough. You know that I'll tell you instead of certainty, fear, and compliance, I will advocate misery, deliverance, and gratitude. In fact, while you may read the Bible and see lots of other religions and look at all the pluralism around and say, I don't know what to believe. Let me tell you where to start. The surest thing you probably know is your inability to actually follow him. Your inability to actually do even what you say is right. Francis Schaeffer had this little thought experiment. He said that what if God basically said, was going to judge you not on what was in the Bible, or not what was in some legal code, but basically would judge you only on what you yourself have declared is right. And every time you said, well, people should all do this, someone drew a line. People should all keep their lawns green. People should all clean up after their dogs. People should all behave well in public. And what if someone examined your whole life? Would you even be able to comply with what you say is wrong? Haith says, we're basically all imagining we do, but when we look at each other, we know we don't. The Christian story says that God sees our mess and has acted on our behalf in the most surprising way. He sent his Son to us, into this violent world, not in judgment to condemn us, but in humility to save us. We need to be remade from the inside out, and Jesus leads us through this process, which, like him, involves both our death and our resurrection. This Jesus came. Colossians chapter 1 calls him the icon, the image of the invisible God. And both the appearance and the teaching was insufficient to achieve the hope of the old project. In fact, when Jesus comes, Jews come out when the Messiah comes, everyone will know it, and Jesus comes, and even the religious leaders look at him and say, who are you? And even John the Baptist who made the amazing declaration, behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world. When Jesus doesn't come in judgment and storm and fire like on Mount Sinai, since his disciples do him and say, are you really him? In fact, Bill Maher's quote of Jesus coming down on the Super Bowl half-night is basically exactly what Satan attempted to Jesus, and throw yourself down from the pinnacle of the temple, which is the Super Bowl for the Jews, and show them how you can fly, and then they'll all need you. And Jesus basically says, didn't work at Sinai. What makes you think it will work now? The vast majority of Americans, if you give them a survey, will check off, I believe in God. That makes little difference to their behavior. Peter says this, as you come to him, the living stone, rejected by humans but chosen by God and precious to him, you also like living stones are being built into a spiritual house. And these are the words from Exodus. To be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus. It basically works like this. We begin by saying, I can't save myself, much less the planet. I know this about myself. In fact, I may have lots of doubts about all kinds of things, but this I will tell you, I mess up regularly. Even when I decide I'm not going to, I still do it. I need a savior. And I'm not trusting in any of you because you know what? Even the best of you are just like me. And then the good news, that God in fact knows our problem. You know, when people say, well just tell us what to do and I'll do it. He tried that. He told you what to do. He told us what to do and we can't. So instead he sends his son. And his son pays the price we can't pay and lives the obedient life we can't do and gives us his righteousness in exchange for our guilt. And then we see this, and I know we forget it all the time, even with the certainty, fear, compliance, we keep doubting it, we keep shrinking back from it, but even then Jesus comes back to us and says, remember I came for you to rescue you. You can't rescue yourself. One of my definitions of a Christian is simply this. Do you trust Jesus more than you trust yourself? Do you trust Jesus more than you trust yourself? And in those moments when you begin to trust him and you begin to see that, in fact I can't save myself, but he has acted on my behalf and he has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. So much in fact he loves me that all of the crap of this world must work together for my good, even my own rebellion if he turns towards my benefit. And when I see this, my heart is moved by joy and gratitude and it's in that moment that I begin to say, I'm not going to obey you or follow you out of fear or attempt to earn your good graces, I'm going to respond to you out of gratitude. Because I'll never do it perfectly myself, but I don't have to because you have saved me. So on this basis I will follow you. And that's the Christian life. It's different from religion which is trying to buy God, and it's different from atheism which says we can fix this ourselves. Basically it begins by saying I can't fix it. Jesus rescues. I'm free. Let's pray. Lord, I doubt religion and I doubt humanity. Where can I put my trust? I need to trust you more than I trust myself. And I need to recognize that in fact I stumble and fail all the time, but you are good and gracious and you pick me up and you remind me that you know who I am and you invite me to follow in your way. Help us to understand ourselves, to see you clearly, and to live out of joy and gratitude, not fear and pride. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Will you stand?