https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XTVM36JtDo0

 Cynthia and Reggie are out of town today. Let's see if this works. Cynthia and Reggie are out of town today. But when I was talking to Cynthia when she and Marsha were in and I told her what the sermon was about this week, about vows, she started to laugh and she said, I once saw this movie with Burt Reynolds in it and he was out in the middle of the ocean and he was making vows and the movie's from 1978 and it's called The End and is the sound off of the computer edge? I'll play a little bit of this clip. The clip is even on YouTube. Hopefully we won't get an ad. I'll be better at everything. All I ask is, make me a better swimmer! Oh God, I can't do this as Julie. We can't do this as Julie. Oh God, let me live, let me go astray, let me wear the Kekkeman's. I shall not kill, I shall not commit adultery, I shall not, I shall not, I'll wear the Kekkeman's and then I'll wear whatever. Just hit me back in the face. I'll be honest with goodness. I promise I'll be showing my side lots and I'll turn your light around. I want to see the sunrise. I want to see the sunset. I'll be thinking. I'll give you 50% of everything I make. 50% drop. I'd rather point out the I'll give you 50% and you'll fucking roll down. You've already got this, Lord. I'll obey every commandment. I'll see my guidance more often. No more cheating on us. I'll pay you back the money I made to you. And I'm gonna start building that 10% from my own money. I know I can't do this anymore, but 10% is start. If you don't want your 10% then don't take it. I know it will take me, but it was also used to make me sick. That was Wendell in the end. Okay. Click over to the next slide, Rog. Wendell was not a good person. Wendell discovered he was sick. He thought he wanted to kill himself and then he thought he would swim out into the ocean and if he swam far enough he'd get fatigued and he'd die and obviously he had a change of heart. And he starts to pray and he starts to bargain with God. And what was interesting to me is that this is a film from 1978 and very much the assumption, I kind of fast forward through most of the film, the assumption was that Wendell had a sense that God was involved in his life and that God was punishing him for being bad and so that if somehow he could kind of deal with God then he can get what he wants from God. But what really struck me was some of the difference between 1978, which is not that long ago, and today. And I wonder if even many people today would have a sense of, oh, I'm sick, I'm going to die young. Today, most people, according to Christian Smith, a Christian sociologist, says most people basically believe whether they are Muslims or Christians or whatever in America, most people tend to follow the beliefs of what he calls moralistic therapeutic theism. That there's a God who made the world that orders life, that God wants people to be good, nice and fair as taught in the Bible and other religions, that the central goal in life is to be happy and feel good about oneself, and God doesn't really get involved much unless there's a problem with being happy or feeling good about yourself. And that good people go to heaven when they die. And so Wendell here facing an illness that can't be treated, decides he wants to kill himself because he's upset, and then he starts killing himself and decides, no, he wants to live, and he's going to bargain with God and while he's a long ways from the beach, he'll get 50% the closer he gets, he'll get 10% and then he'll say, if you can get it. And the problem is we hear this and we relate to it because we know we're like this. That when times are good, we forget God. When times are bad, we think, I can't fix this. Maybe God can help. I'll try praying. And we run to him and then we're going to cut a deal with him. And then, and this is actually in the Bible, some others who cut deals with God, Jacob at Bethel, the Lord appears to him and the Lord says, I'm going to bring you back. He doesn't make it conditional. And then when Jacob hears this, he says, and if you bring me back, I'll give you 10%. And then when Jacob hears this, he says, well, Jacob, he just told you he's going to do it for you and you're turning it into a deal. Hannah at Shiloh, she's totally distraught about not having a son and so she basically says, Lord, if you give me a son, I'll dedicate him to you and the son that is born as Samuel. And then Samuel grows up then in the Tabernacle and that launches the book of Samuel in the Old Testament. This, in fact, was not only a practice in Israel, but throughout the world. When people get afraid or truly nervous about something or truly moved for something, they'll say, Lord, I'll give this to you if you give me that. Paul, in fact, in the book of Acts, has to fulfill a vow when he comes to Jerusalem. And so in the Bible, there's beneath the surface, there's a lot of vow making and vow keeping. The term no atheist in foxholes actually comes from this because the idea is that people in war, suddenly the bombs are falling and it doesn't matter where they grew up with it. Suddenly they learn how to pray and it's like, Lord, save me and if you save me, I'll do this. Those of you who are about my age will remember Meatloaf, Paralyzed by the Dashboard Light, is all about a vow to God, whether he's going to keep it or not. The book of Leviticus ends, in fact, with probably what is the strangest chapter in the book of Leviticus and why the book concludes this way we'll get into. The Lord said to Moses, speak to the Israelites and say to them, if anyone makes a special vow to dedicate a person to the Lord by giving the equivalent value, set the value of a male between the ages of 20 and 60 at 50 shekels of silver, according to the For a female set her value at 30 shekels, for a male between the ages of 5 and 20 set the value of a male at 20 shekels and a female at 10 shekels. For a person at one month and five years, one month to five years set the value of a male at five shekels of silver and the value of a female at three shekels of silver. When we read this and we think, what on earth is this about? Well the chapter continues and it says, well if you set a vow to offer an animal and you try to switch the animal, both animals must be sacrificed. And if you set a value of a field and then it goes through all of these rules and you read this and you say, this is in the Bible? What on earth could this be for? And when I tell you what it's for, you're going to think it's even weirder. Because basically what it's for it says is that, for example, if someone is in a pinch and they say, Lord, if you save me I'll dedicate myself to you. And so basically the vow would be that this person would go and work in the temple. But then they start to work in the temple and they realize, I don't want to work in the temple. You know what these prices are? The way out of your vow. Isn't this strange? Chapter 27 in the book of Leviticus is about loopholes. And it says, Lord, I promised I would commit the rest of my life to you. And then you get rescued and so then you say, boy the rest of my life is a long time. I'll just pay 50 shekels and I'll be free. This is holy. This is spiritual. What on earth could this possibly be about? Perhaps the most amazing story of a special vow is actually found in the book of Judges. The man Jephthah, the Gileadite, was a mighty warrior. His father was Gilead. His mother was a prostitute. Gilead's wife also bore him sons and when they were grown up they drove Jephthah away. You are not going to get any inheritance in our family, they said, because you are the son of another woman. So Jephthah fled from his brothers and settled in the land of Tome where a gang of scoundrels gathered around him and followed him. Okay, you have the picture. Gilead had a wife or some wives and had sons by those wives, but he also slept with a prostitute and she became pregnant and Jephthah was born. And as the children grew up, the boys of the legitimate wives and concubines began to say, why would we split our inheritance with the son of a prostitute? Get away from us. So they drove him out. And so he went out to live in the hills and how does a man without land live in the hills but gathers together with a lot of other dispossessed men and basically become outlaws. This is almost a western. They become outlaws and so they are bandits and brigands and they basically survive by being strong men in the mountains and probably running protection rackets for shepherds and robbing people who are passing through. This is Jephthah's life. Sometime later the Ammonites were fighting against Israel. The elders of Gilead went to Jephthah from the land of Tome and said, come, be our commander so we can fight the Ammonites. Oh, okay. So first you kick him out. He becomes an outlaw but you're all afraid of him because over the years out of robbing and running protection rackets, the man knows one thing, how to brutalize and kill people. Now the Ammonites are on you so you as the people say, we need a big dog to protect us. Nobody's scarier than Jephthah and his crew so let's go to Jephthah and see if he'll help us. And so what Jephthah says is, oh, first you kick me out of the land and I'm living out in the mountains and you're all afraid of me. Now you're afraid of Ammonite and you come to me and you want me to bail you out? And Jephthah says, okay, I'll do it but at a price. You know what his price is? I will be your new leader. One thing you need to understand about the book of Judges. The book of Judges is about a period in Israel's history when it's falling through the floor, when everything is in chaos, when in fact these tribes who are in the Transjordan are worshiping the gods of the Ammonites and the Moabites. And that'll be important as the story develops. So Jephthah, so the elders of Manasseh, the tribe, agree to make Jephthah their king as a sense. And so Jephthah goes to the Ammonites and he says, you know, leave the people alone. And the Ammonites basically say, why should we listen to you? And so there's going to be a war. The king of Ammon however paid no attention to the message Jephthah had sent him. Then the spirit of the Lord came on Jephthah. He crossed Gilead and Manasseh passing through Mizpah of Gilead and from there he advanced against the Ammonites. And Jephthah made a vow to the Lord, if you give me the Ammonites into my hand, whatever comes out of the door of my house to meet me when I return in triumph from the Ammonites will be the Lord's and I will sacrifice it as a burnt offering. Then Jephthah went over to fight the Ammonites and the Lord gave them into his hands. He devastated 20 towns from Aror to the vicinity of Minnet as far as Abel-Karamin. Thus Israel subdued Ammon. When Jephthah returned home in Mizpah, who should come out to meet him but his daughter? Dancing to the sound of timbrels, she was only a child. Except for her, he had neither son nor daughter. When he saw her, he tore his clothes and cried, Oh no, my daughter, you have brought me down and I am devastated. I have made a vow to the Lord that I cannot break. Now I ask you this, what is the difference between Wendel and Jephthah? Wendel swimming there in the ocean, what is he like? He is desperate in a moment and what does he promise? I will learn the Ten Commandments because I can only think of two. I will give you 50% gross, nobody gives 50%. I will stop being a crooked business man, I will do all of this and the closer he gets to the shore, what? What about Jephthah? Now this is a strange thing because first of all, this is a horrible vow. Jephthah is going to keep it? Why? Why will Jephthah keep this vow and why will Wendel frog? Get it? Frog water? There are a few things to think about with respect to Jephthah. A lot of people have noted that this is actually quite similar to the Greek story of Agamemnon. If you remember your Greek mythology, Agamemnon makes a deal to the gods and declares that for the certain victory he will sacrifice the most beautiful girl, the most beautiful baby born in the kingdom that year and it winds up being his own. But then he refuses to sacrifice her until he really needs some fair winds and then the oracle says the reason you are not having success Agamemnon is because you have shirked the gods so he sacrifices his daughter. Jephthah and Israel had been worshipping the gods of the Ammonites and the Moabites. Child sacrifice is completely prohibited in Israelite culture and by the law of the Lord. But Jephthah has been molded by the Moabites and the Ammonites and so child sacrifice is something that is not strange to him. The book of Judges is about the calamity that is Israel and this story is shown as many other stories in Judges to say this is how far Israel has fallen. And in fact, if you notice Leviticus 27, if Jephthah had known Leviticus 27, he could in fact have gotten out of his foolish vow by paying 30 shekels of silver. Isn't this strange? What a strange book this is. The book of Leviticus ends with this, this is how to get out of your vows. And here in the book of Judges we have a man who, well I told you his story, if he had only even known the book of Leviticus, he could have said I made a foolish vow. I'll make my offering to the Lord and my daughter's life will be spared. But he doesn't. You see, Jephthah's vow is godless, hideous and foolish, yet Jephthah took divine judgment seriously. Wendell had a notion about divine justice but not a very concrete one, not a very tangible one. There was very little sense in Wendell that God is someone you take seriously. People today might enjoy the dramatic religious moment of, oh I'll consecrate this to the Lord. I'm having a real, authentic, emotional, religious experience, it feels so real. But then later they'll say, that was silly. It might be offended that God would in fact listen to their prayer and say, this is what you said to me. Are you true to your word? Now, there are competing religious voices when it comes to this kind of thing. Conservative religious voices would say, see the world like Jephthah, take God seriously. And they're right, we should. More skeptic voices would say, this is superstition, this is archaic. How offensive is it that God would give people a value in silver shekels? And you might in fact be offended by Leviticus 27. I've been reading this, it's got to be probably the most interesting book I've read this year. And it very much surprised me. The title of the book is Debt, the first 5,000 years. And I thought, what could be so interesting about a history of debt and what debt is? I probably learned more from this book about the ancient world the Bible was written in than any book I've read this year. Check out this little bit. I began this chapter by beginning to propose an answer, by making a distinction between commercial economies and what I call human economies. That is, those where money acts primarily as social currency to create, maintain or sever relations between people rather than to purchase things. And so, this guy is an anthropologist and he goes through all of these basically ancient civilizations or other civilizations in Africa and Asia. So, as Ross Bob so cogently demonstrated, it is the peculiar quality of such social currencies that they are never quite equivalent to people. If anything, they are a constant reminder that human beings can never be equivalent to anything, even ultimately to one another. This is the profound truth of the blood feud. No one can ever really forgive the man who killed his brother because every brother is unique. Nothing could substitute. Not even some other man given the same name and the status of your brother, or a concubine who will bear a son who will be named after your brother, or a ghost wife who will bear a child pledged to someday avenge his death. In human economy, every person is unique and of incomparable value because each is a unique nexus of relations with one another. A woman may be a daughter, sister, lover, rival, companion, mother, age mate and mentor to many different people in many different ways. Each relation is unique. Even in a society in which they are constantly sustained through the constant giving back and forth of generic objects such as raffia cloth, that's a tribe in Africa, and bundles of copper wire, in one sense those objects make one who one is. A fact illustrated by the way objects used as social currency are often other things otherwise used to clothe or decorate the human body. That helped make one who is one in the eyes of the others. So just as our clothes don't really make us who we are, a relationship kept alive by giving and taking of raffia is always something more than that. This means that the raffia in terms is always something less. This is why I think Raspab is right to emphasize the fact that in such economies, money never really substitutes for a person. Money is a way of acknowledging that very fact. The debt cannot be paid. One of the things he goes through is the question of a bride price. And often people look at a bride price and say, are you purchasing the girl? Well, if you are a man and you propose marriage to a woman and you give a diamond ring, are you buying her with the ring? Is that what you're doing? Now all of us would say, no, you're not buying anyone with the ring. What does the ring mean? What is the ring for? The ring is social currency. Add to the fact that in Israel at this time when Leviticus is written, they have no shekels. What is this story about? Leviticus 25 is the year of Jubilee. We get into debt with one another and God rescues us from this debt because everything belongs to him. Leviticus 26, blessings and curses. We rebel against God until we turn our lives in this world into an utter catastrophe. And God gives us good and ill to draw us back to him. And the book of Leviticus ends in chapter 27 where basically he says, we're all in debt to God. Now we might look at Wendel and say, well, Wendel looks foolish. She's out there swimming. What kind of implicit vows have you made to the Lord? Lord, if I go to church, will you fix this problem? Will you heal this person? Will you make me feel better? Will you manage and create or heal this relationship? If I follow you, will you make my life golden and glorious? The implication being, and if you don't follow through, Lord, will I try to get even with you by turning my back on you or disobeying you or being passive aggressive with you? See, these vows are shot through a lot of our relationships with the Lord. Jephthah the Brigham takes God's power and justice seriously, but doesn't know his part. So he has a sword for hire, imagines God is one too, and so he better not cross it. Wendel is a crooked businessman, so he imagines God is one too. And he tries to give God a crooked deal. What many of us do in this moralistic, therapeutic, deistic world is where you give these little implicit, we give this little implicit relationships with God, and then when God doesn't come through and give us what we want, we're passive aggressive with them. It just shows that what we really want with God is some sick co-dependent relationship. Lord, if you don't follow through, I'll go to a different church. Okay. Leviticus 29 says, we have nothing that we can pay the debt with. And so God, in his mercy, offers a substitute. And the tokens just hold the place. Jesus tries to explain what God is like, and this is what he says, ask and it will be given to you, seek and you will find, knock and the door will be opened to you. Does that sound like a business arrangement? For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and the one who knocks the door will be opened. Which of you, which of you fathers, if your son asked for a fish, will he give you a snake? Now, Ben might ask me for a fish, and if I gave him a snake, he'd say, cool, put it in a container. But that's not the point of the story. Or if he asked for an egg, we'll give him a scorpion. If you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him? So what is God doing with Wendell? Wendell is being revealed to be exactly who he is, and Jephthah is being revealed to be exactly who he is. You see, we imagine God in our own image. We imagine him to be a mercenary, a businessman, or a codependent partner. And when we get into a spot, we try to save ourselves by bargaining with whatever we think God is interested in or needs, so that we can get power. But this gives us no peace. You want to know who the hero of the Jephthah story is? Listen to his daughter. If it was Wendell, it'd be, father, what kind of an idiot are you? This is what his daughter says. After the two months, she returned to her father, and he did to her as he had vowed. She was a virgin. Why would the Bible tell this story? Where would the daughter get this idea? Is this something we should praise? Should we say, stand up and slap your father and say, you idiot, why would you make such a vow? God doesn't possibly imagine you to keep it. And by the way, if you'd only open the book of Leviticus, you could see that you don't even have to kill me. But she says, father, I will give my life for yours. Jephthah's daughter is actually an image of Christ. Because there can be no replacement. So God provides a substitute. The silver, the daughter, only hold the place until the Son will come. And what the Son says is, I pay your debt. Yeah, you're making deals, you're cutting promises, you're making implicit things. And all of that is simply a way to try and get control over God. And God says, you can't. And you need it. Because I will give myself to you. And then the question is, what do you do with your freedom? You see, gratitude reverses obligation. What if Wendell saw the difference? What if Wendell, seeing that in fact he had lived his life miserably, now facing his death and said, I have just a little time to give. How shall I give it? Maybe I'll apologize to my wife who I cheated on 200 times. That's what he told the priest. Maybe I'll start for the limited time to be a good father to my daughter. Maybe in fact I will give my life for that instead of taking from all of that as I have lived. What if Jephthah had known the revelation to in fact his own people? He would have seen that God in fact is not bloodthirsty, a bloodthirsty protection man looking to do to Jephthah what Jephthah's done to others. That God in fact is giving. And if he had only known the revelation, he could have thought or could have lived. What if he knew the gift and the freedom that you've been given? Don't you want to manifest that glory? Don't you want to turn the obligation around and stop keeping track of what everyone owes and begin to say, I will give to you because I have been given? That is joy. Lord, the sad thing is we are a lot like Wendell and we are a lot like Jephthah. And when we see the amazing words of his daughter, we think, how can that be? But the words of his daughter are the words of Christ to us. And the fact is Lord that we have been set free, we have been bought with a price, we have been paid for. Help us Lord to recognize the gift. Help us Lord to see the glory. Help us Lord to live the gratitude. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Amen.