https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wwRMqaffrZg

 Brian Brandon on the TV today, so take a look at Brian Brandon. It was at a pastor's retreat when a group of us pastors from the area were asking the question, what would bring revival? What would bring the kind of mass swelling of resurgent Christianity that has appeared from time to time all over the world? One of the pastors said this, he said, an enduring catastrophe. Because he noted that if we pay attention to ourselves, we may note that we call on God more frequently, more frequently, in a more determined way when we're in trouble. When things are good, when life feels in control, when all of our challenges feel manageable, yeah, we might go through the motions, but when the doctor gives us a bad report, when the police show up at our door, when everything around us seems to be breaking down, then our prayers are perfect and our cries for help endure it. We've been watching the children of Israel leave Egypt. And if you recall, when they left Egypt, the closest way out of where they were in Egypt into the promised land would have pretty much been a straight line, plugging the south coast of the Mediterranean Sea right up there into the coastal plain. They could have been right there in not too much time from Egypt. But if you look way back in the book of Exodus, and we talked about this a while ago when we were in Exodus, the Lord said, I don't want to bring them that way. Because if you actually look, if you go up the coast a little bit, you see Gaza, Ascalon, Ashton, that whole area was inhabited by the sea peoples, who would be later known in the Bible as the Philistines. And so God said, if they would encounter war right away, they would be discouraged. So he takes them into the desert. And as you know, going through Exodus and Leviticus and Numbers, in the desert, everything seems to fall apart. The people don't trust God, they don't believe in God, they rebel against God, and things get so bad that God eventually gets to the point of saying, all of you people here whining about your children, about all of my children are going to die in the desert, guess what? You're going to be in the desert so long, you're going to die, and I'm going to take your children into the promised land. And so that's why Israel spends 40 years in the desert. And we're at the point in our story now, actually, when they're about to go into the land. And they're going to go into the land from the southern group, and if you look at the names here, if you're a very careful student of Genesis, you realize that all of the nations on the eastern side of the Jordan Dead Sea are all the cousins of the children of Israel. Edom were the descendants of Esau, who was Jacob's brother. Ammon were the descendants of Ben-Abi, and Moab, these were the two children of that strange passage in the book of Genesis, when after Solomon and Gomorrah, Lot and his two daughters flee into the mountains, and the two daughters say, there'll never be men in our lives to give us sons, and so they get Lot drunk, and they have their way with their father, and you thought the Bible was a polite book. And two sons are born, and these are the fathers of Moab and Ammon. And so when Israel finally starts coming out of the desert, they first stop at Edom, and they say to Edom, we're heading into the promised land, which is the land west of the Jordan, we're heading into the promised land, can we pass through your country, we promise we won't steal from your fields or drink too much water. And Edom says, no. And so they go around. And then they get up to Ammon, and they say, can you let us pass through your land, we promise we won't eat from your fields or drink too much water. And Ammon doesn't even want to have a conversation. The kings of Ammon mobilize their army and meet Israel and try to kill her. And then the Lord intervenes, and the armies of Ammon are destroyed. Meanwhile, Moab is watching all of this in terror, and that's where our story starts. Then the Israelites traveled to the plains of Moab and camped along the Jordan across from Jericho. Now Baalek, son of Zippor, sounds like Zipper, there's so many funny names in the Bible. Now Baalek, son of Zippor, saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites. And Moab was terrified because there were so many people. If you read through the story in Numbers, right before the story, there's a little song about a war that Ammon had with Moab, and Moab lost that war badly. And the reason that song is in there is to communicate that through Israel, God had already defeated Ammon, and Israel was occupying some of their land, and so Moab, who had lost militarily to Ammon, looks at Israel and says, We're done for. And Moab was terrified because there were so many people. Indeed, Moab was filled with dread because of the Israelites. So Moab said to the elders of Midian, who were just to their south, This board is going to lick up everything around us as an ox licks up the grass of the field. So Baalek, son of Zippor, who was king of Moab at that time, sent messengers to summon Baalek, son of Beor, who was in Pepe, who was in Pepe, near the Euphrates River in his native land. Now a little bit of geography for you here. Anybody know where the Euphrates River is? That's up in Iraq. This is way north of the land that we're talking about. In other words, the king of Moab, Baalek, is so scared of Israel, he gets on the internet and says, I need a spiritual guru. I need a higher religious gun who can get things done. And he goes all the way up to, which in their world was the big place, which is the Euphrates, the Fertile Crescent, the homeland of great civilizations. Goes all the way up there and says, I need Balaam to come down here. And actually you can find references to this Balaam in other ancient sources. He was a prophet that was so famous and so revered in power that his name was famous throughout the region. So Balaam is so scared, he says, I got to find the best man I can to beat Israel. Remember how I started this conversation and I said, what do we do when we get scared? First we try a physical resource, then we try a manipulative resource, and then when we decide this thing that we are facing is beyond us, then we look for a spiritual resource to fix it. And Baalek of Moab does exactly the same thing. So he gets on the internet and sends an email to Balaam and says, He says, you got to come to Moab, I got money, and I need you to curse Israel. A people has come out of Egypt, they cover the face of the land and has settled next to me. Now come put a curse on these people because they are too powerful for me. Perhaps then I will be able to defeat them and drive them out of the land, for I know that whoever you bless is blessed, and whoever you curse is cursed. In other words, Baalek, you are the pastor of pastors. Baalek, you are the witch doctor of witch doctors. You are the religious leaders of religious leaders. You are the dude that has the stuff. If you come down and curse them, they will be cursed. Wow, this Baalek must be quite something. The elders of Moab and Midian left, taking with them the fee for denomination. When they came to Baalem, they told him what Baalem had said. Spend the night here, Baalem said to them, and I will report back to you with the answer, The Lord gives me. So the Moabite officers stayed with him. This passage in the Old Testament is so interesting for so very many reasons, partly because we have no historical reason to imagine Baalem in any way had any clue about Yahweh. Baalem was just a higher religious gun from one of the main empires. And now here we have Baalem saying to the leaders, You just sit down and I'm going to go away overnight, and in the morning I'll give you the answer. And what's interesting is the language here is specific because the Old Testament had different habits of communicating. And one of the habits of communicating was that the Old Testament understood the people who were within Israel, who were the people of the covenant, who were the people of the Lord. But the Old Testament also understood that God is the God of the whole earth, and God can do what he wants. So here God decides, I'll play this game. And so God comes to Baalem. And God came to Baalem and asked, Who are these men with you? Now again, if you're a regular reader of the Old Testament, you'll notice that God often asks questions that he already knows the answer to. He comes to the Garden of Eden and what does he say to the man and the woman? Why are you hiding? As if he doesn't know. It's this kind of God's way of opening up the conversation with Baalem and saying, Baalem, we're going to talk about this. Does God not know who has come to Baalem? Does God not know what Balek is doing? Does God not know what Moab is doing? But God comes to Baalem and says, Who are these men with you? Baalem said to God, Baalek, son of Zippor, king of Moab, send me this message. A people that has come out of Egypt covers the face of the land. Now come and put a curse on them for me. Perhaps then I will be able to fight them and drive them away. But God said to Baalem, do not go with them. You must not put a curse on those people because they are blessed. Now right here we see the real issue with all spirituality. Now you might come to me and say, Pastor, I've got this problem. And the truth is you wouldn't come to me with your problem if you could fix it yourself. So you come to me and you say, Pastor, I've got this problem and I want you to pray for me. And people do this because they think, well, if I just pray, God won't listen. But if I find the pastor, God will listen more. And I often hear that and think, you obviously don't know what my life is like then. But that's how we go. But here's the issue. If God can say no to you, can't he say no to me? Because what we're talking about here is God. And the whole premise of Baalek hiring Baalem is that maybe if I get someone with more power, then I can somehow change God's mind or move God or do some of this stuff. And you just have to ask, are you paying attention to the conversation at all? So God comes to Baalem and says, Baalem, who are these guys? And Baalem says, these guys are from Moab, way down south in the hill country. You know those people that live out there in the snips who try and scrape a living where there is no water. They're promising me riches to curse certain people. And God says, don't go because I have blessed them. And again, if Baalem was in any way rational, he would have to say, all I am is an intermediary. And this is what he does. The next morning Baalem got up and said to Baalek's officials, go back to your own country, for the Lord has refused to let me go with you. So the Moabite officers returned to Baalek and said, Baalem refused to come with us. And Baalek sent other officials more numerous and more distinguished than the first. I just talked this last week that Donald Trump is running for president. And this is going to be so filled with all kinds of interesting stories over the next few months. But one of the things I caught in one of them is that Donald says, you have to forgive me because I'm from that part of the country and I just laugh every time I see him because I know a lot of people like him. But Donald says, but you don't understand, what I am expert in is negotiation. And that's what Baalem thinks. Baalem says to these guys, go get Baalek. He says to these guys, go get Baalek and bring him down here. And then the guys come back and say, Baalem won't come because he says God won't do anything. And Baalek sits back and says, this is just negotiation. Everyone has their price. What you're going to discover in Baalek is this is what Baalek sees everything in the world as being. If God says no, I just haven't given enough. It's all negotiation. So Baalek sends other officials and more numerous and more distinguished from the first and they came to Baalem and said, this is what Baalek, son of Zippor says, do not let anything keep you from coming to me because I will reward you handsomely and whatever you say, come and put a curse on these people for me. But Baalem answers them, even if Baalek gave me all the silver and gold in his palace, I could not do anything greater or small to go beyond the command of the Lord my God. Now spend the night here so that I can find out what else the Lord will tell me. What do you think the officials thought? Maybe there is room for negotiation. What do you think Baalek's thinking? Maybe there is room for negotiation. At night God came to Baalem and said, since these men have come to summon you, go with them. But do only what I tell you. What do you think Baalem's hearing? He's flexing. He's moving. Can I make a way? Does God have his price? This next story is one of the greatest stories in the Bible. Baalem got up in the morning, saddled his donkey, and went with the low-life officials. But God was very angry when he went. Now you have to pause here and say, now wait a minute, you just said you could go. And now when he goes, you're angry. Keep reading the Old Testament. I find a lot of stories like this, and we're going to talk about it in a few minutes. But just keep it in mind. But God was very angry when he went. And the angel of the Lord stood in the road to oppose him. Baalem was riding on his donkey, and his two servants were with him. When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord standing in the road with a drawn sword in his hand, it turned off the road and into a field. Baalem beat it to get it back on the road. Remember when I was a missionary in the New wicked Republic? There was a church way up on the top of the mountain, and there was no road to it. And so the church wanted to, you know, all the missionaries coming, and we have to show him respect. And so they all just rode down that mountain. But they sent down a donkey for me to ride on. I'm looking at this donkey, and of course I'm twice as big as most of these people. So I got on the donkey and started going up the hill. Well, we don't go up by a quarter mile, and that donkey very quickly figured out, this guy on top of me doesn't know anything what's going on. So the donkey turned around and ran back down to the bottom of the hill. Because that's where all the water was. And I remember the Haitian running out after me, and I'm just flying down the hill on this donkey I had no control over. And we get to the bottom of the hill, and I get off. And the next thing that happens, because I didn't grow up with animals, took me by surprise. That Haitian just clapped that donkey. And he started to beat the donkey. And I'm thinking, watching this thinking, but I didn't understand. It's a donkey. It's an animal. It does what power and fear dictate. And so the Haitian did that, so he after beating the donkey a while, he said, get back on. And sure enough, that donkey went up the hill. So Balaam is trying to go down to Moab, and he's riding a donkey, and the donkey sees the angel of the Lord standing in the road with a sword, and the donkey turns off, and what does Balaam do? He beats it. Of course he beats it. Then the angel of the Lord stood in a narrow path through the vineyards, with walls on both sides, when the donkey saw the angel of the Lord had pressed close to the wall, crushing Balaam's foot against it. So he beat the donkey again. Then the angel of the Lord moved on ahead and stood in a narrow place where there was no room to turn, either to the right or to the left. When the donkey saw the angel of the Lord had laid down under Balaam, and he was angry and beat it with his staff, then the Lord opened the donkey's mouth and said to Balaam, what have I done to you to make you beat me three times? Here's the best part of the story. Balaam talks back. Balaam answers the donkey, you have made a fool of me. Pause. What's Balaam's real issue in this moment? His pride, his ego. He's Balaam! You made a fool of me. If only I had a sword in my hand, I would kill you now, he says to the donkey. The donkey said to Balaam, am I not your own donkey, which you have always ridden to this day? Have I been in the habit of doing this to you? No, he said. Then the Lord opened Balaam's eyes, and he saw the angel of the Lord standing in the road with his sword drawn, and he bowed low and fell face down. The angel of the Lord asked him, why have you beaten me or not beaten me these three times? I have come here to oppose you because your path is a reckless one before me. Hmm. Balaam, your path is a reckless one. Balaam, on one hand you know I can only do what the Lord lets me, on the other hand you think maybe he'll flex, maybe I can find some way of wiggle room, maybe I can get Balaam's money and save my pride, maybe I can be God. The angel says, your path is a reckless one before me. The donkey saw me and turned away from me these three times. If it had not turned away, I would certainly have killed you by now. But I would have spared it. Balaam said to the angel of the Lord, I have sinned. I did not realize you were standing in the road to oppose me. What's Balaam's job? What's his job? Why is he famous? Why is he getting all of this money? To see God, to know God, to see clearly, to foretell the future, to have spiritual power, and let us expose in this moment that the donkey knows God more than Balaam. Now if you are displeased, I will go back. The angel of the Lord said to Balaam, no, go with me, snack. But speak only when I tell you. So Balaam went with Balaam's officials. When Balaam heard that Balaam was coming, he went out to meet him at the Molipe town on the Arnhem border at the edge of his territory. Balaam said to Balaam, did I not send you an urgent summons? Why didn't you come to me? Am I ready not to, am I really not able to reward you? What's Balaam doing? Still working negotiation. Now I'm not going to, you should read the rest of the story because Balaam will try all kinds of different ways to get Balaam to curse Israel. And not three times but four. Balaam will stand up and bless Israel and give him the most outrageous blessings. And Balaam will be furious. Every time Balaam stands up and opens his mouth, Israel gets blessed. And Balaam is standing there and saying, I'm paying you the money to curse. And on it goes. It's a great story, but it would take another half hour to read through it. This is a story about religion in the world. One of the unique things about this story is that Israel isn't even in it apart from being the object of fear. Balaam is terrified. He thinks there's a spiritual solution to my problem. If only I can dig deep enough and Balaam being the prophet for hire simply goes along with this idea because it serves him well. We work in the dark trying to get from God what we think we need to survive, to thrive or achieve. Balaam is offering Balaam wealth and power and assumes that this is what drives Balaam. We are willing to pay to have God or the gods align with us, reflect our beliefs and subscribe to our agendas. I was telling the Sunday School class a little bit this morning of the situation I know of a pastor of a church where a billionaire, not just someone with a little more money than the rest of us, but a billionaire came and became a Christian and has joined their church. What do you think that does to the pastor? What would happen even if, we're not talking the kind of sacrament of the sacramental kings, if the Marcus Cousins decided to be a member of Livingstone's church, that would change the church. People would say, oh the Marcus Cousins goes to my church, oh I get to sit by the Marcus Cousins, oh. Now this is the owner of the kings actually, but if a billionaire comes into the church, how does that affect the pastor? How does that affect the pastor's position? How does that affect the pastor's psychology? Would the pastor dare say something that would offend the billionaire? But this is religion in our world, because in many ways the billionaire may become much more real to the pastor than God. And in this story God parts the veil and says, how much is Balaam's money really worth to you Balaam? See the book of Numbers is all about rebellion. The book of Numbers is about all of Israel rebelled against God, and God sending them out to the desert for 40 years. In the book of Numbers Miriam rebels against God, and by Moses' intercession God forgives her and heals her, but Miriam will die in the desert. Aaron rebels against God with Miriam. Aaron will die in the desert. Moses, we talked about this a few weeks ago, Moses strikes the rock when the Lord told him to talk to it. And Moses dies in the desert. And so on one hand the book of Numbers is all about our rebellion against God and all of the ways that we do it. But the rest of the book of Numbers looks at it and says, this is a human condition. We all rebel. Anything besides alignment with God is rebellion. So often people, pastor I want to go to heaven where everything will be great. Do you know what the main business of heaven is? God, if you don't want it in this life, what makes you think you'll want it for eternity? But like the two prodigal sons, we have different ways of saying to God, I want your stuff. I want your power. I want your ability to fix the things in my life, but I really don't want you. And so the younger son says to God, give me my inheritance. And everyone around expects the father to beat the son black and blue. But the father says, okay. And the older brother is fuming because the older brother says, that's not just his money walking out the door. That's my future. And so he in his heart says to the father the same thing. I want your stuff. I want your power. But I don't want you. And the father pleads with the older brother, won't you come to the party? See, here's the shocking thing that the donkey knows more than us. The story of Balaam's ass is the story of Balaam and Balaam. And the ass is to the prophet Balaam, as Balaam is to King Balaam. But the ass is a better prophet. The donkey is Balaam's loving and faithful servant who rescues Balaam and takes a beating for his goodness, which is also the story of Jesus. Because Jesus comes into this world and says, I'm going to reveal to you the father. And we say, we don't like what we're seeing. On one hand, he's too demanding. And on the other hand, he's too forgiving. And what we really want is for God to hate those we hate and love those we love. What we really want is for God to be a reflection of how we see the world, how we want the world to be, and how we think the world should be. And when God does a faithful reflect what we imagine he should, we beat his prophet. And in the case of Jesus, we beat his son. And like Balaam who could not see, we beat Jesus and his prophets for not giving us what we want from him. And in Jesus' case, we do take the sword to him and we kill him. And this is our misery. We are as miserable as Balaam and as miserable as Balaam. Balaam trying to buy God. Balaam trying to look for wiggle room. And we discover God cannot be bought and God cannot be wiggled with. And we discover we are human beings. And that is our misery. We are either like Balaam or like Balaam who want to have it both ways. And the audacity of God doesn't just thunder from heaven and say, you shouldn't do this and bring down fire, boats, and misery. He sends in his son and we crush him. And when we look at our hands and discover that we who would be right, we who would be full of ourselves, we who would set the world according to how we imagine it would be, have blood on our hands because we have killed the son of God. And he tells to us, forgive them. They don't even know what they're doing. A donkey knows better. And when we see that, and when we see the ways to which God would go to open our eyes to our own rebellion in ourselves, in that moment we begin to say, not my will, Father, but yours be done. And that is the beginning of a very hopeful turn. And where it leads us is gratitude. Because the truth is, every time God answers our prayer, it's by his loving kindness, not because we manipulated him. Every time God is patient with us, it's not because we somehow have something to offer him, but because he is patient. And every time God shows us his mercy and shows us his love, it is not because we have a way of extracting it from him, but it is because he is merciful and full of loving kindness. And so he simply asks us to start believing and trusting and living in gratitude for what he has given. So think about this story this week. Think about that donkey, that ass, who under Balaam suffered beatings three times, and only by making the donkey talk could Balaam actually see himself. And we see ourselves by what we've done to the Son of God, and yet he did it for us. Let's pray. Lord, we are blind and full of ourselves. We imagine we can buy you, we imagine we can schmooze you, we imagine we can one way or another get you to be our servant so we can be God. And it simply cannot be. And we are so determined we would bloody our hands with the blood of the Son of God. And for this, Lord, we deserve nothing but judgment, and he turns and gives us grace. May we see that grace, and may that grace change us from the inside out so we ourselves start looking like Jesus and living like Jesus and loving like Jesus. Do your work in us, in the name of Jesus. Amen. We'll just stand.