https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oFDwdaFpMIc

 Some of my earliest recollections of this season were sitting with the Sears wish book when I was a kid. And my sisters and I would fight over it. And we would thumb through all of those, especially the toy section, all that clothing section at the front of it, pass all that, just get to the toys and look at those. It struck me as I reflected on this how, while they still say boys love their toys, and I'm sure I'm no exception to that, the things we begin to long for are so much larger. They have much more to do with our identity and our lives. We wish we could be this, or we wish we could change and become that. Katie Hudson grew up in a Christian family. Her father was a Pentecostal pastor, and she wanted to be a musician. And so she wrote her own songs, and she played her own songs, and this came out with her first Christian album, one step at a time. Teen singer, songwriter Katie Hudson is still learning who she is, but she already knows who she's following. If any of you know who Katie Hudson is, she has a different name now. She's Katie Perry. Katie Perry hit the big time a few years ago, and did a number of interviews about her upbringing and her failed Christian music career. Probably most of you like me are not familiar with her music. Most of her music I won't put up on the big screen for church. Rolling Stone did an interview with her a couple of years ago, and I won't show you the pictures they put with the article. Rolling Stone writes, one would think her religious past is behind her, but Perry still considers herself a Christian. She tells the magazine, God is very much still a part of my life, but the way the details are told in the Bible, that's very fuzzy to me, and I want to throw up when I saw that, but that's the truth. I still believe Jesus is the Son of God, but I also believe in extraterrestrials and that there are people sent from God to be messengers and all sorts of crazy stuff. I look up at the sky and I'm just mind-effed. All those stars and planets, the never-ending-less-ending-ness of the universe, I just can't believe that we're the only polluting planet. Every time I look up, I know that I'm nothing, and there's something way beyond me. I don't think it's as simple as heaven and hell. Most recently, she got into trouble, in fact, a little bit last week with her performance at the American Music Awards. A number of Asian groups called her performance racist, and how she appropriated a lot of the imagery of Japan, but used mostly non-Asian background performers, and many Asians considered the style that she portrayed Japanese culture to be offensive. Katie on one arm has Go With the Flow written in transcript, and Jesus on one of her wrists. Think Christian did a review of her latest album, Prism, and it's an interesting article. You can Google it if you're curious, but his last paragraph says this, There is no image too sacred for Perry to use for her own purposes. Her spiritual vocabulary is rich indeed, but it seems to point to a hodgepodge of motivational philosophy and hedonism that is completely disconnected from anything having to do with the gospel. Perry's is a sad, self-centered spirituality in which every hunger is worth satisfying. There's no doubt she's extremely talented. It's just too bad she can't seem to connect to the truth and to power, and to the power behind the religious images she so deftly misappropriates. What was interesting is that this review of her album very much mirrored many of the critics who called her performance racist. She takes the images that are around her, the spiritual images, and she reappropriates them seemingly, mostly to what she really wants, which is what many of us want. Attention, fame, power, success. A few weeks ago, I was discussing with some of the worship people what should we do for Advent, and Pete said, let's do Esther for Advent. And I thought, I've never heard of anyone doing Esther for Advent. Esther is the book from which the Jewish festival of Purim arises. It's not a Christmas thing. But I was reflecting on what Esther means, especially in the light of Exodus. From beginning to end, the Bible is a story told by the weak looking for hope in the midst of a rebellious, overpowering empire. Katie Hudson decided she needed to be transformed and to become Katie Perry to have her dreams come true. And while she doesn't want to leave all that Christian stuff totally behind, she likes to appropriate it sometimes, like one of the songs on her most recent album. She talks a lot about grace when she's talking about the painful breakup of her marriage that only lasted 14 months. But she clearly wants power, and she clearly wants fame. And she's willing to do a lot to get it. And in the midst of empire, how do you get power? How do you get fame? Genesis 1 tells a counterpoint creation story in rebellion to the stories of stronger nations like Egypt and Babylon. Exodus describes how Yahweh rescues the Hebrew slaves from the grip of Pharaoh and in the desert from the grip of an imperial way of life. The story of Jesus tells us how God inserts himself into the story, resting us from the wrath of Satan, from empire's lure, and from the crumbling age of decay. Paul, Peter, James, and John, in their letters, will help the churches apply the revelation of Jesus to their imperial contexts. They will learn how suffering, like Jesus, makes way for the coming resurrection and the renewal of all things. In each situation, the context is blurred, muddled, confused, and confusing. The people of God are always caught between their maker and the empires that seek to replace God's right to the world. God's people are both always in jeopardy to the avaricious ways of empire and tempted towards assimilation. Esther fits in this narrative. She takes her place with the rest of the characters of the Bible, deeply flawed, often suspect, failing regularly. Any of you resonate with that? Deeply flawed, often suspect, failing regularly, but somehow in the end, used by God to point to a rescue from empire that is perpetually on the horizon. Even when the victory at the end of the story is secured, we see that itself is only to a pointer to the far larger, more permanent victory that awaits the return of the King of Kings. I think Esther fits into Advent. As I was preparing this series of messages, I found some alarming things I had never known. For the first 700 years of Christian history, nobody wrote a commentary on the book of Esther. If you look at John Calvin, John Calvin preached five, six, sometimes seven days a week, and so the guy preached just about everything you can imagine in the Bible, except he never preached a sermon from the book of Esther. Martin Luther, never one to hold his tongue over much of anything, denounced the book as apocryphal and wanted it taken out of the Bible. He also wanted the book of James out of the Bible. But in the Bible it remains, and in our Bibles it remains. And the book, in fact, is still mulled. The book of Esther is, if any of you want to play Bible trivia, is the only book in the Bible where God is not mentioned once. In fact, in a couple of places where it would be natural to mention God, the book avoids the mention of God. And I don't just mean Yahweh in the name of God, any reference to God at all. It isn't in the book. Many conservatives don't like Esther because Esther and Mordecai seem like total moral cave-ins. They completely bow, read Esther compared, let's say, to the story of Daniel. When Esther gets taken in to get groomed for her one grand night with King Ahasuerus, she eats what's placed before her. Remember, remember Daniel and his three friends who won't eat from the king's table and only eat vegetables and water? Not Esther. She goes along with everything. Femis don't like Esther. They like Basti who stands up and says, no, I won't parade for your drunken party. Esther completely caves. Look at how the book begins. Talking about King Xerxes or Ahasuerus, who I'll get to in a minute. He displayed the riches of his royal glory and the splendor of his majestic greatness for a lengthy period of time, 180 days to be exact. We date this period of time of Xerxes near when Xerxes was going to try to take on the Greeks. It could very well mean that this 180-day period of time to display all of his wealth and his power was for to shore up his vassals and to get them mobilized and ready to try and take on the Greeks. When those days were completed, the king then provided a seven-day banquet for all the people who were present in Susa, the citadel. For those of highest standing to the most lowly, it was held at the court located in the garden of the royal palace. The furnishings included linen and purple curtains hung by cords of the finest linen and purple wool of silver rings, alabaster columns, gold and silver couches displayed on the floor made of valuable stones of alabaster, mother of coral and mineral stones. In fact, the Persians were so wealthy and so prone to display their wealth, they offended even the Greeks. And while many historians for many years doubted these stories of gold and silver furnishings, archaeology in fact discovered they did make their furniture out of gold and silver. This was empire. Now most of you who know much about Hollywood would say, nothing has changed. And so as you know, the story goes. Now before the service, I usually write a little blog thing about my sermon before and Nancy read it and she said, what's this business about pinkheading? Ahadjahuerus, as he's written about in Hebrew, ahadjahuerus is not a Hebrew word, it's not an Aramaic word, and it's not a word they could find anywhere connected with Xerxes. The best we can understand what the Hebrews were doing was ahadjahuerus sounds a whole lot like the Hebrew word for heading. And bashti appears nowhere in any of our records of the Persian dynasty, but bashti is Aramaic for beautiful. And so the author of the book of Esther seems to want to tell a story about kingheading and queen beautiful. He throws a 180 day party. Another interesting thing about the Persians that we learned are they thought their best decisions were made drunk. And so they would often get soused before making a decision about a big campaign. Sometimes later when they were sober, they would look at it again. And often if you go to the king's party, drinking was not optional. It wasn't all that you could drink, it was they would keep pouring your glass and the rule was you kept drinking. Everyone must get drunk. And so in the midst of this grand and glorious party, Xerxes, who was known by the Greeks as the tallest, most elegant, most good looking, most virile emperor the Persians had had, although not the most successful, calls for Queen Bashti to come and dance. And he read the description of the party, the whole city of Susa is there, or at least just the men. Bashti seemed to be having a party for the women and he wants her to come out and show her stuff to the whole city of Susa. And Bashti at this point says, Carol just laughed at that point, so I'll turn you down, Carol. Show her stuff to the whole city of Susa. And she says, I'm not going to go out there and act like a stripper for the city of Susa. Forget you, King. So then this happens. Now the king has a problem because she's justified him. And now all the men around the king say, what's going to happen if the queen, the model of how women should be in Persia defies you like that? Pretty soon all the women will be defying their husbands. We can't have this. You need to make an example of her Xerxes. And so he does. He decides, okay, she's banished. And what that means is she goes to some back corner of his harem. She will never see him again. She's not going to be free in any way. She will basically be a prisoner of the harem. Aren't you glad that we don't live in a world where men are just prized for their wealth and their power and women are just prized for their beauty? Aren't you glad all those ideas are gone? Well, King Heddaic wakes up the morning after and says, oh, man. I kind of liked her. What have I done? And he gets all mopey. And so his court, you know, his quarters come around him and say, oh, we got to cheer up the king. How can we cheer up the king? More women. So they have this idea. They're going to have a royal beauty pageant. This is not like the Miss America pageant. They're going to go throughout the empire and find the hottest virgins they can find and bring them all in. And they don't go to Atlantic City and walk across the stage. They one by one, they go and spend a night or however many nights the king wants with the king. So they do this. And there are auditions. And of course, the auditions for queen are in bed and no talking is required unless requested. And then we run into our heroes in the story. And the first one we run into is Mordecai. We learn that Mordecai was taken from Jerusalem back during the Babylonian exile. And he was taken from Jerusalem and brought to Babylon. And what we know of the Persians, in fact, the Old Testament speaks more favorably of the Persians than just about any of the other empires because part of the Persian way of going about empire was when they conquered Babylon and they had all these dispossessed exiled people, Persia says, you know what, let's get in good with these people and let's get in good with these gods until the people can go back to their lands and we'll refinance the building of all of their families. And so that's what happens. But some Jews didn't go back. In fact, many Jews never went back to Jerusalem. If you read the book of Ezra and Nehemiah, if you read the book of Ezra and Nehemiah, life in Jerusalem in fact was hard and Jerusalem was poor. And so probably only the most pious, the most spiritual, the most religious actually went back to Jerusalem. Mordecai was one of those that said, well, back to Jerusalem? No way. I'm living in empire. I have access to power. I have access to money. And here we find Mordecai, in fact, working in the court. It was at least, it was as if he was working in Washington, D.C. and had a good job somewhere in politics. Why would he go back to Jerusalem? So Mordecai stays there. And then we also learn about his cousin, Adasa. His cousin Adasa was quite a bit younger than he was and she was at this point in orphan. And so he's raising her and Susa. And when the call goes out for all the hot young girls, she steps up. But Mordecai says, but be careful talking about your past. Don't let anyone know you're a Jew. In fact, no more mention of Hadasa. But now we have Esther, which as many scholars will note is pretty much almost the same thing as the Babylonian god Ishtar. Mysterious, alluring, attractive. And so Hadasa, the orphan girl raised in Susa, the only quality that is mentioned of her is her beauty. It's not that she's smart. It's not that she's shrewd. It's not that she's godly. It's none of those things. She's just hot. And she and Mordecai decide to keep her identity quiet. And she goes and enters the contest. And very quickly she becomes the favorite of the eunuchs who were prepping all the young girls. And while I'm sure some of the girls had attitude, she listened. And she learned. And she applied herself. And she out competed all the other girls in the beauty contest. Isn't this completely different from Daniel, who steps apart? Then Esther was taken to King Halajurus at his royal residence in the tenth month, that is the month of Tebet, in the seventh year of his reign. And the king loved Esther more than all the other women. And he tried them all out. And she met with his loving approval more than all the other young women. So he placed the royal high turban on her head and appointed her queen in the place of Vashti. Then the king prepared a large banquet for all his officials and his servants. And it was actually Esther's banquet. And he also set aside a holiday for the provinces. And he provided the offerings at the king's expense. This is, I know some of you like The Bachelor, The Bachelor of Actuals. Come on, mess up. I know you watch these things. This is the big winner. She's it. She's the golden girl. She's at the top of the heap. The whole nation stops and adores his beauty. And she is now the principal trophy wife for the most opulent, powerful, and affluent nation on the face of the earth. She has hit the big time. She has arrived. Karen Jobes, who teaches at Wheat College, wrote a really excellent commentary on this book. And in fact, she says early on in the story, she says, pastors probably don't want to do a series of sermons following the book chronologically because what are you going to say from the first two chapters? What kind of message is this? Ditch Hudson, grab Harry, take off your clothes, be revealing, sing songs about sex and that thing. And sell yourself to the world to get to the big time, to get to the top, to get the money, to get the fame, to get all of the things that you want for this world. It looks way better than the kind of stuff I looked at in the WISH book in 1975. The book confirms what we should. You win by power. You win by using people. You know you win when you're on top. This is way bigger than what you wanted as a kid. We just sang before the sermon, O come, O come, Emmanuel, and ransom captive Israel, that mourns in lonely exile here until the Son of God appears. Lonely exile. This is where we are. C.S. Lewis, for his commencement address for King's College in December 1944, wrote a really amazing piece called The Inner Ring. And this is what he says about the inner ring. You have met the phenomenon of an inner ring. You discovered one in your house at school before the end of the first term. And when you had climbed up to somewhere near it by the end of the second term, because you discovered that within the ring, there is a ring yet more inner. There's always an in group, isn't there? There's always those on the inside and those a little bit outside. There's always those who are more famous and more popular and have more power and have more things and are more beautiful and are more exclusive and are more powerful. And from the day you got to school, you learned, oh, if I can get an A, I can be on the inner ring. Or I can be friends with these people. I'll be on the inner ring. And then when you went to work, you discovered, oh, if I can be closer to the boss, I'll be on the inner ring. And then if you reach the top of your own little group, you'd say, oh, but there are bigger companies. And then I can be on the inner ring. Or if it's in politics, you discover, oh, now I'm at work in the capital, but I'm not at work for the people who have real power in the capital. I need to be closer to this person. And then it's the governor. But then it's, oh, it's not just state politics. Then it's national politics. I need to get to Washington and climb and climb and up and up. And in we go. It is even possible that the school ring was almost in touch with a master's ring. You were beginning, in fact, to pierce through the skins of an onion. And here, too, at your university, shall I be wrong in assuming that at this very moment, invisible to me, there are several rings, independent systems or concentric rings present in this room. And I can assure you that in whatever hospital, in a court, diocese, school, business, or college, you arrive after going down, you will find rings. There will always be an inner ring that you try to secure or get into. He goes on. Of all the passions, the passions for the inner ring is the most skillful in making a man who is not yet a very bad man do very bad things. The torture allotted to the deviates, Louis was a medieval scholar, and the classical underworld, that of attempting to fill sieves with water is a symbol not of one vice, but of all vices. It is the very mark of a perverse desire that it seeks when it is not to be had. The desire to be inside the invisible line illustrates this rule. As long as you are governed by that desire, you will never get what you want. You are trying to peel an onion. If you succeed, there will be nothing left until you conquer the fear of being an outsider. An outsider, you will remain. The quest for the inner ring will break your hearts unless you break it. I think all of you know this. Katy Perry, in fact, climbed to the top, and still if you listen to her songs, they're full of longing, and you'd have to say, Katy, you're on top of the world. You're the star performer at the American Music Awards. What haven't you had? Have you climbed ladders? Have you found what you hoped for? Or did you find that there was yet another ladder? Have you found you cannot repeat that immediate joy of having secured your dream? I'm sure on some ladder climb, sometimes you have that moment where you thought, yes, I'm finally getting it. And then it was gone, and you couldn't repeat it. The truth is, there is an inmost ring. Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and the universe desperately wants to be in that chair, to be at the pinnacle, to have control over all things. But one left that inner ring and became subject to what the outsiders all know. Pain and suffering and powerlessness. And in fact, in the moment of his most public display, naked on the cross, the rest of the ring turned their back on him. And he was cast out. But he did it for you. In that moment, he took your place. You see, the world's quest for the inner ring cannot produce lasting joy. Esther might feel like she's won the world. Don't worry, chapter three is coming. Gratitude, however, sees the world differently. In gratitude, seen through Jesus, we see ourselves as having been given it all while suffering. It is a reverse, in fact, of competing. It is loving, not using. It is giving, not taking. On the night we start to reflect on ourselves could We're lost, boys. you you you you you you you you you you you you