https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A-JPc3TrTIA

 . . . . . . I was having lunch with someone and we went out for lunch basically because he wanted to talk about the faith and this young man basically started with the question, how can you believe in God where there is no evidence he exists? Examples were, look up in the sky, you don't see him. You can't hear him talking back to you. You don't find him like you can find one of us by knocking on our door or calling him on the phone. Why would you believe in a God when you have no evidence that God exists? This young man didn't get this idea himself. I can point you to a number of books that basically make the same assertion. The irony of course is that for most of human history this idea never occurred to anyone. For most of human history it was almost self-evident that there is a God or gods and that the heavens are in fact populated. The Apostle Paul in the first chapter of the book of Romans says, for since the creation of the world, God's invisible qualities, his eternal power and divine nature have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made so that people are without excuse. In other words, the Apostle Paul and just about, would have to be close to 99% of all of humanity that has ever lived, has in fact asserted that God, the existence of God is obvious and can be seen from the world. Now, on one hand you have the fact that there is no giant old man in the sky with his finger out as Michelangelo asserted. And on the other side you basically say that believing in God or the divine is nearly universal and the vast majority see no justification necessary. But what really tends to bother people today is actually the diversity of gods. And so they say, well if God is so obvious, if God is so plain, why is everybody all over the map on who God is or what God is and what God wants? Christianity of course has God the father and God the son, which tends to lead to images of old men and young men. You've got Zeus up there in the clouds throwing lightning bolts. The Hindus have angered in all sorts of kinds of gods that look like animals, like elephants that have monkey faces and women with many arms. And Hindus would say that all of these are emanation of the divine. Their idea of God is radically different from what we have in the West. And so actually I think part of what this has done for many of us is to say, well I think that there's a God out there and the vast majority of Americans, will say yes. But if you ask them to say more about it, things tend to get a little bit more fuzzy and these competing ideas tends to make us say, I'm not sure about a whole lot of things. Who am I to say this is right and that is wrong? How are we supposed to know? People can't agree however on lots of other things. So I wonder if the problem of different ideas about God isn't necessarily so much about God as about us because actually we have a lot of disagreements about a lot of things that we know very well. We all live in this country and if you ask, if I do a poll around this room of our different ideas about how the country should be run, well there'd be some commonalities that we should be aware of. We've got lots of different ideas about that, don't we? And if you work with other coworkers, one of the things you'll learn is that you're working in the same business, even a very small business, and in fact you've got different ideas about how things should be. Anthony, I know that you work with your mom and you and your mom ever have disagreements about how things should go at work. Yeah. I used to work with my mom and she was a very good friend of mine. I used to work for a family business, Cucan Lumber in New Jersey, and there are all kinds of Cucans running around and all of those Cucans had very different ideas about how that lumber yard should be. In fact, in families even, you see this. Families live together, they're biologically connected, they know each other very well. No one can fight like a family. And in fact, one of the things that I've noticed is that when, for example, after a person dies, and let's say there's an inheritance left, one of the persons would say, well I think Dad would have liked the money to have been spent this way. And the other person says, oh no, Dad would have wanted this. And you just have to ask them, didn't both of you know Dad? Didn't you know him well? Didn't you spend years? Aren't you in fact his direct genetic descendant? And still you can't agree on what Dad would have wanted. So is our diversity of ideas necessarily an issue that God doesn't expose himself to us? Or quite frankly, if God does speak to us, we're all over the map anyway. John Hayne, who is a sociologist who's been doing some interesting things on brain science and what we think basically asserts this. We think we're scientists discovering the truth, but actually we're lawyers arguing for positions we've arrived at by other means. The Apostle Paul also says in Romans 1, The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of people who suppress the truth by their wickedness. Now way back when I was a student at Calvin Seminary, we had a, our first course of theology was called Prolegomena. Probably in this room only Earl can relate to that word. Prolegomena is a real fancy theological word that basically means how do we know what we know? And the center of the course was actually this verse, and the main point the professor wanted to make was, we all tend to believe what we want to believe. Where's Sky? So do you think Justin Bieber is cute? I don't know. Was I a little harsh on Justin the other day? No? It's funny because I teased Sky about Justin Bieber, and I shouldn't pick on you sweetheart, I'm sorry. I teased Sky about Justin Bieber, and of course everybody knows who Justin Bieber is, and then I asked Marshall about Justin Bieber, what's your take on Justin Bieber, Marshall? I don't like him. Marshall doesn't like him. I didn't like him at first. She didn't like him at first. Do you like him now? I didn't like him before his recent troubles. Oh you didn't like him before his recent troubles. But I remember Marshall's opinion on Justin Bieber was pretty dogmatic. Justin Bieber, well, gets himself in trouble with the law, gets himself arrested. You know, I don't remember the word you used, but it wasn't a nice word. It wasn't a bad, bad world, I'm not saying anything about you Marshall. But here's the point. Our view of things is shaped by what we already think about those things. Every day on Facebook I see a litany of my friends who are on the left politically, and my friends who are on the right politically, and for one group of people, no matter what Obama does it's going to be bad, and for the other group of people, no matter what he does it's going to be good, and you just have to say, aren't we all seeing what we want to see? The Apostle Paul basically says here that in our hearts we suppress the truth. We have filters over our eyes and we interpret what we see. We have filters over our eyes and we interpret the experiences of what's going on around us by our ideas. I often notice in a conflict if someone is getting kind of sideways with someone else, they can do no good. And what do they say? Love is blind? What do we say when love is blind? That when you're in love you can't see the flaws of the beloved. Just wait a few years and you'll be an expert on the flaws of the beloved. We suppress the truth. C.S. Lewis in his appendix in his book, The Abolition of Man, collects what he calls the tab, or he basically says, you know, if you look over all of the moral teachings from the cultures of the world that have written these down across religious lines, across cultural lines, you'll find huge terminality for people. There's the law of general benevolence, the nemesis, being good to people in general. The law of special beneficence, you should be good to your family in particular. There's duties to parents, duties to children, law of justice. Don't steal, don't commit adultery, don't bear false witness. We've been going through the Ten Commandments on these things. It's a law of good faith and veracity. Don't be treacherous. Be honest in your dealings. There's a law of mercy, look out for the poor, and law of magnanimity. Don't be small or petty. In the book of James C.S. Lewis says, actually, with all the religious diversity you see around the world, these same ideas of human contact, of human conduct, generally hold across the lines. Why would that be? The friend that I had lunch with also basically told me, you know, I don't need God to be good. And, okay, I can understand that because most Americans believe that ideas of good and bad are rather self-evident. If I were to ask you to evaluate the practice in Saudi Arabia of not letting women get driver's licenses, most Americans would say what? That's bad. You shouldn't do that. At the same time, most Americans also say we should simply choose good. We know what's good and bad, and doing good and bad is a matter of choosing. I choose to do good, and I don't choose to do bad. The problem with that, of course, is human history shows us being bad a lot. Why? If you were to grow up in the 18th century, you would have probably thought, depending on what family you were born to, that it was okay to subjugate people by gender or by age or by race and have different rules for different people based on different things. You'd assume that was okay. Today you look at that and say that's wrong. Yet today none of us question the fact that if you're born to a certain country, you have different life expectations than if you're born to another country. This idea of nationalism we simply assume. In fact, we have all of these ideas that we widely say are good and bad, and we simply can do good by choosing good, yet how can we explain the fact that there's so much bad in the world? You know, your teachers today, we've adopted this language, sit down with a child. I sat down with my dog yesterday and tried to explain to my dog that my dog was making bad choices. And my dog looked at me and I thought, talking to my dog like this is not a lot different than talking to my children. You're making bad choices. When I say this is a bad choice, does that mean they stop making that choice? No. What is it that drives our behavior? We all say good and bad are obvious, but there's no commonality on that on many different levels. Is it right to have different rules for people based on age, race, gender, ability? I'm reading a book on World War I, and all of the nations of Europe were very sure in World War I that beating their enemy was the right thing to do. One of the interesting things I've discovered in these books is all the quotes by American and English preachers that basically advocated the complete elimination of the German race. I thought, wow, that became very ironic about 20 years later when the Germans attempted the elimination of the Jewish race. What is it about us? What are permissible grounds to end a pregnancy? Most Americans would say it would be wrong to end a pregnancy because the parents discover that they're having a girl. Well, that would just be sexist, but it's not wrong to end a pregnancy because for whatever reason you believe the pregnancy is inconvenient to the path that you want. Which rule? Would you end a pregnancy because the doctor could tell you that the baby had a different eye color or hair color than what you wanted? When the people saw the thunder and the lightning and heard the trumpet and saw the mountain in smoke, they trembled with fear. We just finished going through the Ten Commandments, and while you're going through the series, it's easy to forget that the picture in Exodus of what is happening here is that God on the mountain of Sinai is the son of the Lord. He is declaring these laws to the people. And what's fascinating is that there's really nothing in these laws that is so scandalous. You shall not kill, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal. All of the people would stop and say, those are great laws. We need laws like that. Human society can't live without these laws. God thunders them from the mountain, and the people hear it, and they stay at a distance, and they say to Moses, speak to us yourself and we will listen. And again, you'd have to hear that and say, no you won't. Speak to us again! Speak to us yourself and we will listen. But do not have God speak to us, or we will die. Moses said to people, do not be afraid. God has come to test you so that the fear of God will be with you to keep you from sinning. The people remained at a distance while Moses approached the thick darkness where God was. I think we like to imagine that if we were at the foot of Sinai, and we had God right up there, we'd probably say, can you do a Q&A session? Who should we vote for? Where should I invest my money? Same-sex marriage, yes or no? Abortion, yes or no? Tell us these things and we'll do what you say. Really? Would we really want the answer from God? I'm not sure of that at all. Again, he's telling them commands that should be obvious. They don't say, when he says, thou shalt not kill, they don't say, yay! Or they don't say, oh! We weren't supposed to kill people, we didn't know that. Do we really want to hear God speak? It's amazing being a Christian minister. We often pray and we say, Lord, give us guidance. Lord, tell us what you want to do. Maybe in your personal life there's something in your life that you're just saying, Lord, I want you to speak and let us know what your will is and I'll follow it. One of my favorite stories comes from an editor of Christianity Today. I read this story about every two years. I think, I'm going to read this story again, this article. I dig it up. I've been playing around more on Twitter lately, so I posted it. I had no Andy Crouch's address, so I just linked him in as this article because he had posted it on his blog. He actually sent a message back and said, this is the first article I ever wrote for Christianity Today. And it tells the story of him as a young man who very much wanted God to tell him about what he should do in his life. During my senior year of college, I was precariously in love. After a few intense months of courtship, my beloved moved to Boston and I was desperate to follow her. Good Christian that I was, I decided to pray for guidance. I sat on my bed with my eyes shut tight, two words formed insistently in my brain. Don't go. What was this? Clearly I thought, fears of romantic commitment were welding up in my subconscious. And why would God say don't go without saying where to go? I decided to pray more intently, Lord, I really want you to lead me. Interrupting my prayers, I heard two and only two words, don't go. The voice, entirely clear, though not physically audible, was neither harsh nor healing. I stopped praying since the truth was I had already made up my mind. I moved to Boston. A few weeks later, I walked out of my beloved's apartment into a driving snowstorm. Wisely, she had ended our relationship. I love this story because it says volumes about us. Lord, please tell me what to do. What happens if he does? Is it really so simple that we're just around the corner? Is it really so simple that we're just around waiting for information because we don't know what to do? As if God tells us we'll do it anyway, are we really lacking in information about what is right or what is wrong? Or is the situation actually abundantly more clear because between our ears we are choosers and wanters and the heart wants what it wants and we go for things and justify ourselves all along the way. Dr. Peter Boghossian, who teaches philosophy up in Oregon, has written a manual for creating atheists. He's an atheist and he sees Christians trying to convert people so he decided he'd write a manual for atheists on how to convert Christians to atheism. And as he gives this, a common question that Christians will ask people is what would it take for you to believe? So he turns the question around. If they asked me what it would take me to believe, I would use a variation of American physicist Lawrence Krauss's example in his debate with William Lane Craig. If I walked outside at night and all of the stars weren't organized to read, I am God communicating with you, believe in me. And every human being worldwide witnessed this in their native language, this would be suggested but far from conclusive as a perception that could be delusional. In other words, he's saying that even if in fact God did rearrange the stars that said I believe signed God and put your name on it and moved heaven and earth, he would still look up and say I might be dreaming, which leads me to ask the question, there's nothing that can make us believe if we don't want to, isn't there? In fact, if you say I don't see God anywhere, I really can't show him to you, can I? Frederick Meitner tells a similar story in one of his books and says, you know, God rearranges the stars, I exist, signed God, and for the first week everybody goes to church and is worshiping and praising and you know people start drinking less and stop fornicating and all kinds of stuff because boom, finally proof God is there. Within a few months, everything turns back to normal. Why? This is how we are. Bill Maher had a different take. On real time Bill Maher was humorous in his humorous response to what it would take to make him believe Jesus coming down from the sky during the halftime show at the Super Bowl and turning nachos into bread and fish. Even that wouldn't make him believe and even if he believed, would it change his behavior? We choose what we want more than evidence dictates. Even if we say God exists, we find all sorts of ways to justify what we want. Even if we say God exists, we find all sorts of ways to justify what we want. C.S. Lewis deals with this in his book, Mere Christianity, with I think one of his more trenchant paragraphs. Now what was the sort of fool man has got himself into? He has tried to set up on his own to behave as if he belonged to himself. In other words, fallen man is not simply an imperfect creature who needs improvement. He is a rebel who must lay down his arms. Laying down your arms, surrendering, saying you are sorry, realizing that you have been on the wrong track and getting ready to start life over again from the ground floor is the only way out of the hole. This process of surrender, this movement full speed astern, is what Christians call repentance. Now repentance, and I love Lewis for his honesty, is no fun at all. And it isn't. It is something much harder than merely eating humble pie. It means unlearning all of the self-conceit, the self-will that we have been training ourselves into for thousands of years. It means killing part of yourself, undergoing a kind of death. In fact, it means a good man to repent. And here comes the catch. Only a bad person needs to repent. Only a good person can repent perfectly. The worse you are, the more you need it and the less you can do it. Don't you find this all over in life? It is the good student in your classroom that listens well, that when you instruct them, they learn more. And it is the bad student in class that has behavioral problems and attention problems. That kid can't learn anything. He who has even more will be given. He who has not even what they have will be taken away. The only person who can do it perfectly would be a perfect person and he would not need it. This is the whole hearing. Christianity says, Jesus lived, Jesus died, Jesus rose again. Can you believe it? Now if you grew up in a Christian home, you could probably say, yeah, that is easy to believe. I have been hearing this story all my life. Does it make a difference in your life? Well, if God would come down and tell me, did he change Israel? And he crouched sitting on his bed, Lord, I just want you to leave me. Should I move to Boston? Don't go. He goes anyway. What do we need? I think Lewis is right. At some point, and it is not just that it happens once in our life, if you are living the Christian life, you discover it happens all the time. I have to sit down and confront myself and ask myself, what do I really believe? What do I really want? Where is my life really going? And I have to confess, a lot of my life just goes with what I want, not what he wants from me. What is shocking about the Gospel story is that Jesus comes and no one believes him. Jesus dies and even his friends abandon him. Jesus rises from the dead and everyone kind of looks at him and thinks, what is going on here? It is not until Pentecost when the Holy Spirit comes and says, what is going on here? It is not until Pentecost when the Holy Spirit comes that God really gets inside of us, that God really gets into our brain, that God really gets into our heart, that these disciples who are a hapless bunch of half-hearted followers who would in a minute lead Jesus down the exactly wrong road, finally get it. And the best words that Peter can find on Pentecost, he finds all the way in the Old Testament in that obscure part called the prophets that mostly we ignore. And in the last days it will be, God says, that I will pour out my Spirit on all people, and your sons and your daughters will prophesy, and your young men will see visions and your old men will dream dreams. Even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy and I will perform wonders in the sky above and miraculous signs on the earth below, blood and fire and clouds of smoke, the sun will be changed to darkness and the moon to blood before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes. And then everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved. And the irony of this day is that on one hand you have the miraculous events of Pentecost and on the other you have this talk about theophany. What they saw at Sinai and what Peter is saying is that the Sinai theophany comes into your life. And you might say, I got nothing burning on my head. I got no clouds and lightning. Maybe if I had clouds and lightning people would believe, there's exactly the point. If you show them clouds and lightning they'll say, yeah, okay, but that won't change their heart. It won't change how they behave. It won't change what they believe. What happens then happens because normal men and women empowered by the Holy Spirit in small and subtle ways sneak under the radar and people begin to imagine all this stuff that Jesus says is true. The irony of course is that when people say, God should show up and convince me, what they're really asking is for their will to be violated. For God to overpower them. But that's not repentance, is it? If I hold a gun to your head at the ATM and say, clean out your bank account, do I then say, oh, thank you for the gift? It wasn't a gift, it was assault. And what Jesus does is come and ask, will you follow me? Will you do it willingly? Will you do it out of love? Will you do it wholeheartedly? The person I had lunch with was telling me about their trip to another country and he was taken in by a Christian family and the people said to him, he's not a Christian, they're a Christian, the people said to him, we took you in because we're Christians. And he was a little offended by this and said, you shouldn't take me in because you're Christians, you should take me in because you're good people. Does that really make a difference when you're sitting on the curb? Do you really think pride is a better motivator for generosity? At Pentecost, Jesus decides, I'm going to meet people and I'm going to get into people's lives by the Holy Spirit in quiet, under the radar sort of ways. God comes to the Israelites on Sinai and the whole thing falls apart. God comes to us in Jesus and through the Holy Spirit and 2,000 years later, here we are. Fully believing? Maybe not quite. Repenting? Not every day. Maybe not enough. But believing, trusting, wondering, and in our better moments saying, Lord, take my life and let it be. Let it be yours. The Apostles Creed says Jesus comes to judge the living and the dead. And what that means is there will come a day when Jesus in fact opens the clouds and everyone will say, yes I was right, no I was wrong, or I didn't think it was going to be like this. Why wait until that day? Why not come to him now? Let's pray. Lord, the truth is we have really very little clue about why we believe what we believe anyway. Even though we like to walk around thinking we know what is good and we know what is bad and we're in charge of ourselves, the longer we live the more we realize that even our grasp on our own behavior is not always so great. We do the things that we say are bad and we justify them to our friends and ourselves. And what we really need is for your spirit to come into our hearts. For you to take up ownership of our lives. And we really need to repent, to recognize that we are bad rulers of humanity or even lousy rulers of ourselves. And to ask that you not only tell us what you would have us do, but you give us the heart to follow you when you're clear. Lord, it's not so much that we don't know what you would have us do, it's that we don't want to do it. And so we ask Lord not that you coerce us or put a gun to our head, but that you show us your beauty and you woo us and you bring us along to follow you in love. Here are her in the name of Jesus, Amen.