https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zhIh4FY9ADk

 Sing and God and sacrifice, Hallelujah, hallelujah, Let the Lamb be pious. Oh, the star of the Magi, The star of night, Star with joy of beauty bright, Death's forgiving, still folks sing, And God of still life perfect life. Bread mentioned to me a couple weeks ago that he really wanted to sing that song, so there was Bread. I'm glad we were able to sing it. One of the things I enjoy about that song is it goes all the way through Christ's story, all the way through to the resurrection. In many ways, the question we're always asking, and the question the Bible is always working on, is why doesn't God just fix what's wrong in the world? It seems so simple that if God has power and God is good, why doesn't God just zap things new? Why doesn't he just fix the problems? Is it because he doesn't see our problems? Is it because he's unable to engage and fix our problems? Is it because he's withholding? And from the beginning of the Bible to the end of the Bible, that tension exists through all of the stories. The story of the wise men is a favorite. It's romantic. And we imagine these three kings, and we call them kings sometimes, but what they were were Magi from the east, the book of Matthew says. And to understand the job of these Magi, we need to understand a little bit about ancient cultures. Ancient cultures almost universally believed that events on earth were controlled by the movements of forces in the heavens, the stars in the sky. And ancient people looked up at the sky. They saw a lot better than we did because, of course, they didn't have any lights to compete with. And they noticed that for the most part the constellations moved, but then there were what they called the seven stars, which we today look at as the seven planets. And they noticed that these seven planets didn't move the same way as the constellations did. And so they imagined that when these stars moved, these stars made things happen on earth. And the really smart people knew that there was a delay. So if you watched the stars move, you knew what was going to happen on earth. And so with that insider information, well, you can play the market. You can play any circumstance because if you know where things are going to be and you know where things are now, you have an advantage. So kings would hire these astrologers to look at what's happening in the heavens and say, this is what will happen on earth, and to give them advice. So that if the king knew what was coming, the king could plan and benefit for it. So these astrologers were wealthy and powerful and in demand and wise. If you read the book of Daniel, you read about other wise men. And the problem with being a wise man like this was when you were right, it was everything. When you were wrong, it was death. So these three wise men, we say there are three because there were three gifts, we don't know there were three. But these wise men come first to Jerusalem. Why? To Jerusalem? Because in their reading of the sky, they believe that a king of the Jews was born. Where would you find a king of the Jews? In the capital, Jerusalem. And they go there to meet the king of the Jews, who was in fact, anybody know his name? Herod. Let that baby cry throughout the sermon. It's very applicable to this sermon. Herod was the king of the Jews. Now this Herod that we talk about was Herod the Great. He was the great papa of the great Herod that we will meet later in the story. And this Herod, who we call Herod the Great, had a taste for building. He was a shrewd politician, but he was ruthless. When his wife didn't please him, he killed her. When his children didn't please him, he killed them. Herod was a very shrewd politician and became good friends with Julius Caesar. And through that connection was named king of the Jews, even though he was an Edomite and not really a Jew. And of course, all of the Jews knew that. He married a Jew, but the Jews thought, you're just trying to marry into the family. He rebuilt the temple to try and be a Messiah to the Jews. The Jews said, thank you very much for the pretty new temple, but we still hate you. Julius Caesar, of course, had a very short reign. So then in the mop-up after that, he backed Mark Anthony. And if you know anything of the story, Mark Anthony, of course, went down to Egypt and was a lover of Cleopatra. Herod the Great himself was a lover of Cleopatra. Cleopatra did get a wrap. So Herod, who had known Cleopatra's bed, and Mark Anthony, who had known Cleopatra's bed, Herod backed Mark Anthony. But as many of you know, Mark Anthony did not win that war. Octavius won that war, and Octavius became Augustus. But Herod was such a shrewd politician, he could not only sweet-talk Cleopatra and Mark Anthony and Julius Caesar, he could also sweet-talk Octavius and maintain his power in Jerusalem. And he did not have this power because he was dim. He had his power because he was shrewd and cutthroat and bloodthirsty and smart. And so when the three wise men came to Herod and said, where is the newborn baby? Herod thought, the baby ain't mine. But he kept that in the back of his mind and said, oh, I'll go and consult with my people. The Messiah will be born in Bethlehem. Go to Bethlehem, find the baby, and when you find him, come back and tell me about him so that I too may honor him properly. But of course, anyone in that day who knew Herod the Great knew what he would do to such a baby. When they, the wise men and agile had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. Get up, he said. Take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him. So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night and left for Egypt. For he stayed until the death of Herod, which wouldn't actually be very long. And so it was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet, out of Egypt I have called my son. Now I want you to follow that little word fulfilled as we go through the story. When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious. And he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi. Then what was said through the prophet, Jeremiah, was fulfilled. A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and in great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted because they are no more. After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt that said, Get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel. For those who were trying to take the child's life were dead. So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea, Archelaus being part of the Herod's family, reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee and he went and lived in a town named Nazareth. So it was fulfilled and what was said through the prophets that he would be called a Nazarene. Now when I was growing up, this business of fulfillment always caught my imagination. And I wondered, now how does this really work with God? So these Old Testament prophets have these ideas and so what they say then is fulfilled in the New Testament. And I always imagined you could somehow reverse engineer this old business. But now, and with many of you reading through a lot of the Old Testament in our Sunday school class, working through these texts, it becomes very clear that if you just look in the Old Testament, you're not going to find just kind of dot to dot to dot to dot and come up with Jesus. There's a lot of prophecy in that Old Testament and a lot of things are said. Now you can, if seen from the perspective of Jesus' look back, it's kind of like, oh yeah, that makes sense. But looking forward, it's really pretty tough. And then I have a lot of other questions like, why did the babies have to die? I mean, if God could send an angel to Joseph and say, you know, get Mary and the kid out of here, couldn't he just kind of like do an angelic email or something and visit the other moms and say, get your babies out of here too? I mean, these kinds of questions bother people because we say, does God place specials? Why save Jesus and not the other boys in Bethlehem? And why does Matthew, in the short space, talk about fulfilling the prophets three times? Why is that so important? What does that mean? The truth is, as we go through this story, there are too many stories that this connects with. Those of you who have been through our work in here, Exodus might remember, Moses was a boy who was specially saved. And that story echoes through this one. Israel itself was subjected to male genocide by the pharaohs. And that story echoes through this one. Israel flees to Egypt to escape a famine. And Egypt then is a place of refuge. Ishmael goes to Egypt. Joseph goes to Egypt. Jacob goes to Egypt. Then Israel is called out of Egypt. And that is picked up by the book of Hosea. You also might begin to notice that Babylon, and the whole Exodus story gets brought up here. This quote about Rachel leaving actually comes from the prophet Jeremiah, and it's the most specific lengthy quote in Matthew's treatment here. And that is quite an image too because after Nebuchadnezzar comes down and sacks Jerusalem, he takes the brightest and the best and accumulates them and brings them down to Babylon. And the road to Babylon passes near Rachel's tomb. And in our Sunday School class we just started Ruth. We started Ruth chapter one, verse one, and I told them we're going to spend the whole day on it. And in fact we only spent a third of what I wanted to treat on there because the Bible is like this. It repeats these stories. And so the prophet Jeremiah had this vision of the children of Israel in chains being brought up to Babylon. He had this vision of Rachel in her tomb weeping for her children. And so Matthew brings this up in the context of the boys of Bethlehem's slaughter. A mother who will not be consoled because her child has been ripped out of her arms and will be no more. Many of you can relate to something like this. Mothers refusing to be comforted. Bethlehem suffers by Herod as a part of this larger conflict that the Bible keeps talking about. About, Augustine talked about the city of man and the city of God. I haven't talked about the empire. It is God versus Egypt and God versus Babylon and God versus Rome. And these stories rumble throughout the stories of the Bible. And so Herod now, pretending Messiah, stands with Egypt and with Babylon, murders these boys. Why? Because they might possibly in some way be a threat to him and he won't take any chances. Even though Herod the Great within four years will be dead anyway. And again, we want to imagine a simple story of God playing chess with Herod. Herod thinks he can kill God's boy? No. God will send an angel and Jesus will escape. But is this story just about God playing chess with Herod? Could God just kill Herod? Why all the details of this story? Why say some and not others? Why let the drama continue? And what does that say about Jesus? See what this story does is helps us know who Jesus is. Helps us know who Israel is. You see God rescues Israel. God rescues Israel and avenges the murder of her boys with the death of Egypt's firstborn. Israel is God's firstborn. Israel is given the law and promises. And if they do it right, then God will turn the world their way. But Israel fails. And we fail. To quote Jeremiah, Matthew picks a very interesting passage. Because the verse after Rachel weeping for her children because they are no more. It says this. This is what the Lord says. Restrain your voice from weeping and your eyes from tears. For your work will be rewarded, declares the Lord. They will return from the land of the enemy. So there is hope for your descendants, declares the Lord. Your children will return to their own land. Jeremiah says. And Jeremiah in fact continues and gives us this vision of a new heavens and a new earth. The days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel and with the people of Judah. It will not be like the covenant I made with their ancestors when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt because they broke my covenant. Though I was a husband to them, declares the Lord. This is the covenant I will make with the people of Israel after that time, declares the Lord. I will put my law in their minds and write it on their parts. I will be their God and they will be my people. No longer will they teach their neighbors or Satan one another, know the Lord, because they all will know me. From the least of them to the greatest, declares the Lord. For I will forgive their wickedness and will remember their sins no more. What does this have to do with murdered babies and toddlers? To the exiles going to Babylon, you might say they will return. But what will you say to the mothers of murdered sons? If you would go to those mothers and say your sons will return, the mothers would say how can they return? They're dead. And what does that have to do with Jesus? See the truth is, time kills all. Time will kill Herod. Every boy born in Bethlehem will grow up and die. All of us will die. The age of decay kills Herod. The powers of this world are exposed for who they are and what they do. Empire will come and kill Jesus. Not just yet. See Matthew is telling the story here in connection with the far older story. And he's telling the story about us and us in this world where maybe you'll escape it today, maybe you'll escape it tomorrow, but none of us escaped death. And maybe you think you can outwit Empire now and maybe you think you can triumph and get over later. Herod was a master of getting over. If anybody was following Herod's fortune, you'd say wow Herod, what amazing fortune that you were close friends with Julius Caesar. And help them out in a scrape one so that when he gained power, you were at his right hand. Oh what terrible fortune when Caesar died. Oh Herod, how crafty you were to be Cleopatra's lover. Oh Herod, how smart you were to back Mark Anthony. Oh Herod, how stupid you were to back Mark Anthony. You should have backed Octavius. Oh Herod, how crafty you are to weanel your way in. And become the pet of Augustus too. Herod, Herod, Herod, you are the chief maker in this world, aren't you? But what does Herod fear? Faith. He kills his own. He kills those that Bethlehem. He's exposed for being nothing but what he truly is. A man who fears babies. And this baby who slips out to Egypt and takes on Israel's story. Takes on the story of promise where through Israel, God will begin to show the world what he really wanted. And when Israel shows us who we really are, this baby will turn the story. Will turn the corner. This baby too will be killed by empire. Another heir will sit on the throne and invite Jesus to come in and hope, Oh maybe this Jesus will do some tricks for me. And when Jesus refuses to say anything to him, Herod says, take him away. I don't care what you do with him. Oscar Wilde probably had the best line about one of Herod's descendants. When a later Herod hears that Jesus is raising the dead, he cries, I prevent him to raise the dead. This man must be found and told, I don't allow people to raise the dead. Why? Because death is how Herod feels. Why? Because death is how Herod secures himself. What will you say to a man who raises the dead? How exactly will you stop him? God cannot simply deliver us from the empire outside of us. Because empire is in us all. And on one hand it's easy from our seat of convenience to look at Herod and say, Oh Herod, what a bloodthirsty man you were. How horrible of you to kill all those babies. But if you live long enough, you know that the seed of Herod is in each of us. And if God would deliver us from that Herod outside of us, he must deliver us from the Herod inside of us. And how should he do that? You see, it's easy to eliminate your problems by killing them if your problems are people. But you know it's far harder to deal actually with people and to rescue them from themselves. God works through the long story of Jesus and Israel to show us the nature of our bondage. It isn't simply us versus them. And it isn't simply us giving us a better law. We are rebels. We are in it for ourselves. We will do whatever it takes to get what we want. So Jesus comes to be God with us. And he's not a herculean god. And he's not a heretic god. He hasn't come to be born in the palace in Jerusalem. He's in a stable in Bethlehem and then in a humble home. And he himself must flee and be pushed around by empire until empire finally grasps him, catches him, and crushes him. But like Herod saying, I simply, he must be told not to raise the dead. So what happens when Jesus comes back from the dead? Because finally the impotence of the weapon of empire, which is death, is undone. And then what would Herod do? Jesus' answer to the innocence of Bethlehem is the same as his answer to us. He rescues us from death. And then when you get to the grieving mothers of the murdered babies of Bethlehem, your sons will return. You can only have credibility if you see the risen Christ. You can only believe that these dead babies are not forgotten by God. So how will we face this world where children continue to be slaughtered? Children are slaughtered who are unborn because of inconvenience. Children die of poor water or malnutrition every day. Most children in this world die of diseases that are easily avoided by those of us with clean water, sanitation, and even basic medical care. The slaughter continues. Where do we stand and what do we see? How do we think about Jesus in history? Is he a man who said some really idealistic things? Is he a guy who gave us some good advice how to be nice to people and good to the poor? Or did he fundamentally change empire by taking away its chief weapon? How do we think about Jesus in our own lives? It's 2015. It used to be 2014. We make a lot of the turning of the year sometimes and we think, maybe this new year will bring me some new things, and maybe it will. But when we turn the clock to 2016, if we get there, guess what? We'll all be another year older. We'll all be one year closer to the grave. How does Jesus change it? If we are with him in life, we are with him in death, and we're with him in the resurrection, and that finally changes how we live. On the night he was betrayed, he took bread, and he broke it. He said, this is my body broken for you. In that moment, did he think about the boy babies who were butchered? Did he think about the armies and the killing that empire always brings? Unlike Herod, who said, I'm going to secure myself at the cost of these babies, Jesus comes to us and says, I'm going to secure you at the cost of me. Take my body, eat it, remember and believe that empire is no more, and that with me you are delivered. Thank you.