https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=dhNQM-7C1xY

 All this technology, here doesn't want to work. Okay. There! Okay. How many of you recognize this? That's the blessing! I say that almost every Sunday. Again and again and again and again and again. This is probably one of the things that you've probably memorized without even knowing it. And in fact, this blessing is very old. It's something I heard my father say almost every week when I was growing up. It's something my grandfather said almost every week growing up. It has traditionally, liturgically, in the end, not only of Christian church services, but even of Jewish synagogue services for thousands of years. It comes out of the book of Numbers. And it's beautiful. It's very simple. The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face shine on you and be gracious to you. The Lord turn his face towards you and give you peace. Beautiful. It's simple. It's elegant. And it's powerful. But can it be believed? When Neil got here this morning, when Neil and I get together, we often share what books we've been reading back and forth. This is one of the books I've mentioned to him. I've been probably pecking at this book for over a year. It's about 700 pages of philosophy and history. And basically, a Canadian Roman Catholic philosopher, Charles Taylor, tries to answer the question, why is it that in 1500, almost everyone in the West simply believed in God? And now by 2014, for many people, believing in God is difficult. What made this change? And it's an odd change because, and we feel it in the blessing, because why would I stand up in front of you and raise my hands and repeat these words? And what really happens when I do it? A scientist might say, well, let's figure it out. Let's eliminate the variables. Let's study churches that use the blessing and churches that don't use the blessing. And we'll see if one group is more blessed than the other. That would be a very scientific way of approaching it. But then we have the question, how are we going to know who's blessed, who's more blessed, and who's less blessed? Around here, often, some of us have the tradition where you might ask, how are you doing today? And you might say, I'm blessed. And sometimes that's a way of saying, things aren't so great, but I still believe in God's blessing. Sometimes that might say, things are going pretty well and I'm feeling thankful. But how on earth do we know who's more blessed and who's less blessed? Can we quantify it? So we start our journey in the book of Numbers. Actually, Advent begins next week, so we'll pause our journey through the Bible. We'll spend actually a fair amount of time in Isaiah, which will be a little bit repetitive for the Sunday School class. We've been in Isaiah for quite a while there. But the book of Numbers picks up the Exodus story. And it's often the case that people say, well, I want to read the Bible. So they'll read through Genesis, and Genesis has lots of interesting stories. And then they'll get into Exodus that has more interesting stories until they get to about chapter 25. And then it spends all this time talking about the tabernacle. So let's skip that. Then they get to the book of Leviticus, and that's all weird, so they want to skip that. And then it's like, okay, we have a new book, Numbers. And they start reading the book of Numbers, and what do they find in their heart but lists of Numbers? And you thought, well, that's what it said. The book is about Numbers. And there are some interesting stories dotted throughout the book of Numbers, and we'll get to those at some point. But the book of Numbers is really about one thing, Numbers. Numbers, but the Numbers themselves are significant because they talk about a story, and it's a hard story, and it's a difficult story. After Exodus and Leviticus, the tabernacle is all set up. It's consecrated. Everyone is ready to go. And so God says, I want you to count all of the men of fighting age. And so they count the bonds, about 600,000 of them. And the Numbers, they get all organized, and this is how the tribes are to march, and this is how the camp is to be laid out. And all of this is happening, and the whole point of this is Israel now, after two years in the wilderness, is being... They've gone through basic training, and they're ready to march into the promised land as an army. And so the Numbers are counted, and the men are organized, and they're going to fight their way into the promised land, and they're going to have this wonderful land of milk and honey. And so they get to the border, and they send in 12 spies. And these 12 spies are in the land for 40 days, and they come back with a report. They came back to Moses and Aaron and the whole Israelite community at Kadesh in the desert of Kerem. And they reported to them, to the whole assembly, and showed them the fruit of the land. They gave Moses this account. We went into the land in which you sent us, and it does flow with milk and honey. The ear is its fruit. But the people who live there are powerful, and the cities are fortified and very large. And we even saw descendants of Anak there. The Amalekites live in the Negad. The Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Ammonites live in the hill country. And the Canaanites live near the sea and along the Jordan. Then Caleb silenced the people before Moses and said, We should go up and take possession of the land, for we can certainly do it. But the men who had got up with him said, We can't attack those people. They are stronger than we are. And they spread among the Israelites a bad report about the land they had explored. They said, The land we explored devours those living in it. All the people we saw there are of great size. We saw the Nephilim there. The descendants of Anak come from the Nephilim. We seemed like grasshoppers in our own eyes, and we looked the same to them. And I remember as a child going to Sunday school learning this story about how the twelve spies go in, and only Joshua and Caleb say, Yes, the Lord can take this land. And the other twelve spies says, No, we can't take the land. And all of Israel believes the majority committee. That night all the members of the community raised their voices and wept aloud. All the Israelites rumbled against Moses and Aaron, and the whole company said to them, If only we had died in Egypt or in this wilderness, why is the Lord bringing us into this land only to let us fall by the sword? Our wives and children will be taken as thunder. Would it be better for us to go back to Egypt? And they said to each other, We should choose a leader and get back to Egypt. What's funny about this story is that I learned this first part in Sunday school. And I learned how the ten of the twelve spies were faithless and they wanted to turn back. And I learned how the Lord was angry. But what I never read, and they never read in my children's Bible, this passage, which is really the center of the book of Numbers. The Lord says to them basically, You don't want to go in? I'm not going to let you in. In this wilderness your bodies will fall, every one of you, twenty years old or more, who was counted in the census and who has rumbled against me. Not one of you will enter the land I swore with uplifted hand to make your home, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh and Joshua the son of Nun. As for your children that you said would be taken as thunder, I will bring them in to enjoy the land you have rejected. But as for you, your bodies will fall in this wilderness. Your children will be shepherds here for forty years, suffering for your unfaithfulness until the last of your bodies lies in the wilderness. For forty years, one year for each of the forty days you explore the land, you will suffer for your sins and know what it is like to have me against you. Oh wow. This is not a happy book. Because in a sense the book of Numbers begins by counting the first time all the Israelite men who would go before into the land. And the book ends by counting them again. And there's another six hundred thousand at the end of the book. But the point is the six hundred thousand at the end of the book are different from the six hundred thousand at the beginning of the book. Because a whole generation that was faithless died in the desert. It's a funny book, the book of Numbers, and in a sense already giving you the prize. But it's an important book on a lot of different levels. Because the blessing that we began with comes in chapter six at the beginning of the book. When the tabernacle is shiny and new, and all the fighting men are numbered, and the people are all arranged, and everything is ready to go, and they're all excited because the Lord's going to bring them into this land, and so the Lord gives Aaron this blessing, and says, bless the people, bless the people, and everybody's thinking, yes, it's all going to happen, we're ready to go, let's go get it. And all they need to discourage them is ten spies of the twelve that say, okay, maybe God took out Pharaoh, but I don't think he can do this. All hope is lost. What did the people imagine when Aaron first announced this blessing on them? What did they think? Now, one reading might say, well, you know, these blessings are for people who qualify. Did the people disqualify themselves from the blessing by their faithlessness? Yes, in many ways they did. But they disqualified themselves a number of times beforehand, because in fact, God blessed them in Egypt when they didn't even remember his name. And he blessed them even when they were appropriating all the laws and failing them, and the most dramatic case was with Aaron himself, the one who's going to give them the blessing, when Aaron made it to the top. And so what exactly is the nature of this blessing? And what exactly is the nature of the blessing of God? Because on one hand, when the people are all in the tabernacle of shiny and new, and the cloud of God is before them, and they all remember the passage through the Red Sea, they're thinking, we can do it. And the truth is, no, they can't. Now the blessing itself is really quite amazing. It's three lines of three words in Hebrew, five words, and seven words. And what's really striking, if you're used to reading the Hebrew text, is that God's name, which is something very present in the text, appears in each of the three lines. There's progression in the text. It begins by saying, what is happening here? The Lord bless you. And then the second word is that the Lord keep you or protect you. And then the second line begins, we make his face to shine upon you. And the image here is, now if you've been following along, you remember that the face of the Lord is his most intimate part. And when Moses himself said, Lord, I want to see you face to face, the Lord said, Moses, you can't see my face, but I will turn my back to you. If you turn your back to the rock, I will pass behind you. But here the image is that the Lord will share his face with his people and be gracious to them. It's a word of mercy and forgiveness and abundance. And then the face comes back again. The Lord, actually in Hebrew, it's a lifting. And in Psalms you find this word sometimes where the Lord lifts up the face of the downcast. And here the image is that the Lord comes and again lifts up his face and reveals himself intimately and fully to his people. And then the conclusion of the blessing sometimes escapes us in English, but the word is shalom and it means heaven. It means well-being. It means fullness. So in a sense what this blessing says is that God comes in you. He shares himself most intimately with you. And he gives you more than you could have possibly asked or imagined. And he tells Aaron, lift up your hands and say this to the people. And he has Aaron say this to the people, Aaron, a man who failed God at the golden cap, and the people who once they get to the brink of the promised land will all turn faithless. And the Lord, of course, knows this. And he says, bless them still. Now, for you grammarians out there, this blessing is in the just of mood. And the just of mood is kind of an important idea in the Bible. It's the mood of Genesis when God creates. Let there be light and there is light. Let the ground burst forth and bring forth animals. Let the sky be filled with the birds of the air. Let the seas be filled with the fish of the sea. The just of mood is kind of an indirect God making space for something to happen. It isn't a ham-fisted hammering of things. This is Andy Crouch in his book Playing God, Redeeming the Gift of Power. The first chapter of Genesis is full of goodness and good results of creative power. Genesis begins not with violence, but with breath and word. The creator God does not need to rest being out of chaos. Instead, God calmly speaks the simple words, let there be. These words in what grammarians call the just of form are not direct imperatives. They are simultaneously more powerful and less controlling than that. And I want that image more powerful and less controlling. Just think into your mind when you think about this blessing. Because the question is, how does God bless? Because what we tend to want is a direct blessing. So the idea is, oh, here at Living Stones the pastor raises his hand and he says the blessing. So I want to get in front of that and I want to get in front of God's face and I'm going to soak this up. And this is going to make all my problems disappear. And if that really happens here, you couldn't find a seat. But it's an just of mood that God blesses. It's both more creative and less direct, less controlling. This God comes in to our lives making the most dramatic claims and then says, and I will make it be in the most indirect and surprising way you could ever imagine. You see, because Israel's story is a moral failure almost from start to finish. See, Israel's story is our story. They act out of fear. They act out of greed. They don't love their neighbors. They behave selfishly. They do what's easy instead of what's right. And the most predictable thing about them is this list. And the most predictable thing about them is this list. And that's how they live. And you might say all those Israelites, but the problem is this is how we live too. And so the question is then, can God bless people like this? And God continues to say, yes. And one of the most dramatic things about the Bible is that Israel is God's chosen people. Why are they? They will wander for 40 years. They will flounder when they finally get into the land. You can read about that in the book of Judges. David and Solomon are kind of the high point, but then it all comes apart. They have civil years until they're swallowed by the empire. And then by the time Jesus comes along, they're occupied by Rome. And you might want to say, well, if this is what being a chosen people looks like, choose somebody else. And then when Jesus comes along, Jesus has power and he's dramatic, but if you look at his life, he gets killed by his own people by age 33. And you might say, if this is what God's anointing looks like, have him anoint somebody else. But we don't appreciate the just form of the blessing of God. This just mood, however, is what we see in Jesus. Jesus is blessed, but he embraces our curse for us. Jesus' strange blessing, he's chosen to die, becomes for Christians our freedom and liberation. Jesus' story is the completion of Israel's story. It is in Jesus' crucifixion that the power of the just of blessing of God is revealed. God will bless, we will fail. God will come around, beneath, through the suffering and the trial and the failure, only to find a way to bless still more. I was talking to the Sunday School class this morning and we were reading Isaiah 61 and talking about these oaks of righteousness, how the Bible has this tradition of those who wait on the Lord will renew their strength like eagles. It's a story of enduring loss, enduring hardship, of receiving blessings, throwing it away, but having God turn to bless again in a surprising way. J.R. Tolkien, as many of you know, is one of my favorite authors. It's really a book he didn't exactly write, the Silmarillion, which is all of the background material that he created before he wrote his masterpiece, which was The Lord of the Rings. He tells it as kind of a tale. Tolkien, being a Roman Catholic and a Christian, tried to communicate this sense of how God takes this world, which is rebellious and simply seems to muck things up again and again, and God will not let it go. What Tolkien does in his work is he has some different characters. He has Eluvatar, which is the God figure. He has the Einar, who are the angels, and he has Melkor, who is like Satan. And here in this creation story, Eluvatar is singing the world into being, and Melkor continues to try to disrupt the song. Then Eluvatar arose, and the Einar, they're like the angels, perceived that he smiled, and he lifted up his left hand, and a new theme began amid the storm, like and yet unlike the former theme, and it gathered power and it had new beauty. But the discord of Melkor rose in uproar and contended with it, and again there was a war of sound more violent than before until all of the Einar were dismayed and sang no longer, and Melkor had mastery. Then again Eluvatar arose, and the Einar perceived that his countenance was stern, and he lifted up his right hand, and behold, a third theme grew amid the confusion, and it was unlike the others, for it seemed at first soft and sweet, and I hear rippling of gentle sounds and delicate melodies, but it could not be quenched, and it took to itself power and profundity, and it seemed at last that there were two musics progressing at one time before the seat of Eluvatar, and they were utterly at variance. The one was deep and wide and beautiful, but slow and blended with an immeasurable sorrow, from which its beauty chiefly came. The other had now achieved a unity of its own, but it was loud and vain and endlessly repeated, and it had little harmony, but rather clamorous unison as of many trumpets' brains. A few... And an essay to drown the other... And the third... ...to behold, that he raised both his hands, and in one chord, deeper than the abyss, higher than the firmament, piercing as light of the eye of Eluvatar, the music ceased. Then Eluvatar said, Mighty are the einer, that he may know, and all the einer, that I am Eluvatar. Some... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... What does our unbelief get us? I began by citing Charles Taylor and noting the difficulties of belief today. Believing in God, his goodness, and his power is not automatic. It is, in fact, difficult for many of us. We may see this as a difficulty, but we also see in this text that trust, which is the practical application of belief, was difficult even for those who saw the mighty acts of God in the plagues, the Red Sea, the water from the rock, the voice of God on Sinai, the glory cloud of God over the Tabernacle. You might say, well, if I had all these things, I'd surely believe. I doubt it. We have an incredible capacity to no longer believe what we believe in the moment. What you do have today, in some ways, the same that Aaron gave Israel, I will, as I do most weeks, speak these words over you. I will place the name of God upon you. I will invite you to believe in this story that begins with God's assertive blessings and culminates in shalom for God's creation. You will rebel. You will fail. You will suffer. But will you believe? Will you believe that like the warring song of Elubitar and Malfour, that no matter how many monotonous, drowning out tunes, Malfour thrones, into the mix, that Elubitar will always be able to work the song for glory and beauty? That is at the heart of belief. Do you believe that the difficulties that have come into your life, whether they be from cancer or from death or from betrayal or from how many different other circumstances, even things that you have brought again and again before the throne of God, and say, Lord, believe me of this. Do you believe that God can take these very things and in your life turn them for glory and blessing? You will have to believe above and beyond what you can see or control. Do you believe that the mission of God for reclaiming of glory cannot be stopped? That is what this blessing is. This blessing is in many ways a statement that you believe, come what may, your God can pull you out. Come what may, come what evil may come, your God can turn it to your good. Come what may, the Lord will one way or another work his plan to glory. That is what this blessing says. It's simple, it's small, but it's the Lord basically saying, I will not give you up. Can you still trust me? Let's pray. Lord, the sounds of this world are monotonous. The sounds of this world are predictable. And in many ways sin itself, Lord, is simple and boring. It never brings anything new to the table. But what you do, Lord, through our lives and even sometimes through our tragedies is bring blessing where we do not expect. Bring hope where we cannot imagine. Bring comfort where we imagine there is only suffering. And show us a path to joy that will eventually overcome. Lord, this is hard for us to believe, especially hard for us to believe when we're suffering. And so we ask, Lord, that you give us your spirit, that we may believe, that we may endure, that we may imagine that even though things seem difficult, that your song will never end. And no matter what discordant parts we may throw into the mix, you will always turn it towards your glory. Lord, if we can believe this, we can rest secure, we can live out of gratitude, we can believe, we can become these oaks of righteousness that Isaiah 61 talks about. Weave that into our stories, Lord, and make us yours. In the name of Jesus, amen. When you stand.