https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Y9tUHnMmt-g

 This Thursday is Thanksgiving and we have a Thanksgiving service at 10 a.m. here at the church. It's a small service and we usually just come and we'll sing some songs of Thanksgiving and we'll spend some time in prayer. Thank you God very much as Pete just sang for all of His goodness to us. So 10 a.m. this Thursday morning here at L.A. Stones. What can we pray for each other this morning? Jackie? Thank you. What's the time on the phone that we are closed at? Four? We could be closed at? Forty seconds? I didn't think either of you were that old. Well, congratulations. I'm just glad we're open. This is one friend at the church. He's looking forward to opening this Thanksgiving service. Unfortunately, I had to go to class. He's been already at the church. So, we're just going to celebrate this Thanksgiving from now on. Yeah. Okay. All right. So, prayers for your sister Richard and your whole family as you greet. Thank you Jackie. Donna? Saturday is 45 years to you guys. Yeah. I didn't think you'd be here either. So, we pray that you'll know what kind of celebration it will be, but we pray that God be with you in that place. Diana? It's funny that two of us have celebrated November anniversary. What's the deal with November anniversary? Who gets married in November? 53. That's right. And Gene? When was your anniversary? The 22nd. The 22nd. And yours was? 55. 55. You guys are my heroes. Not me, though. Let's bow our heads in prayer. Oh, Cory, go ahead. Before I started my John Kaffir, he had a relapse at the murder of a student. He lost his hearing, too. Oh. Okay. His mother is in stable state. And the care home in Tassel was less stable. Okay. Okay. But for John, he lost his hearing. Hopefully, they can figure out what's really going on in his ears. Let's pray. Oh, another one? I continue prayers for the family of my friend Jesse, who committed suicide while he was at school in September, since he was 28,000. Okay. I continue prayers for my friend Jesse's family. Jesse committed suicide in September at school. And so, very, very, very, blessed prayer. Lord, this is the state of life in this world. We have wonderful blessings of anniversaries, faithfulness, 42, 45, 54, 55 years. We have birthdays and new births. We have the regular things of sun and moon and food and harvest. And we have the difficult things of sudden death, of illness, of suicide, of even young men. Lord, the world has been this way a very long time. And the book of James tells us very bluntly, are you in trouble? Pray. And Lord, we know that prayer is sometimes difficult when times are hard, because difficult questions arise. Can we trust you? Can we see you? Can we know you? Where are you in times of suicide? Where are you in times of illness and of death? Where are you when our bodies grow faint and weak? When strong men are disabled, when beautiful women are brought low? And Lord, we are tempted to despair or to make rash statements about you not caring or not being there, and we do rash things against each other. And Lord, it's into this mess that you sent your son to be subject to our pain, to be subject to our illness, and even more shockingly, to become subject to us and our foolishness and our violence who killed him. But Lord, we believe that he rose from the dead, and we believe that sin and death have been conquered, and we believe that the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus addresses all of the things that have been mentioned today and far more. And we believe that your spirit is here to give us comfort, to give us strength, to help us to endure, and to show us that in fact, through the sad story of this world, you are making a new world where death will be no more, where you will wipe away every tear from our eyes. Help us to believe. Help us to encourage one another. Help us to lift up each other, and help us to endure, and not only endure, Lord, but to be more than confers to him that gives us his strength. And although he was beaten and tortured and hung bleeding on the cross, he prayed for the welfare of his executioners. May we see that example. May we have the same spirit that he had, and may we live his life behind him. As we pray in the name of Jesus, Amen. Offering this morning is for the ministry of the Pope Children's Church. Thank you. Does someone have Children's Church? Mrs. Cole has Children's Church, so any children, 3 to 8, and follow her. Any takers? I look like we have a Mason. Would the deacons please come forward? God of our health, he does move his almighty hand, Pleads for the beauty of a starry land, Of shining worlds, His splendor through the skies, Our grateful songs, before thy throne of life. Thy love divine hath led us in the past, In this great land, by thee our law is passed, Be thou our ruler, guardian, guide, and state, Thy word our love, thy will be done. Carol is traveling to Georgia to be with Demi. There's a lot of hope on my day. Being young, disillusioned, and articulate is popular today. These are just the covers of a few of the many books and even more blog posts of young men and women who grew up in the church and are beset with a lot of questions and doubts about it. It's well articulated by Sarah Cunningham in this her first book. Dear readers, I used to believe that the church was the most powerful source of hope on the planet. That is, until I got old enough to notice its defects. Once in adult land, I quickly stumbled upon a list of religious flaws and decided the church that was far from hopeful. Unfortunately, I am not the only one who has lost some admiration for the church along the way. Many of my fellow twenty-somethings ended up less than impressed with the church as well. And sadly, as my peers dropped out of local congregations, they were promptly welcomed into a multi-generational group of ex-church attenders. In fact, if you go on blogs and on the internet, you can find many people talking about their failed expectations, their disappointments, how Christianity and the church has failed. She published her book in 2009, and I noticed that this year in Hermann Hütz, which is a blog of Christianity Today, she had a new article which said, I've grown cynical of cynicism. And she writes in that article this, In my twenties, you could have found me sitting cross-legged in a coffee shop, reading a real made-for-paper book with the dramatic title about economic inequality. Occasionally, I might have looked up at you to make clever, droll remarks about how the institutional church and much of society was missing the mark. Other days, I might have delivered a half philosophical diatribe, half stand-up comedy routine about the weakness of organized religion. And if you happened to jump in by highlighting your own list of social and religious flaws, we could have bantered about back and forth like ESPN commentators until the coffee shop kicked us out at closing. And in fact, I was writing a book called Dear Church, Letters from a Dissolution Generation, and I was pretty much the poster child for cynics for its religious institutions. It's probably no surprise to you that this first book sold better than my second one, even though the later one was warmer, more positive, and better crafted. It's a testament to the preferences of our culture. One's facing. Cynicism is sexy. And I think both sides deserve their day in court. Because in fact, there's a lot to be cynical about. Life is hard. Promises do get broken. We are not only sometimes discouraged about our own expectations, we are discouraged about real and hard and deep things, and don't always know where to take these things. Most of the new defectors are young, educated, and have relative affluence, and have open options and open vistas in life. For the majority of humanity, life is short, hard, and trying. It's something you won't learn a lot of just by watching normal television. Because in our culture, we tend to like to present the façade that if you follow the rules, things will be handy, and you'll get what you want. Ironically, however, it's often those who experience the difficulties of life who come stumbling into the church and seem to have more tolerance for our failures and our vulnerabilities. And even that group often wishes that we get beyond the religious veneer or we write the paper over our pain. We've been working through the book of Genesis, and it's pretty shocking that after God releases the children of Israel from Egypt, the Lord says to Moses, when Pharaoh released the people, God did not lead them by the way to the land of the Philistines, although that was nearby, for God said, lest the people change their minds and return to Egypt when they experience war. In other words, God says, we need to lead them by an easier route than back to the Philistines. But what follows in the story is not easy. In fact, look where he takes them. First he leads them to the Red Sea and puts them between Pharaoh's army and the sea, and they howl, were there no graves for us to be buried in Egypt? And then he delivers them. And then he brings them into the desert of Sur, where the water was bitter and they cry out to him and they curse against Moses. And the Lord says, put this tree in the water and it will become sweet. And then they drink and are satisfied. And then he brings them into Elam, which is a wonderful place with wells and palm trees, and they're happy there. And then he takes them from there and brings them into the desert of Sin, where they are hungry and they again curse God and get angry at Moses, and he causes men to fall and he gives them quail so they have food. At each point, Moses, kind of like the church, bears the brunt of the criticism. And if there's anyone to complain in this drama, Moses had the most justification because he was always the one caught in the middle. The whole community of Israelites traveled on their journey from the desert of Sin according to the Lord's instruction, and they pitched their tents at Rephid. Now there was no water for the people to drink. And again, you must ask, if the Lord is charting their steps, why does he keep bringing them to places where there's no water? People need water. Animals need water. So the people contended with Moses, and that word contended is a very specific word. It basically means that they, in a sense, brought criminal charges against Moses and saying, this is negligence. This is horrible what you've done to us. So they contended with Moses and they said, give us water to drink. Moses said to them, why do you contend with me? Why do you test the Lord? But the people were very thirsty there for water. And they murmured against Moses and they said, why in the world did you bring us up out of Egypt to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst? Then Moses cried out to the Lord, what will I do with these people? A little more and they will stoke me. And I don't think Moses was exaggerating. Thirsty, hungry people do desperate things and they are furious with him. And here is Moses in the middle and we can almost imagine he's thinking, from the day I got into this mess, I used to have a simple job as a shepherd of my uncle sheep out here in the wilderness. And now, look at the problems I have. Cynicism grows when we expect that someone is benefiting from our suffering. And in fact, usual targets are pastors, politicians, corporations and institutions. We love to look at these groups and say, you don't really care about us. You're in it for themselves and too often we're right. Moses gets to blame, but the truth is, God's been calling all the shots. And in fact, at each point he has shown his power. By the Red Sea he showed how he could dominate Pharaoh's army and they were no challenge for him. At the Desert of Shura he showed, he said, I am your healer. And he showed how he brought them healing in the desert. In the desert of Sin he showed that he had the power to provide, to give them food, to give them man, to give them quail, to meet their needs in a place where there is no food. But what do they really ask him? The Lord said to Moses, go over before the people. Take with you some of the elders of Israel and take in your hand your staff with which you struck the Nile and go. I will be standing before you there on the rock in Haram and you will strike the rock and water will come out of it so that the people may drink. And Moses did so in plain view of the elders of Israel. Now reading this you might say, well this is yet another one of these stories out of the desert. But what I want us to do is pause right now because I would assert this is one of in fact the most important passages in the entirety of the Old Testament. Because what we learn about God in these few short verses is nothing short of breathtaking. When the Lord said to Moses, go over before the people and take with you some of the elders, what he is saying is we will have a trial. Now Moses I know you have been playing by mouthpiece. You are our intermediary. I want you to go over and I want you to be on the side of the people. And I want you to lead them. And I want you to take the elders of the tribe. And I want you to have them right around you. And I want you to organize the whole people and we are going to set up a trial scene. And take in your hand the staff with which you struck the Nile and go. Now if you haven't been paying attention throughout this story, this staff has been the focal point of God's power. With this staff it was turned into a serpent in the desert. And it was turned into a serpent in Pharaoh's court. And it swallowed the serpents of the magicians. With this staff he struck the Nile. And in the Egyptian culture that would mean with this staff he smoked the gods of Egypt. He changed the water into blood. With this staff he parted the Red Sea. With this staff he closed it up again and the army of Pharaoh was destroyed. This staff is the power of God. And God says take the staff, go amongst the people, be their leader, organize yourself and have a trial. And then he said, I will be standing before you here on the rock of Horus. Reverse order. Most of you probably don't remember this place. Anyone have a clue where Horus is and what happened there first? Exodus chapter 3. Moses, a simple shepherd in the wilderness keeping his uncle's sheep. And there's a burning bush popping at Horus. What God says to Moses is assemble the people, take up the staff, organize them, get the elders around you and go to the place where all of this began at Horus. Where I first spoke to you, where I first trapped you by my incredible idea of delivering the people. Bring us all there and come to Horus. And something else in this verse which is equally alarming. I will stand before you on the rock. Now if you read the Old Testament, what you hear again and again is this term, stand before. And again and again is you will stand before me and he stood before the Lord or he stood before the king or he stood before the people. To stand before someone in the language of the Old Testament is to make yourself vulnerable to them. To make yourself in judgment to them. It's absolutely the opposite of the contemporary phrase don't judge me. In fact to stand before someone is to be judged by that. And most of the time you find this phrase. It is some servant or some underling standing before someone in power who is about to judge them. And so what God is saying is you all are complaining about me. You all are saying this is criminal negligence what you have brought me through. Organize yourselves, have a trial and I will be in the dock. I will be the defendant. I, you will all stand trial against me. And you will strike the rock and water will come out of it so that the people may drink. What is this verse about? This is God saying take my rod and smite me as you smoke the gods of Eden. In fact the apostle Paul sees this very clearly in the book of 1st Corinthians. For I did not want to be, for I did not want you to be unaware brothers and sisters that our fathers were all under the cloud. That all passed through the sea and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. And all ate the same spiritual food and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they were all drinking from the spiritual rock that followed them. And that rock was Christ. Why would Paul say that? Here God tells Moses they have been judging me. They have seen my power but because of their circumstances they doubt my faithfulness towards them. My commitment to them even at my own expense. They must see who I really am and the degree I am committed to their welfare. Not just their temporary welfare that they are fixated upon but their everlasting welfare. I will show this to them in a physical way they will need to remember. They wish to put me on trial. On trial I will go. They have declared me guilty and the weapon of execution will be my own power. Because no other power can defeat me. You will strike me with my own staff so that the people will hear. We call the name of the place Massa and Meribah because of all the contending of the Israelites. And because of their trusting the Lord saying is the Lord among us or not? That is the question of every cynic. That is the question of every doubt. That is the question of every sufferer. Is the Lord among us or not? Because could the Lord be among us and us still endure these calamities? Is life hard? You think God is making it worse? Is cynicism making you feel better or superior? Do you wonder if God is committed or God is just using us? One of the alarming things about the story of the Exodus is that at any moment the Israelites could have said enough! And hudged back across the desert to drink from the Nile and had all the water they wanted once more. And probably after a beating the Egyptians would have loved to have made them slaves again. Why didn't they? Despite all their complaining about we had plenty to eat in Egypt they knew. And in many ways we were just stuck. And I would suggest that probably many of you in your lives are stuck in similar ways. There is no going back. There is no going forward. There you are in the middle and you don't know what to do. And you cry out to God and you say is the Lord with me or not? And in this moment God says strike me. When I was in seminary I read probably one of the most amazing books I've ever read. It's by a Japanese author, Endo, who wrote the story of the 17th century attempt to Christianize Japan. And for a while the Jesuit priests were making some inroads into the country and there were a number of converts. And the rulers of Japan at that point decided they wanted to crack down on this alien influence and they were very shrewd about it. And so what they would do was they would round up the Japanese converts and they would take the priests and they would say to the priests, now you need to recount. And the way of recounting was to take their foot and to trample upon an image of Jesus. And they'd say to the priests, you need to recount. And you need to recount in front of the people. And if you don't recount in front of the people we are going to kill them all in front of you. And so what would the priests do? And so many of them recounted. And the story that Endo writes is the story of a priest who came late and is in exactly this situation. And there he is on trial. And the villagers that he has evangelized and worked with are about to be executed if he doesn't step on the pumi. The climax of the novel, Christ breaks his silence and invites the priest to trample upon him. Yet the face was different from that on which the priest had gazed so often in Portugal, in Rome, in Goa, and in Macau. It was not Christ whose face was filled with majesty and glory. Neither was it a face made beautiful by endurance to pain. Nor was it a face with strength of a will that had repelled temptation. The face of the man who lay at his feet in the pumi was sunken and utterly exhausted. The sorrow in it had gazed upon him, Rodriguez, as the eyes spoke appealingly, trample, trample. It is to be trampled on by you that I am here. God says to Moses, take my staff and strike me, and water will flow from the rock, and you all will be saved at my expense. Know my love. Only in Christianity does God not exclude himself from our suffering. Other religions find this ridiculous and offensive. What kind of God would suffer? We blame God for making us suffer. Only in Christianity does our God voluntarily enable us to strike him with his own power. Only in Christianity does God take the penalty for our wrongdoing. Only in Christianity does our God so openly practice our well-being at his hateful expense. Only in Christianity are the guilty both justified and freely redeemed. This offends us. Our God was struck for our wrongdoing. Do you seek his love? Do you find his sacrifice both horrible and beautiful at the same time? He invites you to do the same for the guilty around you, for your enemies, for the people who have wronged you. The most disturbing thing that the Romans found in these new Christians was the fact that while they were executing them for sport, while they were executing them for sport, burning them as forges, feeding them to lions, watching them flee at Colosseum, the Christians didn't plead for their lives and they didn't curse the Romans. They weren't happy about being fed to lions, but they also weren't responding. This deeply troubled the Romans, and they knew that something was different. Do you want to be like this? Because this is how our God is. And if you are in good times, the book of James says rejoice. And if you are suffering, the book of James says pray. You see, Christ came not to take away our suffering, but to make our suffering like his, so that we could be like him. That's the thing. Lord, if I had the staff of Moses, I would try to use it to eliminate the suffering in these people that I love, to heal the sick and raise the dead, to set the captives free. And in fact, your rod is used for those things. But Lord, there is often a time and a space when you call us to a desert where there is no water, when you bring us to a place where we know life can't be lived, and when we raise our voice to you and clamor against you, you say travel, strike, go ahead. Help us to know, Lord, that you are powerful. But more than that, help us to see how committed you are to our well-being and to our future. With this we ask in the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand? Would you stand?