https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=G4wMyH1FoiM

 Roman Hupp, I probably didn't appreciate, as few of us did, what it meant that Linus addressed Charlie Brown's questions about the meaning of Christmas. Charlie Brown, of course, in the story is confused by the commercialism and all of the hullabaloo that's going on, and he wants to know the meaning of Christmas. As you know, Linus then stops in the middle and upon the stage essentially recites the first part of the second chapter of Luke. What is the meaning of Christmas? It's the Lukean Christmas story with Jesus born in the stable and the shepherds and the angels and the whole thing. It's interesting. Oh, Jesus, bless me, Chris. It's interesting if you consider the kinds of cartoons we watch today and the kinds of messages that we have about Christmas from those cartoons. You have the citizens above with Bart and the manger and the family playing with hearts. You have South Park Christmas. I don't know a lot about South Park, a few of you do. And it's interesting, all the different elements that come into cartoons, which in South Park, it seems to me, are pretty insightful cultural narratives. And the little A.L. Satan that you see there is probably a shout out to the fact that if you put up a manger scene in a public place, all of the other public declarations also need their space and will take you to court to ensure that they have their space. George Marsden was a professor of mine at Calvin College and was probably the most preeminent scholar, American scholar on fundamentalism and modern Christian history in America. And he just recently published a new book, The Twilight of the American Enlightenment, the 1950s and the Crisis of Liberal Belief. He talks about the fact that really the calendar doesn't really present the epochs, that the 50s really go from 1945 to 1965, from between World War II and the Vietnam War, and the 60s really go from 1965 to 1975, which is essentially the Vietnam War. And then 1975 starts to bleed into the 80s and so forth. He notes that when Charlie Brown Christmas came on TV, the essential religious pluralism of America was Protestant Catholic Jew. And so that when Linus stood on stage and announced the Christmas story, the church and most Americans at that time would say, yes, that is the Christmas story. Mayline and fundamentalists differed on whether how historical they thought the Bible might be, but they both agreed that the fundamental values could be held by all. Marsden goes on to talk about the anxiety of the 50s, of the modern man, of existentialism and what those things produced. Essentially, as Marsden takes a look at the history of the church from the 50s to the 80s, he says what neither side of the church fully appreciated was the change that religious pluralism would bring to the country. By the 1980s and the rise of the religious right, the 1980s, even those of the religious right basically reaffirmed some of the stuff that was more broadly held in the 50s. But people weren't quite ready for the identity revolutions that today would give birth to the culture wars. And so what Marsden basically says is that this challenge of religious pluralism, this question of who gets to say what is good and what is right dominates, yes, technology, dominates our conversations. So now when we ask about Christmas, we have Jesus and Santa and Frosty and the atheists with their billboards and all of the other voices saying what is the meaning of Christmas and does it really matter? And what has essentially happened for us is that we like to say religious pluralism means each of us goes up to a spiritual smorgasbord and we pick the elements we like and we all have an implicit agreement to look down the way and not say anything negative about the Brussels sprouts that you chose or not to say anything negative about the roast meat that I chose. And if we simply agree to not criticize each other, then maybe that will bring peace on Earth. The difficulty, however, is that there are competing claims about what is good. And simply being spiritual often means something like I'll be nice to you if you be nice to me. But that doesn't fundamentally answer all of these competing religious claims. What does it mean to be holy? What does it mean to be good? What choices are good and what choices aren't good? If everyone simply does what is right in their own eyes, will that in fact just lead to what we find in the book of Judges? Being generic doesn't work if you can't agree on what is good. And we imagine, however, that this situation is new to us, but it really isn't because religious pluralism has been in the world almost right from the start. And in fact, if you want to see conflicts in religious pluralism, read the New Testament. After the very famous birth narrative, Luke continues, When the time came for purification rights required by the law of Moses, Joseph and Mary took him to Jerusalem, presenting to the Lord. As it is written in the law of the Lord, every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the Lord, and to offer a sacrifice that keeps it with what is said in the law of the Lord, a pair of doves or two young pigeons. Now again, you might just be reading along and say, oh, this is just a story, and it says that Joseph and Mary were observant Jews, and they were. But don't forget that Luke, who writes the Gospel of Luke, is also Luke who writes the book of Acts. And so when Luke is writing this story, he is seeing Jesus coming to the temple through what will come in the book of Acts. And that fundamentally changes how we view this. What this says is that Mary and Joseph very much were observant Jews, and for being the people of God, they did specific things, and they made specific choices. And in fact, in Jerusalem, it was not necessarily assured that everyone would bring their son to the temple, or that everyone would in fact offer the specific sacrifice. But here we see Mary and Joseph careful to observe the law. Now there was a man in Jerusalem named Simeon who was righteous and devout. He was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him. It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not die before he had seen the Lord's Messiah. Moved by the Spirit, he went into the temple courts. When the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him what the custom of the law required, Simeon took him in his arms and praised God, saying, Sovereign Lord, as you have promised, you may now dismiss your servant in peace. For my eyes have seen your salvation, which you have prepared in the sight of all nations, alike for the revelation to the Gentiles and the glory of your people Israel. The child's father and mother marveled at what was said about him. Then Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, his mother, This child is destined to cause the falling and the rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against, so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed, and a sword will pierce your sword too. There was also a prophet Anna, the daughter of Menil, of the tribe of Asher. She was very old. She had lived with her husband seven years after her marriage. And then as a widow until she was 84, she never left the temple but worshiped night and day, fasting and praying. Coming to them at that very moment, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem. Not only are Joseph and Mary observant Jews, but they find in the temple these two strange figures. Simeon, who was likely old at that point, because the Lord had said, You will see the Messiah. And so he sees Mary and Joseph and the baby, and the Holy Spirit says, There he is. And so he goes and he blesses them and says, This is the child we've been waiting for as Jews. He will be a life to the Gentile, but that's not a very un-Jewish thing to say at all. He will be the consolation of Israel. Now when he says that, the consolation of Israel, he means something very specific, because Israel has been under the Roman thumb. And one of the chief problems that Israel has had has been the contamination of their culture by Greek and Roman culture. And the Jews know this, and so they bristle when they see Roman troops walk through their streets. And they find it horrible that they have to somehow bow down to these Romans. And so when Simeon sees this baby, he imagines, This is our Savior. He will come to free us. And Anna too is from the tribe of Asher. Asher was one of the tribes way up in the north of Israel. And Asher was one of the tribes that assimilated fairly early and was taken quickly by the Assyrians. And so her tribal designation is noted, and she says, This young man will be the redemption of Jerusalem. And so here we have Joseph, Mary, Simeon, and Anna, all with very specific ideas about what God will do for them. And they're looking at this baby. What can you notice when you look at a baby? What do you know of that infant's future? I would imagine that Joseph and Mary and Anna and Simeon all had pretty specific, clear ideas about the path that Jesus would take and what he would do. And everything to do with all of the stories that they were told. These were not pluralists. These were particularists. They see in him the culmination of the stories as they understand it. They see Jesus in terms of the particularist story of Israel. They're hoping Jesus will finally free Israel and Israel will have Rome under her boots. But babies grow up. And Jesus will confuse and confound Mary. In fact, there's a story in Mark where Mary and her other children come looking for Jesus because they want to take him home. Because they're not sure about this mental health. When they listen to him talk, they think he's nuts. And John the Baptist, who baptized Jesus, the one who said, Behold the Lamb of God, is watching Jesus and begins to think, this isn't right. I thought he was going to bring fire and judgment upon the people. And he isn't. In fact, the Pharisees, the observance who eventually would be behind crucifying Jesus, were quite sure that this man was not the fulfillment of God, of what God would have for them. He confused, in fact, even his hand-picked disciples so much that one of them would betray him. He angered others to the point of plotting and eventually accomplishing this execution. Now here's the thing. Jesus, in that case, was neither the kind of particularism that I would imagine Mary, Joseph, Sinian, and Anna would want. Neither is he the kind of Salazar spirituality where he'd sit there in Jerusalem and say, Ah, yeah, Rome. They have their perspective. Jews, they have their perspective. Can't we all just get along? He's neither of those things. What we see is that Luke, the Gospel, starts with a very Jewish story and has very clear ideas about the consolation of Israel and the redemption of Jerusalem. But by Acts 1, Jesus' disciples, after the crucifixion, after the resurrection, will grab Jesus and say, Now will you restore the kingdom to Israel? Now will you act like the kind of son of David we were hoping you would be? Now will you finally get to work with the kind of work we've always expected you to do? But by the end of the Book of Acts, communities of enormous pluralism, of enormous diversity, of slave and free, male and female, Greeks and Jews. In fact, when the church goes to Antioch, a city that was segregated by laws simply because the Romans knew people of different ethnicities don't get along, the church that develops in Rome, which has people from lots of different ethnicities, the people in Antioch don't know what to call them. They're used to saying they're Jews, they're Greeks, they're Romans, but these people in the church, there's Jews, Greeks and Romans in there, so what do we call them? Well, I guess we'll call them Christians, because we don't have another name. Jesus did things, and then as apostles go and do things, that many Jews begin to say, This can't be right. What about circumcision? What about keeping the dietary laws? But here is the challenge. There are no generic people. Each of you comes to Jesus with a story. Each of you comes to Jesus with a bloodline. Each of you comes to Jesus with ideas, and from one specific place and time. None of you had generic parents. All of you had parents with ideas and beliefs and values that they put into you, that were grown into you, that you either embraced or pushed against. None of us is generic. You see, the thing is, as people, we imagine stories and we actually create them. I mean, Carol, you asked for prayers for your grandson. He's trying to figure out what story is he a part of, and how can he become a storyteller too? That's what all of us have to learn to do. People are story creators, and they impact our stories in happy and sad ways. I've said this many times. Most of the time, when someone comes to me with a problem, it's usually a relational problem. What's at the heart of every relational problem? You're standing across a relationship from another person. And that person has ideas, that person has values, that person does things that you don't like, or maybe you're doing things that they don't like, and neither of you controls the other. So there you have it. People begin by coming to me and say, oh, Pastor, I'm so lonely. I just want someone to share my life with. And they're happy they find someone. Years later, they come to me and they say, Pastor, he doesn't do what I want him to do. She doesn't do what I want him to do. This is us. This is what we are. We're persons. We make stories. We make choices. We have wills. Now, Simeon and Anna, they commit to Jesus, which is an amazing thing, because when they look at that baby, how do they know what that baby will do? And both of them give prophecies, and their prophecies are true. Jesus will rise up, and Jesus will cause conflict, and Jesus will bring misery to Mary's heart. How could a mother not be stricken by seeing what her son would go through? It could very well be that at some point Mary wished Jesus had stayed at Carpenter and never got into this ministry stuff, because maybe if he had stayed at Carpenter, he could have lived a quiet life, and none of this ugly stuff would happen. But Simeon and Anna commit to Jesus, and it means laying down a part of their demand. It means being open to what the consolation of Israel would mean, and what it would mean for Jesus to be a light to the Gentiles. It doesn't mean that Jesus being a light to the Gentiles is a vague thing. It's a specific thing. But Simeon and Anna and Mary and Joseph and all of us have to come to terms with what that specific thing is. Jesus will do things that they probably would not have understood. But then they have the question, will I follow him still? In the context of religious diversity and religious pluralism, again we imagine ourselves as religious consumers at a spiritual salad bar. And we say, I want to find the God of religion that meets my tastes. I want to find the God that says the things that I like, that doesn't say the things I don't want to hear, the God that has a picture of the world I want, and will push away the world I don't want. I think in ancient, watching us standing at the religious salad bar would make a pretty specific observation. And the observation would be, you want a God that reflects you. And if your God simply reflects you, then who really is your God again? Because that's just it. Someone comes to me and says, Pastor, my spouse does all the things I don't want them to do. And annoys me in all these different ways. What do you want? I want them to do what I want them to do and reflect me in all the ways I want them to be reflected. Oh, in other words, you don't really want to be married to a person. You just want more of you. So what does that say about me? Simeon and Anna, in all their particularism, had something, however, that was important. Because they look at this baby and they say, this baby may not grow up to be exactly what I want him to be or what I choose him to be, but I will follow him still. What is that? That's a commitment. It's a promise. It's a choice to be a person. Jesus comes. He's resurrected, ascended, and in fact, reigning. Christian theology says, when Christian theology, we read the Apostles Creed this morning, when Christian theology talks about he crucified, died and was buried, raised from the dead, ascended into heaven, what we're saying is that Jesus was resurrected, ascended into heaven. When Christian theology talks about he crucified, died and was buried, raised from the dead, ascended into heaven, what we're saying is that Jesus rules the world. So what we say in our Christmas carols, isn't it? He rules the world with truth and grace and makes the nations prove. Do we stop and think about what we're saying? What we're saying is that Jesus is right now on the throne of heaven, governing the earth and the cosmos. What does that mean? So on one hand, we look at Linus and we can say, yes, Linus, this is the meaning of Christmas. But when we look at the other cartoons, we'll have to say, Jesus is reigning still, even in the midst of a world which is not yet together about his reign. And that world has things to say and we must somehow figure out how to engage this world and how to hear Linus and understand what the other voices are saying too. See, here's the thing. To have faith in a child, in a sense, means to have faith like a child. If you look at one of those little children out there and you think about how they trust their parents, do they sit down and say, well, usually when they're teenagers they get these ideas. Well, I wish my dad was more like this and I wish my mom was more like that. And it will usually come in the form of somebody else's mom or dad that let one of their friends do this or that. But the faith of a child looks at their parent and does what? Reaches up their arms and says, you never gave me a resume. The resume I received was the love that you've given me. You never told me about all of the choices I have with respect to parents. We always like to think of people in generic terms, but the truth is all of your children are specific. They have specific DNA. And the good parent-child relationship is one where the child trusts the parent, where the child finally says, there are a lot of options here in this salad bar, but me standing before it is just basically me looking at it myself. When I encounter a real parent and begin to trust, I begin to say, I'm with you even when I'm scared. I'm with you especially when I'm scared. You see the difference between all of our expectations of God and the true God is that the true God is a person. And the true God acts and the true God decides. Most of you who are at a point in your life, and there are a lot of people in this room that are in their 60s, 70s, and 80s, and again I ask this often, if you think about yourself in the 20s and thought, this is how my life should go, is that how your life went? Almost all of you will say no. You might even look back on your life and say, I'm not happy with a lot of the ways my life went. And I can appreciate that. What following a person and having a Lord does is finally saying, I relinquish my choices. I still have plenty of choices I need to make, but you Lord govern my future. How do I feel about that? That's a reflection about how do I feel about you? Do I trust you? Do I love you? I've got fears, I've got doubts, but do I believe you will finally do what is right and do what is good even if it's something I cannot see? Christmas time for us, we always grab the presents, and parents who want the presents usually have a pretty good idea what's in the boxes, and sometimes the kid reaches out to one and will say, open this one first. And the trusting child of the good parent doesn't say, no, I want this one. What has the trusting child learned? The child's welfare and happiness should listen to the parent. This is why we have a person. This is why when we say Jesus is Lord, we say, I'm not just following my expectations. This is why Anna and Simeon and Mary and Joseph in the temple while looking at this little baby who at that moment is completely dependent upon them can say, I believe this is what this child will give me. But I commit to this child because of who he is. My short answer to people, what does it mean to be a Christian? Do you trust Jesus more than you trust yourself? That's what it means to stand at that salad bar. Do you trust Jesus more than you trust yourself? Let's pray. Lord Simeon and Anna spoke of the redemption of Jerusalem and the consolation of Israel. They had absolutely no idea what Jesus would do. And when nearly all of Jesus' friends and allies in Jerusalem saw him crucified, they all figured the game was lost. And no one was there at the tomb, even as he had told them he would rise in three days. This Lord shows the limits of our ability to believe you. Lord, it's nowhere near as important how hard, how firmly we can grasp you as important that it is that you grasp us firmly. Help us Lord to believe. Help us Lord to trust. Help us Lord to believe what we sing, that he rules the world with truth and grace and makes the nations prove. Help us Lord to understand these words and live them out in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand? Would you stand? Jesus Christ was born for this. He has all that heaven's door prepared for us forevermore. Christ was born for this. Christ was born for this. The Christian soul rejoices with our consolation. Now you need not fear the great Jesus Christ was born to save. All to one and all to all who came this everlasting hope. Christ was born to save. Christ was born to save. The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you. The Lord turn his face towards you and give you his peace. Amen. Lord, in your servant's soul, in peace your work is now fulfilled. These eyes have seen salvation's dawn in this land so far fortho. This is the Savior of the world. The Ten house promised light. God's glory dwells in our midst and joy of Israel.