https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ks26wPx5-sM

 But clearly over the last couple of months, longer than that obviously, the news from Ferguson, Missouri has highlighted the tensions and the conflict in our land over race. For now, Wes made this comment. To engage in a serious discussion of race in America, we must not begin with the problems of black people, but with the flaws of American society, flaws rooted in historic inequalities and long-standing cultural stereotypes. I hear the language of, we need to have a conversation, we need to have a discussion, and I find that language insufficient. I don't think we can stop being racist by telling people, don't be racist. During our study of the Book of Leviticus, I worked a lot with Jonathan Haig's psychology of morality and used the image of the elephant and the rider. You can tell the rider, don't be racist, but racism is a thing that is so deeply entrenched in each of us, so deeply entrenched in the elephant that just the rider learning that racism is a bad thing and promising that to be racist won't really address the behavior of the elephant. Right now there's a lot of focus and a lot of study on the relationship between racism and fear. When Darren Wilson pulled the trigger, the grand jury had to come to the determination if Darren Wilson was afraid. The question of course we ask is, were his fears legitimate? Now I work with people all the time, people who have fears. You know what? We have fears whether or not they are legitimate. Fearing is something we experience. And so when fear, if we're going to talk about racism and we're going to talk about Darren Wilson's action in killing Michael, we have to look at the question of fear and trust. Now, from the time we were very small, from the time we were very small my cooker didn't work. From the time we were very small, each of us began to develop biases. Some of you maybe grew up to love dogs because you had a nice dog that you lived with. Some of you maybe grew up to be afraid of people with beards because you had a bad experience of someone with a beard. Each of us, even before we are born, begins to print on our parents because already in the womb we hear the voices of our mother and our father and already from that time that unborn child begins to be soothed by the voice. And as we see with small children not too long after, a strange voice may cause them to fear. So already from a very young age we begin to trust in some and move away and be afraid of another. We form these biases at such a deep, unconscious level, deep into the elephant that in fact if you go on the internet and do these little click studies of just by looking at faces you'll find that racism is deeply impacting all of us. And the messages that we receive and take them in very consciously and the ways that we have formed deeply impact all of us. And so telling someone don't be racist might be like telling someone, well you should stop smoking or you need to trust me or you need to not be afraid. Now I realize that very often the angels would come down and say be not afraid, but the person was still on the floor quivering in fear. Fear has everything to do with trust. Here's the problem with imagining that conversation or discussion will eliminate racism. As rioters decide it's bad to be racist so I'll stand against racism, they start to form herds around this value. Since the rioter has decided that racism is bad, it immediately starts telling a story that tries to show that the elephant they ride and the herd they belong to aren't racist, or at least not as racist as the next elephant or especially that other herd of elephants over there. Herds that can be identified by ideology, political party, or even ironically race. In other words we instinctively group up out of what? Fear. And we find people we trust and side with them and then there are people over there we don't trust and so we oppose them. And so this automatically starts changing the landscape. And then we start identifying people by political party, by skin color, by religious situation and we start grouping up against them which in fact causes what? More fear. So the conversation or discussion devolves into self-justifying posturing upon their own elephants and within their own herds. Grouping and herding against other groups of elephants, groups that have been mentally formed, subjecting them to stereotyping, labeling, and actually promoting remedies such as shunning, silencing, instructing, informing, enlightening, or marginalizing, expelling, and even killing. In other words, trying to have a conversation about racism can ironically create more racism or just claim new groupisms that reinforce the group dynamics that cause the harm the conversation seeks to undo. Usually what happens if you say, you're a racist, how does the other person respond? Oh, I never knew, I'm sorry. Or, you know how it goes. You see, the Bible gives us a picture of humanity. And one of the deep things that we don't like to fess up to is that in many ways, it's our own self-interest that causes us to hurt others. This book I've been reading for a while, Debt, the last 5,000 years, I didn't put it in the sermon, but there's a great quote facing the fact that in fact over the course of human history, slavery had been eliminated numerous times, not just in the modern era. And that again and again, slavery keeps getting brought back. Why? Because it serves our interest to use others. And whether it takes the form of race-based slavery or death-based slavery or war-based slavery, the natural inclination of our hearts is to progress ourselves by using another. And deeply beneath that is basically our fear of self-preservation. Why did Darren Wilson fire that gun after he got out of the police car? Because the other guy might have had a gun. In other words, it's, I can't take a chance on my own well-being. I'll shoot first and worry later. You see, if you can't trust God with your life, you will subjugate your neighbor. The story of Adam and Eve in the garden, what is the notion, the tiny idea that the serpent plants in the minds of the man and the woman? God is holding out on you, unique to take matters into your own hand for your own self-interest. What is the main agenda that God tries to move with Abraham? The Lord says to Abraham, I'm going to give you a son. And what's Abraham's first move? How can I get a son myself because I don't trust that the Lord will do it. The Lord saves Jacob from his brother Esau. What's Jacob's...and the Lord comes to Jacob at Bethel and says, I will bless you. I will save you and I will bring you back. And Jacob said, if you bring me back, I'll give you 10%. He told you he was giving it to you, but you didn't trust. You see, if I can turn it into a deal, I can control it. We've been going through the story of Israel. The Lord rescues Israel from Egypt. And at first they see a little inkling of it and say, no, leave us alone, don't rescue us. And he rescues us. Oh, we're happy you rescued him. Another day later, a little bit of drought, a little bit of hunger, they say, you brought us out here to die. We can't trust. And so when we can't trust, fear grips. We use each other. To save us from the sin between us, like racism, he must save us from the sin within us, which is all about trust. And you see, this isn't just about basic survival. Some of you might have seen Maslow's Triangle, which basically says we have all these levels within us. And just notice, when there's a heart attack or when there's a medical crisis, what do we do? Call the doctor. Do you worry about not going into work? Do you worry how you will look? You go into the hospital, they take all your clothes off, you run around, you have this little robot, all that decency goes out the window because it's my life. Okay, that's the first level. A level above that, now it's about, well, my life tomorrow. It's about my security. You go a level above that. It's about my family. You go a level above that. It's about how I feel about myself. And you go to a level above that. It's my whole worldview. And in fact, all of my fears and insecurities get preyed on all these levels. So that when someone attacks, even an idea that I cherish and think is important, well, what are the two topics we're not supposed to discuss in polite company? Religion and politics. It's the top triangle. Because if you say anything about my God or my group, I'll attack you. Isn't that the nature? We complain about the gridlock in Washington. Isn't that the nature of the gridlock? I can't say anything good about the other side because I might be perceived as weak. And so our wars continue. Israel, when we meet her in the book of Isaiah, has some trust issues, and I understand that. Because the Lord had said, I am going to bring upon you the punishments I promised way back in the book of Deuteronomy. In that day, the Lord will whistle for flies from the Nile Delta in Egypt and for bees from the land of Assyria. They will come and settle on the steeper beams and the crevices in the rocks, on the thorn bushes and all the water holes. In that day, the Lord will use a razor higher from beyond the Euphrates River, the king of Assyria, to shave your head and your private parts and cut off your beard also. And so we have questions about God. On one hand, if God does this to our enemies, we say, woohoo! God's on our side! But when God comes against us, where do we go and what do we do? This was written in the New York Times by an African American police officer who partly went into the work of police work because he saw how unjust African Americans were treated by the police. So he decided he would become a police officer. Hours after coming out of the police academy, I was told something as a new rookie officer. You'd rather be tried by twelve jurors than carried by six paulbearers. In my impressionable first days, I saw officers lead the precinct every day touching the lockers of their paulbearer brothers. They started their shift on the defense, thinking about protecting themselves as opposed to the communities they serve. Regardless of the complexion of those communities. One of my white fellow officers once told me that if we saw a white individual with a gun, he took extra care for himself and the individual. When he saw a black individual with a gun, he took care only for himself. What's at the heart of this? It's fear. It's self-preservation. And it's protecting your group. And if you imagine we can just talk each other out of this, we're being naive. At the bottom, we say, what choice do we have? We have to group up and protect our group. In Isaiah, God comes to Israel and says this. Comfort, comfort my people, says your God. Speak tenderly to Jerusalem and proclaim to her that her hard service has been completed, that her sin has been paid for, and that she has received from the Lord's hand double for all our sins. When God comes back to Israel, he doesn't say, let's have a conversation. He says, what my people need are comfort. They need to know I can be trusted. They need to know that she has served her time, she has paid for her sentence, and she now needs to be laid to rest. As I listen to the conversation going back and forth, part of me hears it with a degree of cynicism, because I think it's easy to blame the other side when you're sitting in a nice, comfortable room and your needs are met. But I know people well enough that when we get scared, what do we do? We take, we hurt, we take our advantage, and we justify ourselves. And so the Lord says, before we do anything else, I'm going to bring you comfort. If they're going to start to trust me, they're going to need to begin in a place where they can hear me. And when we're afraid, we cannot hear. So trust is the focus. Then he moves on. A voice of one calling in the wilderness, prepare the way for the Lord. Make straight in the desert a highway for our guide. Every valley shall be raised up, every mountain and hill made low. The rough ground shall become level, the rugged places a plain, and the glory of the Lord will be revealed. And all people will see it together, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken. These are the words that John the Baptist picks up that we saw last week. And the image here is that this guy is so powerful, this God, this author of heaven and earth. He is going to make a highway, and instead of land movers taking years to try and carve down mountains, when he speaks, the mountains flee. When he declares, the earth obeys. He can still a storm. He can say to a mountain, be moved and it will be moved. This is the God that comes and brings you comfort. This is his power. There is no other power that can be compared to this. A voice says, cry out. And I said, what shall I cry? All people are like grass, and their faithfulness is like the flowers of the field. The grass withers and the flowers fall, because the breath of the Lord blows on them. Surely the people are grass. The grass withers and the flowers fall, but the word of God endures forever. The message here is, let's have a conversation. You and I can agree, we'll be nice, we'll be civil, but you just wait until there is something up for grabs, or until one of us is scared, or until something happens. What do we do? Our work is no good. On one hand, I'll say, I'm against racism. And deep in my heart, if someone comes to me, I immediately size them up and judge them. By the color of their skin, by the car they are driving, by whatever cost benefit I can imagine, would be to my advantage. We see this all the time. Someone drags themselves into church after spending the night under one of our eves, and we think, well, you know, keep the offering over here. How much food are they going to eat? Are they going to leave a mess in the bathroom? And we're not down to ask these questions, because this is human life. This is what happens. Someone comes in in a nice car, or maybe someone from the Sacramento Kings decides coming to our church. What are we going to do? We're going to be all a flutter. We have, oh, so-and-so is coming to our church. Maybe they'll tithe. Maybe we'll get to refresh the building. Maybe, maybe, maybe. We're sizing these people up according to what? According to whether they'll give us what we want or whether they'll cost us. It's no different from racism. It's classism. It's another form of groupism, and this is what we're like. And Isaiah says, go ahead, have the conversations you want. When people get scared, they'll do what? Before 9-11, everyone's, oh, you know, peace and love. We're going to be patient. We're not a bad empire. The towers come down, and what do we want to do? We're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age. This is human nature. This is how we are. You who bring good news to Zion. Go up on a high mountain. You who bring good news to Jerusalem. Lift up your voice with a shout. Lift it up. Do not be afraid. Say to the towns of Judah, here is your God. See the sovereign Lord comes with power. He rules with a mighty arm. His reward with his wisdom and his recompense accompanies him. This is Advent. This is God coming to rescue, to save, to bring justice, to lift up the court and take down the abuser. This is Advent. And then he says something really shocking. Because in the ancient world, they imagined the king coming with power and with might who could make the mountains flee with his sword ready to defeat the flow. He tends his flock like a shepherd. He gathers lambs in his arms and carries them close to his heart. He gently leads those that have young. So this coming one, this person who's going to come on one hand, he's full of power. On the other hand, he stops, sees a lamb, and picks up a lamb and holds it in his arms. This is the might and strength of the best kind of father and the tenderness and nourish and the tenderness and nurture of the best kind of mother all in one. Isn't this the God we want to pray to? Isn't this the God who can move mountains and the God who cares for our needs and the needs of even the smallest? No one, this is no God the ancient Near East could ever imagine. Now people look at this and say, well, that's just talk. And the irony of course is folks who have been saying, we need a conversation, we need a conversation, you'll read this and say, that's just talk. What is a conversation? It's talk. We don't need just talk, you're right. We need action, we need someone, we need something, we need nothing less than adverts. Advert is the word becoming flesh. Jesus comes with great power to still the storm, to multiply the loaves, to turn the water into wine, to heal the sick, the crippled, and to raise the dead. He comes with power. And that was what John the Baptist was looking for. Yeah, Jesus, give me some more of that. Because if you can stop a storm, you can start a storm. Which is easier, to take life or to give it back? So Jesus comes and he's filled with power. But what's surprising then is he's also the gentle shepherd. He comes in tender love. When he sees the woman who's about to be stoned as an adulteress, what does he do? He cares for her. When he sees the woman who has come into the Pharisees' party and they're casting judgment on her and Jesus together, he stops and defends the woman. And when he sees the groupism of the religious in his land against the wobbly, he stops and protects the weak. He is in fact this Savior who can move mountains and scoops up lambs in his arms. He's both sides. Now, again, to save us from the sin between us, he has to save us from the sin within us. Because I can't really be trusted with you until I can be trusted because of him. You know, it's ironic because, you know, Greg's not here this morning, but often he'll stand in back and a visitor will come to church and someone will come through the door and they'll look at him and they'll think, is he safe? And I'd say, no, he's not safe. We'll keep our eye out and I think you'll be fine, but he's not safe. But here's the irony. They look at me and because I'm not schizophrenic and I'm a pastor and I'm wearing nice clothes and I can talk to them, well, you must be safe. And the truth is I can be far more dangerous than Greg ever could because I can get below the radar and I'm in control of myself. He's got to save us. He can't save us from the sins between us until he saves us from the sin within us. To begin with trusting Jesus, it begins with trusting Jesus more than we trust ourselves. And that is so hard. So often people wonder, what's the definition of a Christian? Well, this is my definition. Do you trust Jesus more than you trust yourself? Because when it comes right down to it, well, look at the story of Jacob. Jacob's running from Esau and he's like, oh, Esau's going to get me. And so then God wrestles with him and what's the one thing that God takes away from Jacob? He touches his hip and he's laying. Now, Jacob, you can't run from Esau like you did before. You're stuck. Are you going to trust me when there's no other help that you can bring to yourself? And it's at that moment that we meet Jesus and we say, Lord, whatever happens to me, I'll trust you. How would Darren Wilson's life be different today if at that moment when he saw Michael coming to him if in that moment he decided, I am not going to shoot, but I am going to wait. And if I take a bullet, I take a bullet, but I will wait. Now, any cop will tell you that's foolishness. But wouldn't Jesus have taken the bullet? It's this kind of trust that he invites us into. Trusting in ourselves results in what we see all the time. You see, and here's the thing, resurrection changes the equation. When Jesus talks about what he's leading us into, he puts it in the most basic terms. The one who tries to save their life will lose it. What does Darren Wilson's life look like from now on? Well, he gave up his job. Anywhere he goes, everybody's going to know who he is. And some in his group will call him a hero and others will call him a villain. But Jesus says, Jesus puts it in the most stark contrast possible. If you try to save your life, you will lose it. But if you lose your life for my sake, I will give it to you. And you will say, well, what does that mean, Jesus? Well, look at his story. When he's in the garden, you read one of the Gospels and Jesus addresses the crowd of the mob who are going to arrest him. They fall back. Couldn't Jesus have killed them? Couldn't Jesus have paralyzed them? Couldn't Jesus have, in fact, his disciple pulls a sword, cuts the ear off the servant of the high priest. And what does Jesus do? He puts it back and he says, if anybody's blood is going to be shed, it's going to be mine. And then he goes on the cross and they mock him and say, he saved others. He couldn't save himself. But of course, they didn't say he was saving others by not saving himself. And I know these are in the most dramatic terms, but they take place every day. When a mother gets up in the middle of the night to nurse her baby, what is she doing? She's practicing that baby's well-being at the mother's expense. When a parent bankrupts themselves for the welfare of their child, what are they doing? They're sacrificing themselves for their loved one. And Jesus comes and says, this needs to be your life. And all of us who have parents who sacrifice for us can testify. It's that kind of sacrifice that brings life. And every parent that looks at a child and says, you're on your own, works the opposite. The resurrection changes the equation. And then the question is, what can gratitude do? The great example from Les Miserables of Jean Valjean, having served years in prison for stealing bread because he was hungry, gets welcomed by the monsignor, and in the middle of the night he wakes up and he steals the silverware and he runs away and the police grab him and bring him back to the priest and say, are these your, is this your silverware? Did this man rob from you? And the priest says, oh, Jean, you forgot the candlesticks. And what does that do for Jean? Does it work every time? Does it work for everyone? Does it mean that this is somehow a formula? No, it's grace. But at that moment, Jean takes the candlesticks and begins to realize this priest had just given of himself. And in one of the movie versions, the priest says to him, with these candlesticks, I have bought your life. Where did the priest get such an idea? He spent years learning it from his master, Jesus, because what he does is he comes to us and says, I'm giving my body for you and with my body I've bought your life. The struggle for the moral high ground reinforces the groupism beneath the racism. The elephant within keeps learning the same old lesson. Me and my group have to prevail. What does Jesus say? On the night he was what? On the night he was what? Betrayed. His own group. His own disciple. One of the chosen handpicked twelve did what? Sold him for 30 pieces of silver. On the night he was betrayed, he said, I'm not trusting anybody again. No. He took bread. He broke it. And the one who was still feeling the sting of betrayal took a look to his disciples and said, this is my body, broken for you. You might say, I've done this, pastor. I've forgiven people and they turned around and stabbed me again. Yes. I completely believe you. This is what we do. And this is what Jesus does. And this is what saves the world. This bread is for you. If you believe in him, if you've been baptized into his name, if you look at Jesus and say, that's how I want to live. I want him to be my master. It doesn't mean you'll be perfect at it. It doesn't mean you won't be a racist anymore. It doesn't mean you won't group up and hit back. It means that for betrayers like us, we have grace from him. And by taking this bread, you say, this is what I want. This is what I need. I want Jesus to feed me and make me like him. This is your meal. Thank you.