https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aorjvyTjU6g

 I wrote the sermon, I think there will be quite so much to do about it. Bruce Jenner, born in 1949, currently age 65, went to high school in Newton, Connecticut. Is that a name ring a bell? The shootings in that Newton Elementary School, same town in Connecticut. Finished 10th in the 1972 Olympic Trials. I didn't know this, I found this out, drafted in 1977 by the Kansas City Kings. How about that? What we mostly know him for, however, was his big moment in 1976. I was 13, I remember watching those Olympics, and he of course was the big star and won the gold medal and broke the Olympic record for the decathlon. From there he was everywhere, and TV and pitching. Oh, technology! In 1976 he was married, had two children, he was on the front of the Wheaties box, was hawking Tropicana orange juice, night on cameras. He was in a very lousy movie, can't stop the music, and his marriage ended in 1981. But even 1980, Sports Illustrated called him Mr. Fantasy. And these are the first words of the article. Hey Mr. Fantasy man, otherwise known as Bruce Jenner, Olympic hero, TV personality, rising movie star, and actor of the Commons Man, Common Man's Dreams. He sails, he surfs, he flies planes, he races autos, and in the words of 1980, he's living baby, really living. And then whole Sports Illustrated piece just talking about how he's working on auto racing, and he's out there at his Malibu house, and he's got his two kids, but his marriage is breaking up. But hey, guess what, he's got a new girlfriend. And his new girlfriend who would become his wife in 1981, well she was the former generation Mr. Fantasy, Elvis Presley's old girlfriend. And movie star Linda Thompson, and they would have two kids, two nice boys, but their marriage would break up in 86. But yeah, he was not done with love, and so he would marry Chris Kardashian, and I don't have a subscription to People Magazine, and I've never seen the show, but I know a lot of folks have, and I know some of you have. So keeping up with the Kardashians, and he was the head of the household, had two girls with Chris Kardashian, and well things just have continued to change for Bruce. Apparently a new chapter in his life, a new kind of fame. He's been having surgery to remove his Adam's apple, and there was a lot of rumors, but now he's come out with People Magazine that he's transitioning into becoming a woman. And the People Magazine piece was quite interesting. On one hand they picked this picture of him, and then with this headline, after his secret struggle, reality TV father, former Olympian Bruce Jenner, is finally happy. And I read that and I thought, really? He doesn't look happy. And of course, the family, I guess maybe all his families, I don't know, come around him, and his mom has this quote, I never thought I could be more proud of Bruce when he reached his goal in 1976, but I'm more proud of him now. It takes a lot of courage to do what he's doing. And I thought, I don't know how I feel about this, and it isn't about necessarily trying to become a woman, but looking at his entire life. I mean, this man accomplished and achieved and received and enjoyed pretty much everything that the American dream has to offer. Well, he hasn't been governor of the state of California. He could have used ours. And then the comment from his mother just kind of reinforced what I think is deep in the American assumption, that we have these desire narratives. And now to say he's finally happy. Did this household in Malibu make him happy? Did his first family and wife make him happy? Or his second family and wife make him happy? Or his third family and wife make him happy? Or the millions he made in endorsement deals? Or the fame and achievement he had in winning the Olympic gold? Or the auto racing? Or the flying? Or the surfing? Or what we see in fact is just not just one narrative, but a series of narratives. There is the sports narrative where he becomes an Olympic medalist and then is drafted by an NBA team. There's the big man on planet narrative where he has all of the toys and all of the desirable assets. There's the romance narrative, not just falling in love once, but again and again and again to beautiful, successful women. There's the oh family is what really counts narrative where well it's just all about the family and so he has not one, but three families. And there's the what's a power narrative. And then finally there's the narrative of expressive individualism, which his mother seems to be saying. There's well now he's found his true self. And I just have to ask and say when, how do we really know what this true self is? If there's a man today who would kind of be Bruce Jenner 30 years ago, it might be Tom Brady. Just won the Super Bowl. And he has a wife who is a supermodel and this is his home that he has. And can you imagine walking up to Tom Brady and saying 30 years from now will you transform into a woman? He'd probably hit you. Bruce Jenner might have done the same thing in 1976. So then you have the question, well, what is the self? Can it possibly be located? Seems to always be migrating from one desire to the next. Oh, I want to be a sports hero. Oh, I want to be a family man. Oh, I want to be this. Oh, I want to have that. In a 2006 interview after his third Super Bowl victory, he said this to 60 Minutes. Why do I have three Super Bowl ratings and still think there's something greater out there for me? I mean, maybe a lot of people would say, hey, man, this is what is. I reached my goal, my dream, my life. Me, I think God. I don't think he meant it as God. I think he meant it as God. It's going to be it's got to be more than this. I mean, this can't be what it's all cracked up to be. I mean, I'm done with it. I'm 27. What else is there for me? At that point, he was just breaking up with his girlfriend who was pregnant with his child and just getting together with his next girlfriend who would become his wife. But he says, here I am, 27 years old, three Super Bowl rings, beautiful women and wealth and homes and everything. And I think, is this what life is about? Or is it just finding yet another dream and pursuing it? Robert Williams, who just took his life this year. On stage, he owned the room. Backstage, he was lonely and needy and a little out of breath. Laughter was his oxygen. Two years later, in a podcast interview with comedian Mark Maron, he offered another glimpse of the pressure to create and remain fresh. You bought it out, he said. People say, you have an Academy Award. The Academy Award lasted about a week. And one week later, people are going, hey Mark. We've been following Israel out of Egypt. And if you can imagine that moment of exaltation where the Egyptians come out of their homes laden with gold. And Israel has been laboring under slavery in Egypt along with lots of other slaves. And then the Egyptians come out and they throw gold and throw riches into the hands of the Israelites. It's like, get out, leave! And the Israelites might have been, this is wonderful, this is what we've always wanted. We've been longing so much to be free from this slavery. And now we're going to be free. Life is going to be great. And here we find in Numbers chapter 11, the rabble with them. And the Old Testament talks about that. The sons and the family of the children of Israel, the children of Jacob went out of Egypt and a lot of other slaves, seeing that Egypt was in turmoil, says, I'm getting that too. So they all left together. The rabble with them began to crave other food. God had been feeding them with manna in the desert. And said, if only we had meat to eat. You know we've been eating this manna every day. Manna for breakfast, manna for lunch, manna for dinner. Manna, manna, manna. Manna cakes, manna bread, manna cupcakes. We make everything out of manna. I'm tired of manna. In Egypt, oh, when we were in Egypt, we ate fish. It didn't cost anything. We just plucked them out of the river. We also had cucumbers and melons and leeks and onions and garlic. It was all for nothing. And someone might say, oh, you were also slaves. But now we have lost our appetite. We never see anything but this manna. Moses heard the people of every family wailing at the entrance of their tents. The Lord became exceedingly angry and Moses was troubled. He asked the Lord, why have you brought this trouble on your servant? Notice how contagious complaint is. Why have you brought this trouble on your servant? Moses is complaining to God. What have I done to this lesion that you would put this burden of all these people on me? Did I conceive all these people? Did I give them birth? Why do you tell me to carry them in your arms as a nurse carried an infant to the land you promised on oath to their ancestors? Where can I get meat for all these people? They keep wailing to me. Give us meat to eat. I cannot carry all these people by myself. The burden is too heavy for me. If this is how you are going to treat me, please go ahead and kill me. If I have found favor in your eyes, do not let me face my own ruin. So in other words, oh manna manna manna! And then Moses is just hearing this and hearing this. He is sick and desolate and just turned on the Lord and says, all these people that are driving me crazy, why did you complain? You put this on me. Why don't you kill me and I will be done with this whole lousy calamity. What is interesting about this story is that if you read through Numbers 11, you will find that it goes in a sequence. First there is the food theme and then there is a transition and then there is the leadership theme and it just goes back from one to the other. Then the Lord said to Moses, bring me 70 of Israel's elders who are known to you as leaders and officials among the people. Have them come to the tent of meeting that they may stand here before you. Notice how God does not just say, okay we will give them bread. He says, the real issue has nothing to do with me. And Moses really has nothing to do with your capacity to satisfy their desires. Because for example, if in 1976 Bruce not only won the decathlon and then let's say in 1977 he played for the Kansas City Kings and let's say that went better than his movies. He was a star and he won an NBA championship and maybe he would then get into baseball and win the World Series. How much would it take? How many championships would actually fill him? So the Lord says to Moses, okay Moses this is what we are going to do. Gather around 72 people or 70 people and I will take some of the power of the Spirit that is on you and put it on that. Now this is really interesting because nowhere else in the Bible do we find anything like this. It's almost as if the Spirit that God puts on Moses, God says, well just think about this as like water or a little bit of quatsty or something. And so I put it all on you before Moses and you're complaining, oh it's too heavy. I'm going to take some from you and I'm going to sprinkle it on the 70 others. That's what we're going to do. They will share the burden of the people with you so that you will not have to carry it off. Isn't this what you're asking for Moses? Now we deal with the people. Tell the people, consecrate themselves in preparation for tomorrow. They will eat meat. The Lord heard you when you will. If only we had meat to eat, we would have been better off in Egypt. Now the Lord will give you meat and you will eat it. You will not eat it for just one day or two days or five days or ten or twenty, but for the whole month. Until it comes out of your nostrils and you loathe it. Because you have rejected the Lord who is among you and have wailed before him saying, why did we leave Egypt? Now it's easy at this point to say, oh the sin of Israel was being ungrateful. Well the sin of Israel was complaining and so now God's going to punish them for being ungrateful or complaining. But the text is much more subtle than that. In other words, basically what the Lord is saying is, I will give you exactly what you asked for. And maybe you will learn something. That you know what? That thing that you're dreaming of doesn't matter. I can't fill you. I can give you meat every day. And you know what we'll hear? Oh, we're every day we eat meat. Every day we got to eat meat. Oh, we're going to eat meat. We got to eat meat. Oh, remember that nana that we ate last month? Oh, I wish I could get some of that nana. What is it about us? Oh, I wish I could be a spot on my high school basketball team. You got that. Oh, I wish I could win the Olympics. Oh, didn't do it in 72. 76. Oh, 76. Oh, I wish I could have money. Oh, I wish I could have a new wife. Oh, I wish I could have a better car. Oh, I wish I could. I wish I could. Three wives and now I wanted women. Now I want to be a woman. And just one thing after another. And what the text says is this is who we are. This is what we're like. Now Moses, who had just had the leadership conversation, now turns to God and says, But here I am among 600,000 men on foot. And you say, I will give my meat to eat for a whole month. They would have to slaughter. Would they have enough if flocks and herds were slaughtered for them? Would they have enough if all the fish in the sea were caught for them? In other words, Moses now is doubting God too. And saying, how are you going to give him meat? He should have just stopped for a minute there. How is he giving him that? Doesn't occur to him. The Lord answered, Is the Lord's arm too short? Moses. Way back when we started this, you would have said, How can you take him out of Egypt? How can you lead him in the desert? Now you will see whether or not I say will come true for you. And now it's back to leadership. So Moses went out and told the people what the Lord had said. He brought together 70 of the elders and had them stand around the tent. When the Lord came down in the cloud and spoke with them, He took some of the power of the Spirit that was on Moses and put it on the 70 elders. When the Spirit rested on them, they prophesied, but they did not do so again. However, two men whose names were Eldad and Midad had remained in camp. So not only are the Israelites complainers, they can't get to the meeting on time. They were listed among the elders, but did not go out to the tent. Yet the Spirit also rested on them when they prophesied in the camp. A young man ran and told Moses, eat Eldad and Midad of prophesying in the camp. Joshua's son, who had been Moses' age since youth, spoke up and said, Moses, my Lord, stop that! So what's going on here? Joshua's like, hey, we've got to, you know, if God starts spreading around the leadership, we could, you know, be in trouble. And Moses, in his better moment in this story, replies, are you jealous for my sake? In the book of Deuteronomy, he notes, Moses was the most humble man who ever lived, and we see some of that humility right here. He looks at Joshua and says, do you think I'm excited about my job? Remember, a few verses ago, he said, I want out of my job! Kill me if necessary! And so he looks at Joshua and says, are you worried about me? In other words, probably part of under there is saying to Joshua, you're really worried about you in this, aren't you? And then he says this, I wish that all the Lord's people were prophets and that the Lord would put his spirit on them. Now remember the specific language we had about the spirit, that the Lord took some of the spirit that was upon Moses and parceled it out among 70. And in a sense, what Moses is saying is, I wish I had enough spirit for the whole camp to go around. I wish that's what God could do. Now remember his conversation with meat, remember what he said to God about meat? You can't feed these people meat. You're not able to do that. And God says, watch and see what I'm able to do. And then Moses says, I wish God would put his spirit on everyone, but in a sense, Moses is probably also saying, but there's only so much spirit in me to go around. It's a really strange text. Spirit seems limited for Moses to the people. Moses wishes that all the Lord's people could have it, but the quail seems limited. Isn't the Lord's arm too short? Implicit is the question, is the Lord's arm too short with spirit as well as meat? Now a wind went up from the Lord and drove quail in from the sea. It gathered them up to two cubits deep all around the camp. So you have quail piling up all over the place. As far as the days walk in any direction, because the Lord's arm is too short, we can bury you in quail. That's who we are. He's burying them in water. We're just happy for this. All day and all night and all the next day the people went out and gathered quail. No one gathered less than ten homers. They spread them out all around the camp. But while the meat was still between their teeth and before it could be consumed. Now why would it say that? See it's not the quail that's making them sick. You see for Bruce Jenner it wasn't his wives that made him sick. It wasn't his success that made him sick. It wasn't the Olympics. It wasn't the kids. It wasn't the car. It wasn't any of those things that make us sick. It's us. The anger of the Lord went against the people and he struck them with a severe plague. Therefore the place was named Kibrach Atahah. Now Kibrach Atahah means graves of craving. It's such an amazing name because it says exactly what it is. They craved so much it took them to ruin. Because they buried people who craved other food. One of the interesting things is I didn't read the first three verses of Numbers 11. Because the first three verses also have a murmuring complaining story. And in that story fire breaks out around the camp. And if you read that story in light of understanding what Gehenna. Sometimes I'll shock people and say you know the word Galeriles is in the Bible. I'll say oh pastor how can the word Galeriles not be in the Bible. I'll pull out a Bible and open the New Testament and say here it says hell right here. So yes that's hell in English. But there's no word in Greek for hell. There's Hades which is like Sheol the emote of the dead. And then there's Gehenna which usually in your English translations will be rendered as hell. But Gehenna was actually outside of Jerusalem. A place where before Jesus time the kings of Israel had made altars to Molech. And the other Canaanite gods. And where they sacrificed their children in this place. So in the time of Jesus that's what they used as their garbage dump. When I lived in the Dominican Republic there wasn't any garbage service where I lived. And so the neighbors just would always throw their garbage out into the weeds around the houses. And then the garbage got too large and too smelly. They went out there with about a gallon of gasoline sprinkled it around. Let it match and whoosh. The whole place went up. It was called Gehenna. It was hell. It was the place outside the camp. And so what we see here in the story of the blaze outside the camp. The desire of cravings in the light of the New Testament is this picture of hell. Now C.S. Lewis when he wrote the book The Great Divorce startled people with hell. Because when you talk about hell people would imagine devils with pitchforks and fire. And C.S. Lewis said it's much more subtle than that. And so C.S. Lewis pictures hell as a place where you can have whatever you want. Just by thinking of it. You want to be an Olympic champion? Poof. You're an Olympic champion. You want women? Poof. There's women. You want food? Poof. There's whatever food you want. You get everything you want all the time. And C.S. Lewis says that's hell. You might say why? That sounds like heaven to me. Ah, but you don't know yourself. Thing after thing after thing after thing. And you're satisfied with nothing. So then it's more things. And then it's more things. And then it's more things. And the hunger just grows. This is hell. Augustine made the comment, Nothing can satisfy one who would not be satisfied with God. Nothing can satisfy one who would not be satisfied with God. You see, if you make your job the center of your life, your job will consume you. If you make a romantic partner the center of your life, If you make a romantic partner the center of your life, that partner will consume you. If you make approval the center of your life, seeking approval will consume you. What this text says is that there is only one place, one safe place, to finally put your ultimate desire upon. And that is God. Jesus says, Seek ye first the kingdom and its righteousness, and all these things will be added to you. Because if you make your job your God, your job will fail you. And if you make your romantic partner your God, that partner will fail you. Whatever it is in this world that you make your God, it will fail you. But if in fact God is your God, then your job can be your job. And if you have it and things are good, you can say, Praise God. And if you have it and things are bad, you can say, Oh, I wish it were better, but it's not my life. And the same with all these other categories. What we see in a sense is Bruce Jenner's life and Tom Brady's life. They're like the book of Ecclesiastes. In the book of Ecclesiastes, Koholeth, the teacher, says, I've had everything in life. I've had women. I've had riches. I've had power. I've had all of these things. And what does he say they are? Vanity or vanities. All is vanity. He sought women until he sought womanhood. Will he finally be happy? My money says hell. He desires good things, but he can't find satisfaction even when he attains them. Hell is a place where we finally get what we say we want. And God says, Okay, have it all. Will you be satisfied? There is no finally. Now this is where the pastor makes the glib Christian term and says, Oh, if you become a Christian, then everything will be great. And that's how pastors sell Christianity. And I know many of you have testimonies where you say, I chased this and I chased that and I finally gave my life to God and now I have so much more peace. And that's true. But most of us know that even within the Christian life, we struggle with these things. Our desires are all over the place and we're seeking this and we're seeking that and we're disturbed that we can't get it. It's never quite that simple. What's interesting, however, is while Moses recognizes there's not enough Moses to go around, Jesus is the new and better Moses. Jesus called out in a loud voice, Father, into your hands I commit my spirit. Why was it that Jesus called his disciples? I must go so that my spirit can come. I must leave so that I can give you something else. Why is it that Luke says, ask and it shall be given and seek and you will find not from the door will be opened. Surely the Lord will give his Holy Spirit to whoever asks for it. What's all this message about? Moses sought God. He was left desiring more, but was not a slave to his desires. Did Moses grumble? Yes. Did Moses complain? Yes. Did he get frustrated? Yes. But he did not go with the rest of the camp because Moses understood there was one safe desire. Now the truth is we are not there yet. We still long. And I think what Augustine and Lewis would say about Bruce Jenner was that when Bruce was seeking glory through the Olympics, he was really seeking God. He was just confused. He saw God's glory in this particular form and he grabbed hold of it and he discovered it couldn't satisfy him. The same with this series of women and now with this attempt to grasp that womanhood. And so what Lewis and Augustine would all say is that our hearts, when we're seeking God through all these things, we're really seeking God and that's why when we say, oh, if I only get this I'll be happy and then when we get this, there's no finally because the finally must come in the source of all these things. There is one safe desire, but we are still filled with lots of desires. When Jesus dies, however, a spirit is given that is sufficient that all the people, that all the Lord's people could have the spirit poured out on him. It's amazing that Moses' desire finds fulfillment in pentacles. And then the question you have to ask yourself is, what do you really want? Do you really want that relationship? Do you really want that lifestyle? Do you really want, or are all of your desires really pointing to him? I think Lewis and Augustine would also say, in this world you will not be fully satisfied. In fact, if you read Lewis' Mere Christianity, that's his argument for the existence of God. Because he says our bodies desire food and there is food. Our bodies desire sex and there is sex. Our bodies desire goods and there are goods. But the one desire we have that there is no such thing for in this world is actually the central desire, which is God himself. And so the question is, when we are bound by our cravings, will we pause and recognize the futility of our search and instead bring our focus to the source of our search and start to lean our heart towards that? John Hartberg in his book, The Life You've Always Wanted, tells a story about Mabel. As I near the end of this hallway I saw an old woman strapped in a wheelchair. Her face was an absolute horror. The empty stare and white pupils in her eyes told me that she was blind. The large hearing aid over one ear told me that she was almost deaf. One side of her face was being eaten by cancer. There was a discolored and running sore covering part of one cheek and it had pushed her nose to one side, dropping one eye, distorting her jaw so that what should have been the corner of her mouth was now the bottom of her mouth. As a consequence she drooled constantly. I was later told that when new nurses came the supervisors would send them to feed this woman, thinking that if they could stand this side they could stand anything in the building. I also learned later that this woman was 89 years old and that she had been there, bedridden, blind, and nearly deaf and alone for 25 years. This was Mabel. I don't know why I spoke to her. She looked less likely to respond than most of the people there. And if you've ever been to a chief nursing home you know what I'm talking about. If I put a flower in her hand and I said here's a flower for you, happy Mother's Day. She had the flower up to her face and tried to smell it. And then she spoke. And much to my surprise her words, although somewhat garbled because of her deformity, were obviously produced by a clear mind. 25 years in this horribly mistaken body in a lousy nursing home with a clear mind. In some ways dementia can be merciful. Thank you, it's lovely. But can I give it to someone else? I can't see it, you know, I'm blind. I said of course, and I pushed her in her chair back down the hallway to a place where I thought she could find some alert patients. I found one, stopped the chair, Mabel held out the flower and said here, this is from Jesus. That was when it began to dawn on me that this was not an ordinary human being. Later I reeled her back in her room and heard more about her story. She had grown up in a small farm where she managed with only her mother until her mother died. She ran the farm alone until 1950 when her blindness and sickness sent her to the convalescent hospital. For 25 years she got weaker and sicker with constant headaches, backaches, and stomach aches. And then the cancer came too. She had three roommates who were all human vegetables who screamed occasionally but never talked. They often soiled their bedclothes because the hospital was under staff, especially on Sundays when I usually visited. The stench was often overpowering. Mabel and I became friends over the next few weeks and I wanted to see her once or twice a week for the next three years. And her first words to me were usually an offer of hard candy from a tissue box near her bed. Some days I would read to her from the Bible and often it was where I would pause and continue reciting the passage for memory, word for word. On other days I would take a book of hymns and sing it with her and she would know all the words of the old song. For Mabel, these were not mere exercises in memory. She would often stop and mid-hint and make a brief comment about the lyrics she considered particularly relevant to her own situation. I never heard her speak of loneliness or pain except in the stress she placed on certain lines and on certain hymns. It was not many weeks before I turned from a sense that I was being helpful to a sense of wonder and that I would go to her with pen and paper to write down the things she would say. During one hectic week of final exams I was frustrated because my mind seemed to be pulled in ten directions at once with all the things I had to think about. The question occurred to me, what does Mabel have to think about hour after hour, day after day, week after week, not even able to do what it's not even able to know it's night or day. So I went to her and asked Mabel, what do you think about when you lie there? She said, I think about my Jesus. I sat there and thought for a moment about the difficulty for me of thinking about Jesus for even five minutes and I asked, what do you think about Jesus? She replied slowly and deliberately as I wrote, I think about how good he's been to me. He's been awfully good to me in my life, you know. I'm one of those kinds who are most satisfied. Lots of folks would care much for what I think. Lots of folks would think I'm kind of old fashioned but I don't care. I'd rather have Jesus. He's all the world to me. And then she sang that song. The opera goes on to say, I'm not making this up. This woman actually lived and she had the kind of power I could not imagine. There in a wheelchair and 25 years with with a distorted face being heated by cancer and an awful situation. She's the most content, satisfied and pleasant person you've ever met. And then I look at this. There goes the big moment. And I think, finally happy? Bruce, what you're chasing you will never catch. Now let's imagine Bruce is 65 and looks good for a 65 year old and let's imagine Bruce would never die. Would Bruce finally be happy? What would it be after this or after that? Let's say he could look like one of the beautiful women he married. Let's say he could get into politics. Let's say, let's say, let's say the world would run out of things before he would run out of desire. And this is exactly a picture of that. And here is Mabel 25 years in a wheelchair, completely satisfied. And you know what death will bring her? Even more joy. The most common question Jesus asked people was simply this. What do you want? So I asked you, what do you want? Let's pray. Lord, we are foolish and silly creatures. We run around imagining the things that will make us happy. Even though Lord, we live lives of collecting these things and they don't. There's no better word for it but insanity. And you come to us and you say, I will give you what is free. You can have it by asking. But we'd rather run around chasing other things. Lord, give us your Holy Spirit so that we can come to sanity. And recognize that in having you, we have everything else too. Help us Lord to learn. Open the eyes of our heart and may we receive you in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand? Amen.