https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AiIoW_JUdDY

 We've been talking in the last few weeks a lot about resurrection and Pete mentioned to me, you know, he talked about the resurrection of Reggie and the resurrection of Christ and Pete mentioned to me that there's this TV show called Resurrection that was on TV and he wondered if I had seen it. I hadn't seen it so thanks to Hulu I've been watching a bunch of episodes. Not quite, not a great show, it was cancelled after it set its second season. But a lot of the questions that I've been challenging us to take in real terms about in terms of what would happen if people start showing up again and how does that play in a community and even as this show tries to, you know, obviously the characters on this show are trying to figure out what does it mean when people come back to life? How are we to think about that? Why would this happen? How can this be and how can those people fit in with the rest of life? I think we don't really appreciate how confused and bewildered disciples might have been with Jesus' reappearance because what should they expect? Because people don't come back from the dead and so when Jesus comes back will Jesus just kind of pick up his old job? Will they go back up to Galilee and he'll start multiplying loaves and fishes and selling storms and teaching? Will he try to franchise kind of like John the Baptist? I mean what on earth would happen when Jesus comes back? Or maybe Jesus will now march into Jerusalem again this time with a real triumphal entry and not just turn over some money changers but kick out the priests and go and clear out the Roman soldiers and why stop at Jerusalem and go to Rome and why stop at Rome and go to India and China and figure out a way to walk on water and maybe stroll across the Atlantic and take on the Aztecs and the Inca. I mean what could Jesus do? What on earth should the disciples expect? Or maybe Jesus will just set himself up in something like the Vatican and here suddenly all around the world everyone knows that you have this miracle working man who's been alive for 2,000 years. Think about how that would go. Now if Jesus was a 2,000 years old miracle working man wouldn't it be easier for us to talk about Jesus because we could say Jesus rose from the dead and people could say people don't rise from the dead. Say no go find him go to the Vatican or whatever place in Jerusalem Jesus set up shopping. You can look at him and you can talk to him and he'll multiply loaves and fishes won't you believe? Wouldn't God have made all of our work a lot easier if he had decided to do something like this? Wouldn't individuals and governments have to listen to Jesus if he's 2,000 years old without morality or politics or sex or the poor? And wouldn't atheists and skeptics have to shut up? Because you could just point to him and say look there he is put your fingers in his hands put your hand in his side. It seems to me the whole ascension is where Jesus whole mission runs off the tracks. If he just stuck around we could prove it to everyone right? This week's passage is very similar to last week's passage in John. I think both passages are referring to the same event but Luke has a little different spin on it. Well they were still talking about this this is after the road to Emmausiae. Jesus himself stood among them and said to them peace be with you. They were startled and frightened thinking they saw a ghost. He said to them why are you troubled and why do doubts rise in your minds? Look at my hands and my feet it is I myself touch me and see a ghost does not have flesh and bones as you see I have. Well he said this he showed them his hands and his feet. While they still did not believe it because of joy and amazement he asked them do you have anything to eat? And they gave him a piece of royal fish and he took it and ate it in their presence. I was thinking of those my daughter Josie came back from school this week and said we saw a video of someone eating through an x-ray machine and I always think of that scene when I think about Jesus eating a fish out. He's got a real body and he chews and digests and I think what does that mean? He said to them this is what I told you while I was still with you everything must be fulfilled what is written about me and the law of Moses the prophets and the Psalms. He opened their minds so they could understand the scriptures. He told them this is what was written the Messiah will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day and repentance for the forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations beginning at Jerusalem. You are witnesses of these things I'm going to send you what my father has promised but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high. Now a number of these points we talked about last week because they're very similar to the points in John. Luke is obviously looking forward to the Pentecost scene that will happen in the book of Acts that will follow later but the thing I want us to focus on this morning is this business about everything has been written about me. Now one of the funny things about this is that if you read the second part of the Bible that we call the New Testament if you read this New Testament a lot you find that the New Testament writers are always quoting things from the Old Testament that older part of the book and they're often playing with the quotes a little bit but they're right there and your modern Bibles will do nice things like put it in bold or set it aside so you can figure out it's a quote. But this thing right here that Jesus says almost everyone who reads it says now wait a minute I didn't read in the book of Isaiah the son of man will come and he will suffer and die on the third day he will rise and you can read a lot of stuff in Isaiah about the suffering servant and a number of things that will say yeah that's kind of pointing there but you're not going to find a text that says exactly this precisely this in the Old Testament and that obviously when scholars read this they start to scratch their heads and think what text was Jesus talking about and this gets even more problematic as you continue to go on this just from a conversation I have on Facebook with a friend of mine who's an atheist she said this we're talking about morality she said this well if a person doesn't know the difference between good and bad they certainly won't discover the answer by reading the Old Testament she had been raised in a nominal Christian family I think she went to Catholic school growing up so she knows something about the Bible but her opinion of the Old Testament is this is the last thing we want people to look at in terms of morality which is the root link of all the Abrahamic religions and the root cause of the horrors of fundamentalism it's bursting with celebrations of cruelty both human and divine I'll give you that the teachings attributed to the man Jesus in the New Testament are good it's a shame God couldn't get it right the first time around that's pretty clearly what my friend thinks about this and she's not alone I would suspect that a lot of maybe some of us think this way if we're looking for inspiration maybe we'll read a song yeah there's a lot of funky stuff in the Psalms too about Lord may you smite my enemies but we feel that way sometimes but we make great probably feel a little guilty about it I don't know if I should pray that way but they're doing it in the Psalms and we look at this whole testament as a liability in fact for the first 400 years of the history of the church many of the really difficult heresies actually grew out of people who said I can't take this Old Testament Greek philosophy was all about the Roman Empire everybody knew that the Greeks had the best philosophies and the Greeks looked at this Old Testament as some backwater archaic book there was a there was an early Christian named Marcion in Rome and he was a wealthy powerful man and he got a whole group of people that said well you know what the Old Testament is the story about an evil God Yahweh who did things like make bodies the New Testament he liked Luke and Paul and kind of cleared everything else out he said the New Testament is it's the story of the God Jesus and Jesus is nice and loving and kind unlike that old fiery God in the Old Testament Yahweh Marcion is in the second century most early Christian heresies substituted Greek ideas for Hebrew ones and these groups actually became very large and powerful in the church and if you know anything about church history they had these big meetings called councils and a lot of the creeds we have actually come out of the fights that happened in these councils about these very issues and many commoners in the Roman Empire in finding out what these Hebrews and Christians believed from this Old Testament were a little shocked these Christians seem sexually very peculiar they didn't participate in baths and other Roman things temple worship they were religious exclusivists where they didn't really mix and say well I'll have Jesus and I'll have Zeus and I'll have Apollo they'd say Jesus is Lord and have no other gods before me and the personal ethic often seems sacrificial whereas the father familiar could look at his family and if a girl baby was born the guy could say I think we've got enough girls around here we can always use more sons but girls are a liability so don't put the girl on the garbage dump and Christians would go out and pick up these girls and raise them as their own and so Romans would look at these Christians and they'd say these are strange people with odd beliefs and they have this book about this God Yahweh and none of it makes any sense and even the Apostles I would imagine if Jesus hadn't made this commandment specifically I wonder if the Apostles at least one of them would have had a smart idea and said you know what Jesus coming back from the dead we could spin this any way we want we could make Jesus make us the final authority because actually when the Apostles move out of Jerusalem and go into the empire they're usually persecuted by the synagogue rulers and persecuted by the Romans so they tended to catch it on each side why not just make up a whole new book? Why tie this amazing event of Jesus' resurrection to this old religious book? And I think the best answer to that question is Jesus himself did it. Now again if you would imagine that Jesus has the power to come back from the dead might we not imagine that Jesus wants to give them a new Bible? In fact if you look at the history of Islam for example Islam is centered around Mohammed writing the Quran. That's really the center of the religion. One of the strangest things about Jesus is he didn't write a book and the book he gives us is in fact that Old Testament and that Old Testament in fact becomes until a few hundred years later when they had grabbed Matthew, Mark, Luke, some of the writings of Paul and Peter and a few others and put the New Testament together for the early church their entire Bible was in fact Moses and the prophets and the Psalms and that Old Testament you have today. Which leaves us in kind of a funny place because many of us think yeah I like reading the Gospels and I like reading about Jesus but by far the most neglected part of the Bible is in fact the Old Testament. A few months ago someone suggested actually quite a while ago someone suggested that in our 930 Sunday school class where we pretty much just kind of go through books of the Bible someone said let's do Isaiah and I thought oh boy I don't know if they're quite ready for this and we spent almost a year in the book of Isaiah and then it was a shock for a lot of people. What's in this book? There's God being angry with Israel and God sending them off into exile and there's a lot of stuff in this book and we read this today and we say I don't quite know what to do with this whole Old Testament. In fact when we go back to our Old Testament series which we will at some point we'll be back in the middle of the book of Numbers and I'm sure for some of you are like oh boy I'm glad we're out of because we did Genesis they had cool stories in there Exodus was kind of wild with the plates but then we did Leviticus and we talked about all that weird stuff and now we're in Numbers and you might just have to say what on earth is God thinking giving us this as a Bible? But the church then and now asserts that the Old Testament, the Hebrew scriptures are inspired. Why? Because Jesus tells us they are. I know a lot of contemporary Christians say well I'm a Christian because I believe in the Bible but in terms of church history it really didn't work out that way. We became Christians first because we believed in Jesus and Jesus said do you want to know me? You find me in this book. I think a lot of Christians they get the Easter egg when they first become a Christian and they shake it up and they say I think there's chocolate in here and they open it up and what do they discover? A carrot. And what we begin to learn is that Jesus meant what he said. And if you read the rest of the New Testament you begin to learn the reason it's got all these quotes is because when they saw Jesus and when they read back in the Old Testament they began to say this kind of makes sense but only if you see them together. Because what tends to happen is if it's just me and Jesus, Jesus kind of starts becoming a projection of what I want. You see the truth is that the church in some ways could have been enormously popular if it hadn't messed with the Roman sexual ethic and if the church had just decided to make Jesus alongside of Apollo and Zeus and some of the mystery religions and the Stoics and the Epicureans, if Christianity had just been one of many other religions a lot of people would have said yeah I'll be a Christian. I'm a good Roman citizen. I pray to the emperor. I pray to Apollo and I pray to Jesus. What could be better? And in fact even today if we said well you can be a Muslim if the Muslims are exclusive too but I can like Jesus and I can pray to this God over here and these other spiritual forces over here will help me with that. The difficulty you have however is that Christianity probably would have been extremely popular in its own little bubble and 200 years later would have made absolutely no sense to anyone. Because the real struggle that we face often is I think what everyone else thinks because I'm part of that group. Some of you will remember the elephant and the rider that we've been talking about and we think about us as individuals on one hand we're this conscious rider that thinks I'm directing my life but beneath us is this enormous elephant that says eat chocolate, watch TV, exercise is misery, stay home and lay on the couch. The elephant is very persuasive. And part of the thing is that we tend to believe in groups because elephants are herd animals. And when we say Jesus rose from the dead and we say that in church everyone says yeah I think that's right. But if you say that at work people say that sounds kind of crazy. And when we're at church we feel yeah I can believe this stuff when I'm at church but when I'm around other people we think oh this kind of sounds nuts I'm going to keep my mouth shut and be a little embarrassed about what I think. That's because we're herd animals really. But here's the thing, if your God does not offend you sometimes, if your God never says no to you then your God is probably just you looking in the mirror. If your God is looking at you and saying you're wonderful, you're great, don't change a thing, I don't know why everyone doesn't love you like you love yourself then your God is probably just you. You see Jesus comes into this world and the strange thing about him is he manages to take just about everybody off to the point that these people who couldn't agree on just about anything in their culture war could all agree that the world would be better without him. And so they kill him. And it isn't because Jesus was a jerk and it isn't because Jesus asked them to do abominable things, he told them things like love one another and if your eye causes you to sin gouge it out. And none of us, well loving one another is always a wonderful idea until it means loving this person or that person or maybe even the person you share your home with. And Jesus comes and does this and says, do you want to know the proof of it? Watch me love you even though you're killing me. And maybe you'll see what love is. I use this illustration in the Sunday School Room 2. If you go to the doctor and the doctor says, whoa I see you got that 60 inch belly going. Let's see if we can get the 65. Sit more, eat more potato chips and drink more soda. What kind of a doctor do you have? Now you might feel the best, that's right. You might feel really good about your doctor. And if you go to the doctor, someone comes and says, oh my doctor told me I've got to lose weight, exercise and quit smoking. And you say, my doctor says I can do whatever I want. Okay. Do you need a doctor to tell you the truth or do you need a doctor to tell you what you want to hear? Do you need a God who reveals the truth to you or do you need a God who just makes you feel better about yourself? See Jesus begins the hard conversation with us in the context of the story in Israel. Jesus says that the only way for us to understand how he is rescuing us is through that story. And as you can see time and time again in that old story of Israel, we are our own worst enemy. Now most of the time people open up the story and think, oh I'm looking for some inspiration. And what they find is that Israel is doing all kinds of really silly and stupid and often offensive stuff. And God bails him out. Because Israel is not an inspirational story about the human spirit overcoming. It's a story about the human spirit flopping and God rescuing us more often from ourselves. The images that communicate what he is doing for us come through that story. And that's why he tells them, if you want to understand me, why I die, why I'm raised, if you want to understand me, you have to understand me in the context of that story. You see it right away at the beginning of the Gospels. Jesus says, I am Israel. Israel was born to suffer as was I. I am God coming to you, rescuing you from yourself, delivering you from yourself. He's not a self-help God, which leaves us with gratitude that the Gospel is finally and fundamentally not good advice but good news. Now the doctor may put the thing around my waist and tell me I should exercise a little bit more and my blood pressure is creeping up, so I exercise more and keep an eye on the cholesterol and all those things and I should work at that. But the truth is the medical condition that I have is terminal. Now I'm in good health and the doctor would say, yeah, you're in pretty good health. So what's so terminal about it? Well, where do I live? I am dying. The truth is I am my own worst enemy. All of this is true about myself. And Jesus comes and says, I'm going to save you in every way you can be saved. I'm going to rescue you even though you don't even know you need to be rescued. You are so self-absorbed you have absolutely no understanding about how you treat others, even the ones that you love. And I'm going to be getting to turn the light on in your eyes and your heart and help you see who you really are. And bit by bit you will begin to understand the lengths that I went to to rescue you. And then once you understand that you are rescued and saved, I'm going to turn your heart towards me and towards this world in gratitude and invite you to do for others what I've done for you. And that's the gospel. And Jesus says, you want a lesson in that? Open up that long and crazy book. And when you read that long and crazy book, look for me because I'm in there. Sometimes it's hard, sometimes it feels like your plane wears Waldo. But I'm in there and you'll begin to understand what the resurrection is really about. It's great. Lord, the God I want is the one that says I can eat potato chips all day, watch TV forevermore, and imagine myself to be the center of the universe. The problem that I have is I am not the center of the universe. And I am self-absorbed, self-centered, self-indulgent, and I wish to make my life work at the expense of everyone else. And Lord, you came to us and we all think, yeah, we just need a good talking to, but in most of our cases a good talking to doesn't amount to anything. And you came in the most surprising way to be our victim. And by becoming our victim, you show us who we are. Help us, Lord, to see the beauty of the man that we bled. Help us to understand the grace of the man that we blamed. And in his resurrection, may we see the coming of the restoration that he has won for us. And may that turn us into the kinds of generous loving creatures that we all imagined we were in our own sinful selves. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Therapy. You stand.