https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=FNWSValkpRo

 I don't realize how old he is. He's not here. How's it working with that hand heat? I don't want to have some time to say it. John Oliver is a comedian that used to be on The Daily Show with John Stewart. In a couple weeks he's going to be on the show. He's going to be on the show. He's going to be on the show. He's going to be on the show. He's going to be on the show. A couple weeks ago he did a piece on his show about Robert Tilton and some of the other prosperity creatures. That's caught a lot of attention, especially among the young who are on Facebook and YouTube. John Oliver is a pretty sharp comedian, so he decided to see all of the stuff going on. A Mr. Televangelist decided to start his own church, our lady with perpetual exemption. Eventually he'll get the money to some good cause. It was interesting because now that I'm Trump 52 this year, I've been around long enough to notice that these stories just cycle through and through. I remember a number of years ago making a comment about something and Earl basically said to me, he said, there's nothing new under the sun. This stuff just comes through every few years and a new generation is initiated and introduced to all the same old stuff. It's been interesting listening to the discussion because on one hand John Oliver makes the point about how much money these guys are making. If you look at the list compiled by this radio station, the 10 wealthiest pastors, almost all of them with the exception of Billy Graham. There's questions about that net worth of 25 million per hand probably includes the assets of the Billy Graham Association which probably are personal assets, but nearly all the rest of the pastors preach a prosperity gospel and they live that and they've made a considerable amount of money doing it. But I always find it interesting that those who are decrying them are not poor either. John Oliver making 2 million dollars a year, not using God's name or anything like that, but making good salary. If anybody has profited from corporate welfare, it would certainly be the cable industry that basically was able to corner a legal monopoly in certain areas. So on one hand these guys are easy targets. Hypocrisy is always public fun to display and expose. But on the other hand why does John Oliver have moral high ground over some of these characters? Part of what's so disturbing about these stories that come up, whether it's about Benny Henn or Robert Tilton, is that we're disturbed because it seems people are such easy marks. And that God seems to be such a useful tool for manipulating the meek and the simple. For giving them, for promising people things when you are in no place to deliver. When people are desperate, maybe it's because medicine can't heal them, or they're poor, or they just don't have any other options. And to say something to throw to play the God part, and people then are all over. It's cheap. And I do believe that there will be on Judgment Day a very special place, and not a happy place for those who use God's name to manipulate people especially out of their money. But God is by definition such a maximum authority, confers so much legitimacy and power, that the tricks that these guys pull aren't terribly clever or imaginative. You know, call yourself a reverent. And at least in some communities people will defer to you. You know, keep talking about the Bible, keep waving your Bible around. Whether or not anything you say has anything to do with the Bible, just keep mentioning the Bible and people will believe you, or be disposed to believe you. You know, adopt religious customs. Use all the Christian language, and then people, oh, you know, I should listen to him because he sounds so Christian. And the biggest proof of all is usually the miracle. And then there's something about televangelism and television miracles that are simply so susceptible to this kind of manipulation. I know someone who's very close to me who for years suffered from an illness that she could not find any comfort or any cure from doctors. And so she went to a Benny Hinn rally and she had been watching him on TV and she was so excited about the fact that he was coming to town and the mob was so huge and she got there and she was just sure she would be healed. And she wasn't. And in 2009 NBC did an expose and they basically looked at the organization and basically said, you know, the organization puts the people on stage that the organization wants on stage and they keep the really sick away from the stage because with the television lights on, they want to present an image and the image is successful and it makes a huge amount of money. And so this person that I know went to the Benny Hinn rally all excited about hoping for a healing and when she left just as sick as she came, the illusion was destroyed. And in many ways she had questions, not just about Benny Hinn, but about God. Our text this morning comes from the book of Joshua. And as I'll talk about later, amongst Christians, Joshua isn't really a very controversial book, but amongst critical scholars and academics, the book of Joshua is actually one of the most controversial books in the Bible. And what we'll see in chapters three and four is that these chapters are key to this whole question of legitimacy. And right at the heart of legitimacy is an outstanding miracle. And this miracle confers, at least according to the story, upon the resuscitation of Canaan, an authority to Joshua and a fear of Israel that will set up events that are to come. Joshua three. After three days the officers went throughout the camp, getting orders to the people. When you see the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord your God, and the biblical priest carrying it, you are to move out from your position and follow it. Then you will know which way to go since you have never been this way before. But keep a distance about 2,000 cubits between you and the Ark and you not go near. Scholars of ancient culture will notice that a lot of the language here is pretty indicative of the way that royalty acted in that culture. And the clear message is that God weighed their God was king. And the clear message of the book of Joshua is that God will give them the land. And the Lord said to Joshua, Today I will begin to exalt you in the eyes of all Israel, so that they may know that I am with you as I was with Moses. Tell the priests who carry the Ark of the Covenant, when you reach the edge of Jordan's bow and stand in the river. Joshua said to the Israelites, Come here and listen to the words of the Lord your God. It's clear here in this passage that part of what God is setting up is that Israel is to regard Joshua as Israel regarded Moses. And when Joshua speaks they are to listen. And when Joshua commands they are to obey. This is how you will know that the living God is among you. And that he will certainly dry out before you the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Hibites, the Teresites, the Gergishites, the Amorites, and the Jehuzites. See the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of all the earth will go into the Jordan ahead of you. Now then choose twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one from each tribe. And as soon as the priests who carry the Ark of the Lord the Lord of all the earth set foot into Jordan, its waters will flow downstream, will be cut off and stand up and it will be eaten. So the people broke him to cross the Jordan. The priests carrying the Ark of the Covenant went ahead of them. Now the Jordan is at flood stage during the harvest. Yet as soon as the priests who carry the Ark reach the Jordan and their feet touch the water's edge the water from the upstream stopped flowing. It piled up in a heap a great distance away so the people crossed over opposite Jericho. The priests who carried the Ark of the Covenant of God stopped in the middle of the Jordan and stood on dry ground while all Israel passed by until the whole nation had completed the crossing on dry ground. The message is clear. Joshua the Ark and then this miracle. And this miracle confers on Joshua and on the Ark a legitimacy and a power that in fact strikes fear in the hearts of the people of Canaan and emboldens the hearts of the people of Israel that the living God is among them. That God has moved into history. That God has rescued these people from Egypt. Now remember that the generation who saw the mighty acts of God in Egypt had died away in the desert. So this new people although they have seen miraculous things, now in the form of this miracle knows that God is on their side. This is a powerful thing. This is the kind of thing that even the hope of which drives many desperate people to send money to hucksters for prayer clubs and promises and all kinds of charlatanism. But even the hope of it can drive the desperate to all kinds of people. Yet here before their eyes the river stops and the waters pile up and they walk through on dry ground surely they will remember that God is on their side. Surely they will know that the God who controls heaven and earth is about to do a wonderful thing for them. And this is partly why the book of Joshua is so problematic to a number of scholars. There's a lot of questions about the historicity of the Old Testament narrative and it's a subject that appears to me because they don't have necessarily a lot of archaeological evidence where they would expect them to have. And so a lot of people believe that the book of Joshua essentially was a narrative to confer legitimacy to Israel. And so there's skepticism about the miracles and the idea is that perhaps the book of Joshua is kind of like the televangelist they're making up stories so that people will believe. And then there are moral objections to the question because God tells them this land is occupied by people already but I'm going to move those people out and I'm going to move you in because you are my chosen possession. Part of the difficulty we have with this is, has quite frankly been the Christian use of the book of Joshua. The story of Joshua and the entrance into David has become in many cases a legitimacy story for other land grabs. These stories were used in South Africa to justify moving out the native population with Europeans name. These stories were used in North America to justify moving out native populations with Europeans name. It's very easy for some Christians to read this and say, well, let's do the math. If I got rewards for obedience, I'll be obedient because I want his reward. If I'm obedient, God will prioritize my needs and wants over my enemies. I can find Bible passages that say that. And my obedience legitimizes taking the property, maybe even the lives of my enemies. And this is how Christians have used this book. The difficulty however, is that it's not a particularly Christian approach to the book because just as we saw with the book of Deuteronomy, the book of Joshua should be read in the life of Jesus. One of the things that you might not know is that in fact the word Jesus, which we get from the Greek, is the Greek translation of the word Yeshua, which is the Hebrew, which means Joshua. And so when Jesus comes along and we see Jesus and his name we have to begin to understand there's a conversation going on between the testaments about Joshua and about Jesus. Now let's not take a simplistic path in this and say, seeing the old Joshua was bad and the new Jesus was good but the Bible is by no means that simple. The conversation these two stories are going to have is in fact vitally important and you can't appreciate the second if you dismiss the first. You see the book of Joshua is not simply problematic for modern critical scholars. The book of Joshua was deeply problematic in fact for the contemporaries of Jesus. Because the message of the book of Joshua was that the God of high and the earth who had piled the Jordan up and named this to be his people if they believed in Oade would put them in the land and protect them and keep them from their enemies and exalt them. And by the time he gets to Jesus' mind in fact the land had been occupied by far empires for hundreds of years and at the time of Jesus the people were chafing under the Roman occupation and so their question was this God of heaven and earth this God of wonders, why doesn't this God intervene on our behalf? This God who said he was on my side is letting us live in our pain and suffering. Is that a question we can relate to? I think it's a question all of us can relate to. Because if we read the book of Joshua and you say well it's simple. If you do the right things then God will come in on your side even at the expense of the Iranites and God will give you what you want. If that's what you believe Christianity is you've never really taken a look at Jesus. Because that in fact is the puzzle of the new Joshua. The old Joshua or we'll get to the end of the book and we'll talk about how successful it was. But the old Joshua seemed to have a simple formula send in the money, be obedient miracles will happen for you. And so people all over sent in the money tried to be obedient and the miracle doesn't happen. What are you supposed to think? Why doesn't God kick out the Romans? Jesus contemporaries ask. Why doesn't God give us back the land promised to us? Why doesn't Jesus if you take a secular line and say miracles are all gooey. Then you have another problem with Jesus because nobody did more miracles than Jesus. And so Jesus in fact doesn't eliminate the Joshua question Jesus heightens the Joshua question because Jesus comes and does these astounding miracles. Spilling the storm is in many ways parallel to stopping the waters of the Jordan River. And Jesus who could spill a storm could keep it rain and a drought. And Jesus who could heal many why doesn't he heal me? Jesus heightens the question. He doesn't dismiss it. But the real question in the book of Joshua is the question who will inherit the earth? And that's ironically the same question that the televangelists tempt. Folks will. Don't you want houses? See I've got a big one. Don't you want land? See I've got land. Don't you want a nice car? Look at my car. Look at my airplane. We need 63 million dollars for the ministry for my airplane. Who will inherit the earth? You see the world says the strong inherit the earth. That's kind of a good point. The strong do inherit the earth. The moralists say the morally strong will inherit the earth. The televangelist says if you send me money you will inherit the earth. Now I ask you if you know your Bible who does Jesus say will inherit the earth? And you have to ask Jesus have you been paying attention? Do you know the definition of the meek? Nobody listens to that. They have no power. They are ignored. They are abused. They are pushed away because they are unimportant. And Jesus stands before them and says blessed are the meek for they will inherit the earth. And you thought miracles were hard to believe. See the truth of the book of Joshua is not that Israel is strong but that Israel is weak and you see this again and again throughout the book. The point of the book of Joshua follows the book of Exodus and the book of Numbers where Israel realizes she's no match for the false cities of Canaan. She cannot inherit the land. She has no power. And the Lord says I will give you the land. The book of Joshua is right when it says the God of heaven and earth can give life to whomever he pleases. He can give land to whomever he pleases. There's your little boy. There right there. No you're fine. There you go. Blessed are the children. There he is. And this is the point isn't it? Israel is weak and should be meek. It is God's right to give and take away and this is part of our struggle as human beings and almost everything in our culture says you have the right to be autonomous and to declare what you will over this world in your own life. And I hear the culture saying that and I think you're selling people. A bag of goods. Yeah for a while if you're young and you're strong and you're beautiful and you're healthy and you have opportunity and you're going to the right place you'll have a lot of options. But you know in the scheme of this world it is not true. We are only human beings. And we live a short time and that's the way life is. Jesus becomes the Christian interpretive key of the book of Joshua. You see the hoxford preachers they pray on me. They sell the prey for me. And here's the thing sometimes people say ah it's all a bunch of fraud but I've seen enough and I've heard enough people that said you know I was healed in a ministry of a pastor who was a fraud. And people say well how could that be true? And I say because it's simple. God hears the prayers of the meek even if the pastor is an idiot. God be praised. Because you are not blessed by the correctness of your pastor. You're not blessed by the morality of your pastor. You're not blessed by the theology. You may be cursed by the theology or you're not. But you're not blessed if this theology is correct. You are blessed by the goodness of God. And this is a point that Jesus makes sometimes. He says some preach from all kinds of motives. But God is free and he listens to the cares and the cries of the meek and he answers their prayers. And so my challenge to you is to read Joshua and do you believe he can stop a river? I do. Because stopping a river is nothing compared to the declaration that the meek will inherit the earth. Do you believe that he can raise the dead? This is the point of the resurrection. Jesus is meek. He's strong but he becomes weak. He becomes meek for our sake. And this world does to Jesus what it does to us all and what it always does to the meek. And Jesus comes out of the tomb and says the strong taking the weak will not be the final say of planet earth. That brings us to Jesus and it brings us before him with open empty hands and we have to say, Lord I have no morality to impress you with. My money you don't fundamentally need. My smarts and my beauty all came from you. I can't take credit for them. All I can bring to you is my need. Won't you fill me? And this is exactly the posture we need before him. If we are to believe that, it is not the strong who inherit the earth but it is the meek. Which is in fact the point of the entire book of Joshua. So where do we stand? Are you still trying to impress God with your morality, with your loyalty, with your knowledge with your allegiance? My invitation to you is to come to him with your open hands and say, Lord you are great and small. I am your servant. Do with me as you will. Here are my needs. Do your will through me. Let's pray. Lord you are great and we are small. You are powerful and we are decaying. You are in control and we are susceptible to viruses, to cancer, to economic downturns, to traffic accidents, to relational upheavals. May we not come to you trying to impress you. Then may we come to you as we are. Just open our hands to you and ask you to save us. Here are our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Will you stand? ... ... ... ... ...