https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bEsZkqULJCU

 Hello? Yes. The pastor's life for many of you is a mystery. One of the most common questions I get from people are, what do you do during the week? I do quite a bit actually if you follow me around. But one of the things I do is I read. And I don't just read commentaries, I read magazine articles and blogs and sometimes I listen to sermons that other people are preaching. And one of the things I notice is that almost always I hear, well the church should be and the church should do and Christians should be and Christians should do. Everyone seems to have the message, Christians and the church should do something different. But what nobody can seem to agree on is exactly what to do different. In fact, a lot of times what people are asking for is contradictory. Well people in church should pray more. Oh, almost nobody says people in church should pray less. But some Christians should read their Bible more and other people say, no the Bible has old ideas and it should be ignored. The church should hold the line on sexual ethics. Oh no, the church needs to loosen up about sexuality. Oh, the church should be more liberal or the church should be more conservative. Everyone agrees that the church should perform better but nobody can agree on what better performance would actually look like. And everyone can agree that Christians and churches are wobbly. There are taboo Christians, people who only come to church on Easter or Christmas. Others say no Christians take themselves too seriously. Then there are ignorant Christians, oh Christians who don't know the Bible. And then other people say, well Christians spend too much time in the Bible, they should spend more time doing things. They say, oh there are Christians who are heretical. Oh those Christians are too strict. And then there are immoral Christians or the Christians are too prudish. And then there are post-Christians or Christians who are too conservative or not Christians or Christians are too narrow. So again, everybody can agree that there are wobbly Christians but not everybody is in agreement about what wobbly looks like. And then it comes to the personal relationship with Jesus. This has become a very popular thing in the last hundred years. People should have a personal relationship with Jesus. And what we mean by that is Jesus feels real to you. That you have conversations with Jesus in prayer. Jesus is a very real part of your life. But very quickly people realize that there are people over here who Jesus is a very real part of their life. But Jesus is telling them very different things than what Jesus is telling these people over here. And round and round we go. And then we talk about a saving relationship with Jesus. And we wonder what is the relationship between this saving relationship and a personal relationship. Another of the things that I do is I read a fair amount of history. Because one of the beautiful things about history is it teaches us that being a Christian has been a different thing in very many different kinds of places. And yet the same thing. And to try and figure out when is it a different thing and when is it the same thing. And what things matter and what things don't matter. One of the interesting things about a saving relationship with Jesus is in our culture everything is individual. While I decide for me what I believe and what I should do. And nobody can tell me what to believe and do. But throughout most of human history actually a lot of people decided what you should believe and what you should do. If you read in the book of Acts for example Lydia in the city of Philippi. Lydia meets Paul at the stream outside of the city and she is baptized and she becomes a Christian. And it says right then and the whole household was baptized. And you might think well did they all hear? Did they all make a personal commitment to Jesus? Did they all have a personal relationship with Jesus? Well probably not because in the Roman world the head of the household which was sometimes often a man but in this case it was Lydia. She said okay I'm a Christian now everyone's going to be baptized. And everyone said okay now we're all Christians I guess. And in fact in the Middle Ages that was a common way of Christian evangelism. Bucks would go up into what became the edges of what was the Roman Empire. And they would meet the tribal leader or the king of the region. And they would talk to the king and they would convince the king that the king should be a Christian. And so the king would be baptized and the king would stand in front of his people and say we are all now Christians. And everyone would say okay but wasn't that really mean? Hadn't they been sacrificing the trees and having their little household gods and doing all kinds of other things? What does it mean when the king declares you to be a Christian and well you just kind of keep doing the other things you used to do? Or maybe you substitute Jesus in for the other pagan deity you were worshiping? What does it mean to have a personal relationship versus a saving relationship? I think it's quite a bit more modern. In 1555, September 25, will be coming up on the anniversary of that quite soon, was the Peace of Augsburg. The Protestant Reformation had been making its way through Europe. And Protestants and Lutherans and Reutalvanists and Anabaptists, not quite yet they were coming, were starting to fight each other and there were these bloody wars going on. And they decided we can't keep killing each other over whether you're a Protestant or a Catholic. So they decided, well the Peace of Augsburg said, whoever is ruling, whoever is the prince or the king over this region, everyone in that region will have to be that religion. So one day you might have been a Catholic and then your prince converts and they come to you and say, guess what, you're a Protestant now. Oh, okay. Do I have any say in it? No. This is just how you are and who you are. So in other words, when you read church history, things in some ways get clearer and in other ways get more complicated. Now you might wonder, why are we talking about this kind of thing this morning? The reason is because we're going to be talking about, again, the Book of Judges. And the Book of Judges is in some ways a hardliner book. My daughter Josie sometimes likes to watch Project Runway and I always get a big kick about watching Heidi Klum with her German accent. She looks so nice and sweet but she's very German. She just stands there and says, one day you're in and next day you're out. And she's in a very German way and then someone has lost the context, you're out, take your bags and go. And it's like, my goodness, this woman is hard and cold, one day you're in, next day you're out. And in the Book of Joshua we have God coming into the Promised Land and one day the Canaanites are in, the next day they are out. And Israel is running them out. So on one hand, a lot of people have problems with the Book of Joshua and say, this God doesn't sound very nice. But as we've been going through, in other ways if you read the Book of Joshua, the Book of Joshua is a lot like Jesus. And we looked last week how we had Rahab and Achan. And here you have Rahab who is a pagan Canaanite prostitute who is running a saloon in Fort Jericho. And she sees God coming in the land and she decides, this is my ticket out. And she embraces this God and she hides the slaves at the threat of her life. And God embraces her and her and her whole family suddenly become part of God's household. Now again you have to realize that now Rahab says we're part of Israel, we worship Yahweh and not Baal or Holac or whoever they are worshiping. We all do it now. And then there's Achan who was part of the tribe of Judah and had a nice lineage. And Achan over this very same battle of Jericho, now he's out and he and his whole family are cut off. And you might say, well that doesn't sound very nice, but in another way it's very much like Jesus. Because here the dispossessed, the pagan Canaanite prostitute becomes part of the family of God. And this heir of Judah is cut off. We see Jesus making those kinds of statements often. But this week we meet a group of people who really do seem lousy. On just about any score these people are treacherous, traitors, slimy, cunning, deceitful. And we wonder, can God find room in his kingdom for them? Now Israel is in the land and Israel has gotten the attention of, we mentioned a number of weeks ago, that Canaan is actually made up of all these little city states. And when Egypt rolls through they all abdicate. But when Egypt recedes because it's got its own internal problems, they all kind of pop up and make their way. It's really a line of opportunities. Now all the kings of the west of the Jordan heard about these things, meaning Israel coming in and conquering Jericho, Ai. The kings of the hill country and the western foot-bells and all along the entire coast of the Mediterranean Sea, as far as Leviton, the kings of the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hittites and Genoeseites, they came together to wage war against Joshua and Israel. However, when the people of Gimian heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and Ai, they resorted to her wounds. They lived as a delegation whose doffes were loaded with worn out sacks and old wine scams, cracked and knitted, and they put worn and packed sandals on their feet and wore old clothes. All the bread of their food supply was dry and moldy. And when they went to Joshua and the camp at Gilgol and said to him, to the Israelites, we have come from a distant country. Make a treaty with us. In other words, they're really right next door, but they put on all these old clothes and they grab this old food and they decide they're going to fool Joshua and Israel. The Israelites said to the Hittites, but perhaps you live near us, so how can we make a treaty with you? We are your servants, they said to Joshua. But Joshua asked, who are you and where do you come from? They answered, your servants have come from a very distant country because of the name of the Lord your God. We have heard reports of him and all he did in Egypt. Rule number one, if you're a con man, play to the vanity of your audience. And so here they come. And the Israelites sampled their provisions but did not inquire of the Lord. It's interesting that the Lord did not tap on anyone's shoulder either. Then Joshua made a treaty of peace with them to let them live and the leaders of the assembly ratified it by oath. Three days after they made the treaty with the Gideonites, the Israelites heard that they were their neighbors living near them. So the Israelites set out and on the third day they came to their cities, Gideon, Kephira, Barof, and Kiryat Jerem. But the Israelites did not attack them because the leaders of the assembly had sworn an oath to them by the Lord, the God of Israel, and the whole assembly rumbled against the leaders. This is an amazing situation because here these guys pour complete cod on Joshua and the leaders who have not done due diligence either with the Lord or even taking a little walk a little way from now. And they sign a peace treaty with them and then they discover three days later that the whole thing was bogus but they honor it. And they honor it and then all the people who are probably thinking, we'd really like to roll in here and take their cities and take their lands and take their power and enslave them. And Joshua will later say, sorry you can't do that because we signed a peace treaty with them. And you think, what kind of situation is this? And then they really begin to ask, where is God in a situation like this? Now Joshua is not real happy because he realizes he's been cod. Then Joshua summoned the Guineanites and said, why did you deceive us by saying we live a long way from you? Why do you live near us? You are now under a curse. You will never be released from service as woodcutters and water carriers for the house of my God. Then Joshua, they answered Joshua, your servants were clearly told how the Lord your God had commanded his servant Moses to give you the whole land and to light out all of his inhabitants before you. So we fear for our lives because of you. And this is why we give this. We are now in your hands. Do to us whatever seems good and right to you. So Joshua saved them from the Israelites and they did not kill them. So in other words, there's some consequences for this, but in a sense the Guineanites did exactly what they wanted. You know, we know we'll be your vassal. And actually in the way the ancient world worked, they're basically a vassal of a stronger power. And Joshua feels cod and a little angry and sore, but in a sense the Guineanites got the deal they wanted. Who esteems the Guineanites? No one. Because they deceive, they lie, they cheat, they got what they wanted. And here's Joshua and the people of Israel having to stand up and do the right thing for these lying, cheating, stealing people. But it's actually going to get worse. Because the Guineanites didn't just cheat Israel. Now the rest of the Canaanites are sore at them because they betrayed them. Now Adam and Isaiah, king of Jerusalem, heard that Joshua had taken Ai and totally destroyed it, due to Ai and its kings and gifts, up to Jericho and its king. And all the people of Gibeon had made a treaty with Israel and become their allies. He and his people were very much alarmed at this because Gibeon was an important city, like one of the royal cities. It was larger than Ai and it's networked with fighters. In other words, we don't get the sense that Gibeon is poor, we don't get the sense that Gibeon is stupid or weak. Gibeon is just crafty. And so the Canaanites are angry at Gibeon too. So he and his people were very much alarmed at this. So Adam and Isaiah, king of Jerusalem, appealed to Honeth, king of Ebron, Pyro, king of Jarva, and Jebiah, king of Lachish, and Deir, king of Egron, come up and help me attack Gibeon. And he said, because he had made peace with Joshua and the Israelites. So then you wonder, well what should God do for Gibeon? If I had been in Joshua's shoes, part of me would feel like saying, Oh, you conned us? Why don't you let these other kids clean your clock? And what Joshua does actually is in fact go to war on behalf of Gibeon. And again you have to wonder, what kind of a dupe is Joshua? And what kind of a dupe is God? Actually in fact, God keeps the treaty because we find way at the book, at the end of the book of 2 Samuel, that Saul, who was from the tribe of Benjamin, which is right there with Gibeah, Saul when he became king of Israel decided he didn't like the Gibeonites either. So he started killing them and taking their land. And at the end of the book of 2 Samuel, the Lord comes to David and says, Saul did wrong by the Gibeonites. So you have to make it right for the Gibeonites. And again you have to ask, these Gibeonites, these are horrible people. Why doesn't God just wipe them off the face of the earth? Or why doesn't God just ignore them and let other people have that? And this gets us to the question of what is Jesus like? Now a few weeks ago I introduced you to the concept of the coconut, the tomato and the pear. Because some say Jesus is like a coconut. It's hard on the outside and Jesus has rules. And if you break the rules you're done. So we say the Gibeonites uniseed us, we don't have a contract with you. I'll let the other Gibeonites destroy you. But Jesus is not like a coconut. Sometimes you want Jesus to be like a tomato. And then they would say, oh you poor Gibeonites. You're just misunderstood. You didn't really mean wrong when you deceived us. And now we have to go to war to save you from your other pagan neighbors. Oh I'm sure it's all fine. I think Jesus is like a tomato. That's that. It's squishy all the way through. And actually the person who came up with this illustration said, actually Jesus is more like a tomato. He's kind of soft on the outside. But unlike a tomato he has a core. And unlike a tomato he has substance. And unlike a tomato he actually has ideas and right and wrong and a backbone. So he's not a coconut that will crush you from the beginning. He's not a tomato that has no substance. He's both soft and substantive. And we see that with Gibeon. Because the Lord defends Gibeon who deserve no justice. And we see that in Jesus in this interesting little story. Jesus is invited to the home of the Pharisees. When one of the Pharisees invited Jesus to have dinner with him, he went to the Pharisees' home and reclined at the table. A woman in that town who lived a sinful life learned that Jesus was leading at the Pharisee's house. Now again and again and again in the Gospels you'll hear that Jesus is a friend of prostitutes. Now on one hand you can hear that and say, well Jesus sleeps with prostitutes. Well that isn't really in character with who Jesus is. Another one might ask, well is Jesus okay with the subjugation of Jewish girls who are forced into prostitution because of the poverty of the Roman Empire? I wouldn't say Jesus is okay with that either. So then how can we think about Jesus and the Pharisees and his prostitute? So Jesus is at the home of the Pharisees. He's eating at the Pharisees' house. And this sinful woman comes in. And she comes in with an alabaster jar of perfume. And now again an alabaster jar of perfume is a very expensive item. And you might say, well how did this poor Jewish girl get this expensive item? She earned it on her back. As she stood beside him and his feet weeping. She began to wet his feet with her tears. And then she wiped them with her hair, kissed them, and poured perfume on them. So is Jesus like a coconut, a tomato, or a peach? And when the Pharisees who had invited this saw this, he said to himself, if this man were a prophet, he would know who is touching him. And what kind of woman she is, is that she is a sinner. Now you might wonder why, what's with the touching? Is that a sexual thing? No, it's actually a religious thing. Because the assumption is that this woman earned the money for the alabaster jar by having intimate contact with Roman soldiers, which would defile her ceremonially, and that defilement would pass off to Jesus. And so the Pharisee says, if Jesus knew what he was doing, he wouldn't even let this woman touch her. And Jesus answered in excitement, I had something to tell you. Please tell me teacher, he said. Two people owed money to a certain money lender. One owed him 500 denarii and the other 50. Neither of them had the money to pay him back, so he forgave the debts of both. Now which of them will love him more? Simon replied, I suppose the one who had the bigger debt forgiven. You have judged correctly, Jesus said. And he turned towards the woman and said to Simon, do you see this woman? I came to your house. You did not give me any water for my feet, but she wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair. You did not give me a kiss, but this woman from the time I entered has not stopped pissing my feet. You did not put oil on my head, but she has poured perfume on my feet. Therefore I tell you, her many sins have been forgiven, as her great love has shown. But whoever has been forgiven little, loves little. Then Jesus said to her, your sins are forgiven. The other guests began saying along with themselves, who is this who even forgives sins? And Jesus said to the woman, your faith has saved you, go in peace. Now what does this story have to do with the Gideonites? You don't see the Gideonites showing anywhere near the kind of dedication, expression, remorse or sorrow. But what we learn from the Gideonites is the story of Joshua. Now when Joshua's group is coming into this land and clearing it out for the people of God, that this lying, steamy, deceiving group comes in and basically carves for themselves out a place in God's kingdom. And God says, I'll tolerate that. They can stay. I'll even protect them. God gives time for wobbly people. Now what God I think is looking for is what we see in the story of Jesus and the Pharisee. But in this world of wobbly people, our Lord makes room for them, often room in the church. And you might say, well the church should be full of better people. Well, yeah, we know I like people to be better. But the church is also full of wobbly people who wobble one way or another. And I think that's what God wants. Not that they be wobbly, but that they be His. The greatest thing that comes back is always, Christians shouldn't be so judgmental. The church shouldn't be so judgmental. But can you make that statement without being judgmental? You can't judge the church without being judgmental and not be judgmental yourself. You see how the gospel works is this. At some point we realize who we really are. We look in the mirror and we say, well sometimes we say, oh I'm pretty good. I'm better than others. And we stand with the Pharisee looking down at the tax collector at the temple in another one of Jesus' parables. But there are times when we mess up so bad that we have to look in the mirror and say, why would God let a wobbly Christian like me in His kingdom? And that's the first sane thought we have. Because then we realize that if there's going to be a way to make it in this world, it's only going to be with Jesus. And then we try and find a way in. And maybe we think, well if I pay a lot of money in the offering, I can get in with Jesus. Well, put all the money you want in. But it's not your money that gets you in with Jesus. Well if I do this, then I can get in with Jesus. And the point is, the heart of it is, you need to want Him. And you need to want to be with Him. And in fact, Jesus will go a long time with you as you wobble around waiting for us to see ourselves for who we are and to see Him for who He is. And then to make the turn, the third point, the gratitude to say, I can't do anything to save myself. I'm a wobbly person. Even after I become a Christian, I'm still wobbly. But I notice Jesus is loving and patient. And the big point isn't that I earn my way into Him, but that He takes me and invites me in, even while I'm wobbly. And as I turn, continue to live for Him and with Him, I begin to wobble less. Not out of fear, not out of judgment, but out of joy. See, the thing is, you can't look down on others without taking a position of superiority yourself. And the beautiful thing about Jesus is He's right there down at the bottom with us, even though He doesn't wobble a bit. He's soft on the outside, but He's hard on the inside, because He's real. And so yeah, you know what? You live in a country of Gideonites. And there are lots of con people, and they're in the church, and they're doing all kinds of muddy things. And Jesus says, yes, I know. And I'm there too. And I'm waiting, and I'm longing, and I'm moving, and I'm working. And I want even the wobbly to come to me. Let's pray. Lord, we are the wobbly. And in fact, we are especially wobbly in the eyes of others. We look across the church and say, they should behave this way. They should behave that way. We look out to the world, and boy, we can only go from there. But the truth is, this God who would protect the Gideonites, who are just a thousand people, is the same God who accepts us, because we're a thousand people. Maybe stop the pretense of our imagined righteousness, or our imagined holiness, or our imagined superiority, and recognize that against you, we are wobbly. And you ask us to repent. And you ask us to come here. And you ask us to let us be cleaned by you, because only you can make us whole. May we have the good sense to see ourselves as we really are, and to see that you are our only shot in this world, and to live out of gratitude. In our prayer, in the name of Jesus, Amen. Will you stand? Will you stand?