https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gRdFf3qxgjs

 back in the Old Testament, a little bit more this summer, finishing up this book of numbers. And whenever I'm back in the Old Testament, I hear many voices, not so much of people in the Church, but many friends and family outside of the Church, that have real objections to the Old Testament. They find it an obstacle. You know, many believers think that the Old Testament is a liability. That the God we find in it is petty, demanding, and cruel. This objection actually you can find all the way back to the second century with Marcion, who was a bishop who wanted to get the Old Testament out of the Christian Bible and just read Luke and the teachings of Paul. And many believe today that we've evolved beyond all of this. And this morning's story will probably make some of you think the same way. In the first month, the whole Israelite community arrived at the desert of Zin. And they stayed at Kedach, where Miriam died and was buried. This is a little indicator of some of what we will see in the rest of the story. And Miriam was the sister of Moses, one who had Moses and Aaron once got together and decided that God talks to us just like he does to Moses. And then some things transpired. In fact, the book of Lembers is mostly about rebellion. Now there was no water for the community, and the people gathered in opposition to Moses and Aaron. And they quarreled with Moses and said, if only we had died when our brothers fell dead before the Lord, why did you bring the Lord's community into this wilderness that we and our livestock should die here? Why did you bring us out of Egypt to this terrible place? It has no grain or figs, grapevines or pomegranates, and there is no water to drink. Moses and Aaron went from the assembly to the tent entrance to the tent of the meeting and fell face down. And the glory of the Lord appeared to them. The Lord said to Moses, take the staff, you and your brother Aaron, gather the assembly together, speak to that rock before their eyes. It must have been some rock that was prominent in that area. Speak to that rock that is before their eyes, and it will pour out its water. He will bring water out of the rock for the community so that they and their livestock can drink. So Moses took the staff from the Lord's presence, just as he commanded him. He and Aaron gathered the assembly together in front of the rock, and Moses said to them, listen you rebels, must we bring you water out of this rock? Then Moses raised his arm and struck the rock twice with his staff. Water gushed out and the community and their livestock drank. Now a little quiz for you to see if you are paying attention. What went wrong? He struck the rock instead of speaking to the rock. Does that sound like a big deal? But the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, because you did not trust me enough to honor me as holy in the sight of the Israelites, you will not bring this community into the land I give you back. These were the waters of Barabbas where the Israelites quarreled with the Lord and wherever he was through holy among them. Now this story has caused a lot of head scratching and a lot of beard stroking and a lot of conversations probably ever since it happened and it was And the great debate has been, was this thing so bad? Moses struck the rock instead of speaking to it. And so what tends to happen in the community of preachers and teachers who study the Bible is a conversation develops. And what tends to happen is more and more people begin to wade in. What exactly did Moses do wrong? Now obviously he struck the rock instead of speaking to it. But is that so bad? Because in a sense the punishment seems severe. Moses, all of this work that you've been doing, all of this leadership that you've been doing, now you're suddenly disqualified. And if you read the book of Numbers, most of us empathize with Moses because again and again and again in the story the people come to Moses and they complain and then Moses gets close to God and God isn't happy and Moses is almost always caught in the middle. And here now after maybe 37 years in the desert, here we have it all over again and Moses has just about had it. If this isn't back towards the end of the desert wandering, Moses is over 100. He is not a young man. He is tired of all of this stuff. And I think many of us can identify with him when he goes out with the rod and he's just angry. And so he says to the people, you rebels! Do we need to strike this rock and bring water out to you? And he just, and so he hits it twice so bad. Water comes out and then the Lord says to him, because you didn't consider me holy enough to trust me, you will not see the promised land. And so of course scholars multiply theories. It's disobedience. God hold in one thing, Moses did the other thing. The penalty for disobedience? There it is. Lack of faith. You get that from the verse. Moses maybe didn't believe God could do this, but Moses had done this exact same thing before. Why wouldn't he have believed God? Maybe it was taking credit for God's miracles. Moses stands there and says, must we bring water out of the rock? Moses didn't say, must God bring water out of the rock? So maybe Moses was taking credit for God. Maybe it was just anger and violence. Moses is punished because he lost his temper and he got violent and maybe that's why God disqualifies him for the promised land. Others have noted that it would have been a cooler miracle if Moses had just talked to the rock and water would have come out. But instead Moses did it. So it was a lesser miracle. This conversation in fact has been going on for thousands of years until one exasperated Jewish scholar makes this observation. Moses, our teacher, committed one sin, but our commentators have peeped on him 13 or more, each one of them having invented a fresh one. I have therefore hitherto refrained from going into this problem for fear that I might attribute a new sin to Moses. What's interesting again is some of you know that this seems to be a replay of the story of Exodus 17, but the people were thirsty for water there and they grumbled against Moses, why did you bring us up out of Egypt to make us and our children in livestock die of thirst? And Moses cried out to the Lord, what am I to do with these people? They are almost ready to stone me. The Lord answered Moses, go out in front of the people, take with you some of the elders of Israel and take in your hand the staff with which you struck the Nile and go. And I will stand there before you at the rock of Horus, strike the rock and water will come out of it for the people to drink. So Moses did this in the sight of the elders of Israel and water came out. And there's another question, why would the Lord say go take the rock and take it with you? Why would the Lord say go take the rod, but then he doesn't tell him to do anything with the rock? There's a lot that's strange about this story and we can't figure it out. Edmund Clowney, who was a professor at Westminster in Philadelphia, talks about the first story and the second story together. When Moses struck the rock in Exodus 17, the first time, a stream of life giving water flowed out into the desert. When Christ was crucified, John tells us that blood and water poured from his side. In reminding us of the water as well as the blood, John recalls for us the cry of Jesus at the beach. At Calvary there flowed from his heart the streams of living water. The water that Christ gives is the water of the Holy Spirit. The breath of the risen Christ symbolizes the gift of the Spirit. So as the water that flows with the blood of the crucified, the spirit of life is given to Christ's death. We do not wonder that Moses was judged severely for striking the rock the second time when he had been told to speak to him. Only once, at his appointed time, does God bear the stroke of our doom. And I think Clowney makes a good point here, especially on the Exodus story, because the Exodus story is told in such a way that in a sense what God sets up with Moses with the staff and the Lord standing before Moses in a sense in judgment before the people is that God strikes himself and that as Clowney shows very much sets up the sacrifice of Christ and what we'll be talking about in terms of the suffering. But what I want to focus on this morning is actually something I'm focused on by anyone which is the punishment. Because there are there's a lot of rebellion in the book of Numbers and God is fully capable of meeting judgment in different ways. In fact when the sons of Aaron bring strange fire, something we talked about a number of months ago, fire comes out from the Holy of Holies and consumes them. When Korah and his crew rebel against them, the ground opens up and swallows them. The punishment that Moses is given is interestingly enough exactly the same punishment that the spies who go into the land and come back and say the Lord can't take us in is the same punishment that Moses is given. And I think in almost all of these cases the punishments for rebellion in the book of Numbers tend to reflect the nature of the rebellion. And that gets us into the question why can't Moses and Aaron go into the promised land? And I think it has something to do with what happens in this situation. In 1920, 5% of Americans lived alone. Today, 27% do. What changed? I asked this to the Sunday class this morning and the first answer I think Marty gave it was individualism. And I think she's right. Now there are a lot of economic factors, there's a lot of social factors, and so I don't want to press this point too hard, but the change is dramatic. I think in many ways part of the reason we can live alone is that we can afford to live alone, but part of the reason we want to live alone is we have a hard time getting along with each other. This is the funny thing about people. We both need each other and are annoyed by each other. We both don't want to be alone but can't stand one another. Have you ever thought about what the promised land is to Israel? Right from the start when the Lord rescued them from Egypt, the goal of this entire enterprise is I am going to establish you in the land and live in your midst. And the whole period between getting into the promised land and going to the promised land, which in fact in the book of Numbers involves the death of an entire generation, is all about the fact that we and God can't get along. And the fact that we can't get along is usually made possible by God not pressing his presence into our point and into our world. You see when C.S. Lewis wrote his book The Great Divorce, he imagines hell, and you might think this sounds like heaven, to be a world in which you can have absolutely anything you want just by thinking about it. And so the visitor who comes off the bus and finds himself in this strange city comes into the city and is amazed by the beautiful buildings that are surrounding him. But the strange thing is that this city is full of buildings, but there don't seem to be any people in it. And then he meets someone and he explains, yeah, there's a lot of buildings because we keep building houses, but we can't get along with our neighbors. So then we move a little bit further out to build the next house, but then someone moves closer. So he says some of the really famous ones, if you want to meet them, you really have to go a long ways because the city just keeps going because people just try to get away from one another. And what Lewis's point is is that if this is true about us, what would it be like to live with God? Imagine living with someone who is perfect. Some of you say, the person I live with is far from perfect. Okay, but think about someone who is perfect and right and beautiful and glorious and in whose presence all of your imperfections and shortcomings and failures are obvious and evident. We like to imagine, oh, when I go to heaven it'll be wonderful, but listen carefully to the things we kind of focus on when we look to heaven. I'll be able to eat anything I want and not get fat. I'll be able to see this and meet this person. We seldom think about the central focus of heaven, which is in fact God and his glory. And I have to ask myself, how much of God do I really want? I remember growing up as a boy in church and I always kind of got the impression that church was going to be a law of worship service, in fact an eternal worship service. And being a boy, I thought that sounds a lot more like hell because I couldn't even sit through an hour. And it leads us to the question, is God a control freak? Because we look at these desert wanderings and we find that God and his people seldom get along and whenever they don't get along with God the people suffer. But the irony again is that most complaints about God today or grounds for this believing in God have more to do with his absence or his negligence. Something bad happens and we ask, why didn't God prevent that? Why did God stop this? Why did God let these bad things happen in my life? Few people say, why won't God leave me alone? The real question of the Bible is, can heaven and earth be reconciled? In fact the story starts in a garden and what happens when the man and the woman get ideas of their own to take from the tree and remake the world in their own image, God comes into the garden and the first thing they do is what? Did they say, Lord we have a great new plant for the world? No, they ate the fruit and the first thing that they noticed was they were naked. And so they hid themselves and the Lord comes into the garden and he says, where are you? We're hiding. Why are you hiding? Because we're naked. Who told you you were naked? You had always been naked before and were never afraid of me. What about us makes us hide? What about us fears showing ourselves wholly to God? The man and the woman are divorced from God and we tend to, the reason we can't get along with each other is we tend to have two conflicting desires. On the one is autonomy. I want things my way, I want to do things my way. I want to be able to control myself and be whoever I want to be. But the second thing is control. I want to be whoever I want to be and I want you to affirm me as I imagine myself to be. And in fact if even a part of this equation falls short, we tend to get nasty or we tend to move away. You see we wish the world to see itself and ourselves as we wish it to be. And I think we begin to see some of what Moses falls into in this moment. And I don't know if we can just pick out one of these things or if it's everything on the list or how it exactly is, but in this moment, Moses becomes his own savior and lord. And the entire project is no longer about life with God, it's about Moses being sick to death of these ornery people. I think in a sense this is Moses, Caitlyn, Jenner moment. Because at this point Moses sees himself in a particular way, in a particular light, and the man that got to the top of the mountain is the man that got to the bottom of the mountain. And I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that is how we all are. Deep in our hearts, we long to be the center of the world and arrange the world according to what we imagine is good and right and beautiful. The other question that's never asked about this story is this. Why does water come from the rock? Now, there's no question that this story is designed to be seen as a miracle story. I don't think there's any question that after decades of living in the desert, the children of Israel knew how to find fresh water. There was no water to be found. And so, in fact, Moses goes out, the people not knowing what the Lord had told him to do, Moses goes out, takes the rod, and strikes the rock twice. And I'm sure all the people, some of those who at least had heard the story of the last time this had happened thought, oh yeah, this is the script. We don't have water. Moses takes the rod, goes out, hits the rock, water comes out, we'll all be okay. But you see, if I were God, I would have arranged this story differently. I would have had Moses go out with that rock and say, okay, Moses, you're so big and bad, go ahead and beat up that rock. Beat up that rock until your little arms are tired, until that little staff is piled up quick. Just beat, beat, beat, beat, beat. I'm not going to give any water. But what happens? Moses goes out there, strikes the rock twice, and water flows. And so, what happened? God gave Moses and the children of Israel the water they needed even through Moses' disobedience. This is a strange thing. Because don't we imagine that God only works? You know, there's this wonderful saying, God can't bless this mess. And the idea behind that idea is we first need to get our own house in order, and then God can bless us. But in this story, it's even in the midst of Moses' disobedience that God steps in and says, Moses, I will bless the people through you even as you disobey me. And God doesn't show up and say, Moses, you've rebelled and strike him down. God doesn't do any of that. God, in a sense, lets Moses have his idolatry and blesses the people through him. And only after comes to him and says, Moses, you're not fit to live with me. See, this is the same that we see when Jesus hangs on a cross. When we take Jesus and we mock him and we beat him and we hang him on the cross, and the mockers around him say, he saved others. He could not save himself. In the midst of our rebellion, God blesses and gives us what we need. You see, every week I tell you three little words. Misery, deliverance, gratitude. The misery is we are ardent self-salvationists. We are just like Moses. We are consistent, committed people who think we can qualify ourselves from the promised land. And at each point we are shown we cannot qualify for the promised land. We are disqualified. In fact, there's nothing we can do to qualify for it. And so God comes to us even in the midst of our rebellion and says, you can never get yourself there. I have to make your way for you. If I wait for you to be ready to live for me, you will never get there. So I will go to the cross and you will mock me and say, he can't even save himself. And he will say, no, I am saving others by not saving myself. Even Christians read this text as a warning or a guide to avoid and control some God. I think that's why the commentators and Bible readers have thought, I need to find out exactly what Moses did so I can avoid that. And I think part of the point of this story is that even a great man like Moses, the most humble person that ever lived, can't avoid it. What hope do you have? You see, we get the idea that if we can avoid sin, we can avoid our need for Jesus. And I think the point of this story is exactly this. There's no avoiding our need for him. The only path is to him. You see, if we have failed, that's why we need a savior. Because what Christianity is not is a do-it-yourself religion. And I think what this story is about is receiving the land of rest, not qualifying for it. Because what we tend to do is grab the rods of God and use them to beat on rocks and beat on neighbors or beat on ourselves, beat on something in order to get the water. And what Jesus does is invite us to the table. Because he doesn't ask us to qualify for this meal, he gives it to us. And that is the heart of the gospel. And what we are is invited to live with him, not against him. To be conformed to the image of his son, not to try to qualify to be his son. So on the night Jesus was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he didn't say, this is for you who have chosen wisely to be my disciples. He said, this is for you. And they didn't understand. That the next day, of course, he would be beaten, he would be mocked, he would be tried, he would be executed. And so what he had given them the evening before suddenly took meaning. This is your spiritual food. This is your spiritual drink. Receive him. You don't qualify. You can only receive. Amen.