https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9IEqvKBOER4

 Once upon a time, two researchers named Medzveth and Wilson set up camp at their local mall and laid out four pairs of nylon stockings across the table. They then asked female pastors by which of the four they liked best. The women voted, and by and large they preferred the pair on the right side. Why? Some of them said they liked the material more. Some said they liked the texture or the color. Others felt that the quality was the highest. This preference was interesting, considering that all four pairs of stockings were identical. Medzveth and Wilson later repeated the experiment with nightgowns and found exactly the same results. When Medzveth and Wilson questioned each participant about the rationale behind their choice, not one of them cited placement of the stockings on the table. Even when the researchers told the women that all the stockings were identical and that there was simply a preference for the right-handed pair, the women denied it. Usually with a worried glance at the interviewer, suggesting that they felt either that they had misunderstood the question or were dealing with a bad man. The moral of this story? We may not always know exactly why we do what we do, choose what we choose, or feel what we feel, but the obscurity of our real motivations doesn't stop us from creating perfectly logical-sounding reasons for our actions, decisions, and feelings. So let me ask you this question. After it was revealed to the women that all the stockings were identical, were the women lying about their reasons? That's hard. If you've ever noticed with young children, often if you ask a young child why they did something, their first answer is, I don't know, and actually that's probably the best answer. But we don't usually accept that answer, and so we keep pushing them, and so they make up new answers that we may or may not be satisfied with, but in all likelihood, the first answer, I don't know, was the truest one. In a commencement speech at Caltech in 1974, the physician Richard Feynman told graduates, The first principle is that you must not fool yourself, and you are the easiest person to fool. As we have seen so far, we human beings are formed by a fundamental conflict, our deeply ingrained propensity to lie to ourselves and others, and the desire to think of ourselves as good and honest people. So we justify our dishonesty by telling ourselves stories about why our actions are acceptable, and sometimes even admirable. Indeed, we're pretty skilled at pulling the wool over our own eyes. The fourth commandment says this, You shall not bear false witness against your neighbors, and every now and then, I'm chagrined when I open, I check different Bible translations, and in the hopes of making this clearer for people, they translate the commandment, You shall not lie. And every time I see that, I think, aren't they breaking the commandment they're trying to tell us to do by translating it that way? Because the command does not say, You shall not lie. The command says, You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. And of all the commands, it's one of the clearest. It's the most specific, and it basically says, If you are to not make trumped-up charges against your neighbor, and if you are called to testify for it, you should testify truthfully. So then why does everyone want to understand this commandment as, You shall not lie, when the commandment itself does not say, You shall not lie? Would that itself be to lie? You can discover, however, that if you're looking for the Bible to tell us not to lie, the Bible does this quite often, in fact, repeatedly and in very stark terms. Leviticus 1911, Do not steal, do not lie, do not deceive one another. Psalm 3413, Keep your tongue from evil and your lips from telling lies. John 8, 42-44, Jesus said to them, If God were your Father, you would love me, for I have come here from God. I have not come on my own, God sent me. Why is my language not clear to you? Because you aren't able to hear what I say. You belong to your Father, the devil, and you want to carry out your Father's desires. He was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth. For there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the father of lies. When Jesus said this, did he mean that the people he was addressing were the literal sons of the devil? Revelation 21, but the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, we hope that doesn't mean forest, where is forest? The idolaters and all liars, they will be consigned to the fiery lake of burning sulfur. This is the second death. So in other words, it's quite clear that the Bible does not say you should lie. In fact, many times the Bible says lying is a bad thing. And it's a terrible thing and it's something that is rightly subject to judgment. And in fact, this isn't just a church thing. People universally don't like liars. And to be called a liar is a strong accusation. Luce Meads, if you want a good book on the 10th Amendment, Luce Meads wrote this book a number of years ago, but I've been reading it as I've been going through the series and I found it's really a very good book. Luce Meads points out, however, that lying takes a lot of different shapes, often a lot of different shapes we look at and basically say that's not so bad or sometimes we'd better. If someone asks you, do these pants make my butt look big? Hmm, how should one answer that question? Why yes, dear, it makes your butt look enormous. They might think that's a good thing, maybe not. Youth-a-vis-a-vis. This room smells like roses. Well, okay. Exaggerations. If I told you a thousand times, well you probably didn't, so that probably is a lie. Glosses kind of smoothing things over. Actually this issue of lying, if you read Tory Tenboom's book, The Hiding Place, has a lot going on it because one of her sisters took this command, you shall not lie, very seriously and they had a trap door under their kitchen table where they would hide the young men of the family. So when the Germans would come around trying to round up the young men and force them to press service or put them to prison, the young men would go under this trap door under the table. So one time when the Germans rushed in, they said, where are your young men? And she said, under the table. And the Germans looked under the table, not seeing the young men, got furious and laughed. And of course Tory's sister says, see, if you tell the truth, God always protects you. Little later in the book, when they were hiding Jews, her sister told the truth and went to prison. So what does this command mean and what do we attach to it? In fact, it gets even more complicated. Loosening goes on to say that casual lying erodes our sense of truthfulness. We lie to evade or deny reality. When we lie, we keep reality and therefore freedom from those we are in community with. If someone is behaving poorly and they don't know it, perhaps telling them will be a blessing. Or perhaps they won't have the kind of maturity or discernment to hear them tell you this and they will curse you and simply continue. Should lying be connected with outcomes? When we lie, Loosmead says, we nurture cynicism. When we tend to disbelieve what we hear from others and often towards the negative. Many of you know, if you're old enough to remember the Soviet Union, the official newspaper of the Soviet Union was named Pravda. And Pravda in Russian means truth. And as most of you know, Pravda was their chief organ of propaganda. And quite a number of interesting sociological studies after the fall of the Soviet Union looked at how the people dealt with their government. And if you continue to get used to lying from your government, soon you don't believe anything the government says, even when it is speaking the truth. And this takes away something from a society in terms of how it can operate. But then again, there are some very interesting passages in the Bible. One of them, second came six. Elisha is in a city and the Syrians, Elisha has been telling the king the movement of the Syrians and what's been going on. And the king of Assyria wants Elisha dead. So the king of Assyria hears that Elisha is in the city and he sends his army down to capture Elisha. So as the enemy came towards him, Elisha prayed to the Lord, strike this army with blindness. So he struck them with blindness as Elisha had asked. Elisha told them, this is not the road and this is not the city. Follow me and I will lead you to the man you are looking for. And he led them to Samaria, where in fact he leads the blind army into Samaria until they are surrounded by the Israelite army. And at which point the king of Israel says, what shall I do? Do you kill them all? And Elisha says, no, give them a good meal and send them home. But this has caused a lot of discussion for theologians who say, this is a lie. And so one reformed theologian, Murray, decides he's going to engage with this. He believes this is not a lie. An uncivil interpreter of this account might say, Elisha lied to the soldiers in self-defense. Why not? But Murray argues that Elisha did not lie. He merely took the truth on a detour. He was, after all, standing just outside the city gates. Thus he was being literally accurate when pointing to the ground they were standing on, he said, this is not the city you seek. Moreover, he kept his promise. He brought them to the man they sought after. He had brought them to their enemy. Elisha told them the truth, even though he knew the truth, even only he knew the truth he told. So says Murray, Elisha's words were strangely and wonderfully true. As for me, I don't buy it. I think Elisha lied to them and set it up. David lied to the priestess now when he took the showbread. In fact, if you go through the Bible carefully, you can find a lot of good and holy men lying. The difficulty is that if you stand up and say, well, Elisha just took the truth on a detour, most people will say, come on. In fact, some of the worst lies are religious lies, and this just doesn't seem to sound. When Christians talk this way, it makes Christians sound as us. And this makes Christians sound more like we're propping up God. There are lots of passages that raise questions. And I'm not saying God is a liar or the Bible is lying. What I am saying that we have this facile understanding that we have of language and lies and truth, we all know. It isn't the case. In fact, we understand, I think, what's beneath this commandment, which is language is for something. Our problem is usually not information. And just as a few weeks ago I asked you what was marriage for, I'll ask you again this morning, what is language for? Is language for trying to manage the world in such a way that I achieve the outcomes that I want? Is language for figuring out how to manipulate people and get what I need? Or is language for something else? And what's even more interesting is that I really don't believe anyone came in this morning thinking, well, I didn't know lying was wrong. I went to church and the preacher told me lying was wrong. And so now, from now on, I'll never lie again. Is it really that simple? You probably learned lying was wrong when you were two or three before you even knew what the word meant. And then there's the fact that some of you believe because I know you give me instructions. Pastor, go tell this person that. I say, why? Because I've told them that and they won't believe me. And they'll believe you if you tell them. Okay. Not usually. If you don't believe your friend, you're not going to believe me. And just because I say lying is wrong, you should all stop. And even if I make you do something like stand up, raise your hand, swear to us, pull all kinds of plagues and curses down on yourself, just wait. You'll see what happens. So even this doesn't work. Tim Keller in his book Center City Church talks about the fact that we lie for a reason. And in fact, often we tell the truth for a reason. And these reasons are part of each other. People typically try to instill honesty in others in this way. If you lie, you'll get in trouble with God and other people. Or if you'll lie, you'll be like those parable people who are habitual liars and you are better than that. And you'll hear both of these excuses given. What motivations are being encouraged? They are being called to change their behavior out of fear of punishment. You'll get in trouble. Or out of pride. You'll be like a dirty liar and you wouldn't want to be like them. But both fear of punishment and pride are essentially self-centered. The root motivation is then be honest because it will pay off for you. This approach puts pressure on the wealth and stirs up the ego to more selfishness in order to be honest. And it will force a person to hurt his or her own inclinations to do wrong. We call this moralistic behavior change. Because its basic argument is this. Will yourself to change your behavior and you can save yourself. So in other words, if I tell you do not lie and you leave the church saying the preacher said do not lie. And because the preacher reads the Bible better than I and knows God better than I and I'm afraid of God. I'm going to walk out here and I'm not going to lie anymore. That's the fear motivation. But the pride motivation says I know liars. I can't stand liars. I'm better than those liars. I don't want to be one of them. So I'm not going to lie anymore. Feller says neither way works. Christians who are taught to act morally primarily to escape punishment or to win self-respect and salvation or learn to be moral to serve themselves. At the behavioral level of course, they may be performing actions of great sacrifice. They may be sacrificing time, money, and much more to help the poor, to love their family, to be faithful to God's law. Yet at a deeper level they are behaving this way so God will bless them. So they can think of themselves as virtuous charitable persons. Well at least I'm not a liar. They are not loving God for himself. They are not obeying him simply because of his greatness and because he has done much for them in Christ. Rather they are using God to get the things they want. They want answered prayers, good health and prosperity, and they want salvation in the afterlife. So they do good. Not for God's sake or for goodness' sake, but for their own sake. And their behavior is being challenged by the power of their own self-interest. Stirring up self-centeredness in order to get someone to do the right thing does not get at the fundamental self-regard and self-absorption that is the main problem of the human heart. Consequently, it does nothing to address the main cause of the behavior you are trying to change, such as lying. Moralistic behavior, change, simply manipulates and leverages radical selfishness without challenging it. It tries to use that selfishness against itself by appealing to fear and pride. But while this may have some success in restraining the heart-self-centeredness, it does absolutely nothing to change it. In fact, it only confirms its power. So if I tell you, do not lie because God's going to get you, that's going to make you afraid. And so what do you wind up doing to yourself and God? I lie. So we're in this trap. So the question again is, what is language for? If language is for making me feel good about myself, I can be very good about not lying and I can sit here and tell all of you exactly what I think of you and exactly what I think the nature of your moral defects are and therefore thinking by informing you of this, you will somehow change. I remember visiting my grandmother at the nursing home. I've told the story before. Both of my grandparents were in their 80s and they lived close to where I was going to college. And I remember walking over there one afternoon and my grandmother was furious. She was furious because my grandfather, all of his life, would take off his socks and leave them on the floor. And so she was just running him up and down. Why did he leave the socks on the floor? I don't know why he leaves the socks on the floor. 50 plus years she was telling him, stop leaving the socks on the floor. Did he keep leaving the socks on the floor until the day he died? So why on earth do we possibly believe this works? We are deeply mysterious. There's a lot going on between us. Sometimes people who don't lie are just jerks. They don't care about your feelings and they just want to unload on you to make themselves feel better. Sometimes people who lie are very low meaning and they don't dare say anything that might offend, which really reflects their own insecurity. This is a very complicated business. And so the better question is, what is language for? And it's the same answer for what is marriage for, what is sex for, what is money for, what is life for, and what is living for. And the answer is the glory of God and the flourishing of humanity. Language is the bliss. The difficulty is we are all choosers of stockings. And when we are presented with the stockings we say, I like the one on the right. And when we are asked why we say, because I think it has a little different quality than all the others. We don't even know why we like what we like. We don't even know what we do what we do. We are like that toddler who asks, why did you take that toy from your brother? Is that what that little snap was about there? Why did you take that toy from your brother? I don't know. Well, you probably don't know. But deep underneath, you knew that toy belonged to your brother. And you knew by taking that toy, because your brother wanted it, you wanted more. And on and on the little thing goes, and it doesn't matter if you're two and four, or if you're 80 and 85, we play the same games. We lie to ourselves. We lie to each other. And then when we convince ourselves that we haven't lied, we feel good about ourselves and superior to others that we think have. Sometimes we don't really know. We make up stories to make ourselves feel good about ourselves and to look good to others. We perpetrate this on everyone else, but especially ourselves. And we live our lives by well-being at the expense of others. Language and language is the most efficient tool to do this. Why do we label people? Why do we do this? The truth is, we can't stop, no matter what the preacher says. Jesus, when he came, talked a lot. And in fact, when you say, preacher, go tell this person what to do, it isn't much different than the guy we talked about last week. Teacher, go tell my brother to split the inheritance. We didn't listen in Jesus. Why should we listen now? We all know lying is wrong, yet we do it all the time. Jesus talked a lot, and Jesus taught us a great many important things. But if you read the Gospels, you very quickly get the impression that Jesus came not just to tell us things, because a lot of what he called this was already in the Old Testament. He came to do something for us. Because he knew we couldn't do it for ourselves, and someone needed to come to rescue. And so what the Christian church says is that in his death, we are forgiven. And in his resurrection, our bodies and our lives begin to be redeemed. And those bodies include our tongues. You see, what Tim Keller is getting at is that really what's beneath a lot of what we do are fear and pride. And so what we're trying to do with language is try to save ourselves. And so when I tell you, maybe it's completely true, about the things that I've accomplished and the things that are good about me, what am I trying to do? Save myself and your reputation. I'm trying to win favor in your hearts. Or when I lie to try and get out of an inconvenient truth or behavior about myself that I don't want to be pressed on, I'm again trying to save myself. And so what the Gospel basically says is, I don't care what you say, you can't save yourself. You need to be saved by another. And if you actually believe that you are forgiven, what does it mean to be forgiven? Forgiveness means you did wrong, and the offended party lets you go free. I forgot to pay my, of sins, this is a pretty small one, I realize that. I forgot to pay my registration on my two cars that were duly met. And so driving back on a field trip with a car full of kids, I realized, oh, the registration in this car has expired. That's not good. So when I go to the DMV site, what do I have to do because I registered at late? Pay the late fee. I have paid my late fee. The police now, if they pull me over, will look me up on the computer and what will they see? I'm okay. I paid my fee. What Christ does in his debt is pay our fee. And in his resurrection, he begins by giving us a new tongue. What if, in fact, I no longer have to win your hearts? What if, in fact, my fee has been paid, my debt has been forgiven? Can I begin to be honest about the sinner that I am and the sinner that I really don't want to be? Can I begin to be secure about who I am and what's going on in my life? That's what Christ invites us into. The motivation to no longer lie in Christianity is not that lying is no longer useful. No, lying is very useful. It's that I no longer need to save myself. What if you no longer have to convince yourself and the world that you are somebody and that they are not? That kind of radical security begins by seeing God tell you, you are forgiven. Now, I've been around people long enough to know that if I were to run down a list of sins with each and every one of you, I could probably get you to lie. It wouldn't be too hard. And you could do the same to me. And once beneath that, again, is my pride. What if I really believe that in the sight of God, everything I've done has been forgiven by His grace and that I could truly be truthful with myself and with each other about my exact nature? The strangeness of the reformed faith is that on one hand we say, we're all broken, and on the other hand, we still play the lying games with each other. Now, don't hear me wrong. I am not saying that I want each of us to stand up and blurt out the most heinous things we have ever done. Why don't I want us to do that? Because it wouldn't be loving each other. We're all broken in different ways. We've all hurt each other in different ways. And whereas it's good to confess your sins, probably confess them quietly to a trusted person, not necessarily to the community, because the community may not handle your sin very well. On the other hand, what the grace of God and His forgiveness offers us is the opportunity to finally be truthful about ourselves. And with one another, where appropriate. Because that kind of freedom our hearts yearn for. Psychologists will say that why is it when someone gets the opportunity to speak an awful truth, a confession about themselves, they've done this with internet websites, they put up a site and say, confess your sins anonymously. People put the most horrendous things on there. Why? Because the truth of themselves is eating at their heart, and they just want to be known as they truly are, and they want to be loved and accepted, not for the wrong, but for themselves, even who have done this wrong. And this is exactly what the Gospel offers. Misery. I am a natural born liar. And I'm too afraid to stop. Deliverance. He has saved you. He has paid your debt. He has made you free. Gratitude. Can we now start the end of playing our little games and live as free people? What if you no longer had to save yourself? How would that change your use of language? Could you bless instead of curse? I want to end this morning with, again, hypercatechism. Does not deal with these things in the section of misery. Yes, we fail to love our neighbors. Does not deal with these things in the section of deliverance. That if I tell you, if you stop lying, God will accept you. No. Because if God is waiting to accept you until you stop lying, he can never accept you. He doesn't wait for us. He acts on our behalf. This gets treated in gratitude. If you believe he has forgiven you, if you believe he has redeemed you, if you believe he has set you free, how then should you use your tongue? Let's read this together. What is God's will for you in the ninth commandment? God's will is that I never give false testimony against anyone. Twist no one's words, not gossip or slander, nor join in condemning anyone without a theory or without a just cause. Rather, in court and everywhere else, I should avoid lying in the seat of every crime. These are devices the devil himself used, and they would call down on me, God's planespanger. I should love the truth. Speak it candidly and openly acknowledge it. And I should do what I can to guard and advance my neighbors' good name. Amen. Let's pray. Lord, by the time we're adults, we are veterans in this game. We attack each other with words. We build ourselves up with words. We try to save ourselves with words. And you come to us and ask us to lay this burden down. May we, Lord, recognize that we are liars. We lie to ourselves. We lie to others. May we recognize that this is a salvation process by which we're trying to save ourselves. And may we release ourselves from this monumental burden and accept the salvation that you give us instead. And, Lord, in our freedom from this burden, may we then take language up again to use it not to manipulate, not to coerce, not to build ourselves up, not to promote our group, but to bless and to love and for your glory. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Would you stand?