https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LyKBmvdm5PE

 anybody recognize this woman? Do you recognize her now? Yeah. Same girl. Katie Hudson became Katy Perry. Katie Hudson grew up the daughter of a Pentecostal minister, grew up speaking in tongues, first tried to launch her career in the Christian music industry, and it didn't go anywhere, and so she relaunched it in the secular industry, and is known for songs such as I Kissed a Girl, and a lot of other songs that we don't think will ever play in church anytime soon. She is also now famous for, she did the Super Bowl a couple of weeks ago, and she's the first artist to actually pay for her slot in the Super Bowl halftime show. The NFL figured out that they had one of the most valuable stages in America, and said, hey, why are we giving this away for free? And so when calls went out and bids went out to play the Super Bowl, she, I imagine, won the bid. She's a multi-millionaire, has become very famous, maybe not so much with your demographic, but a lot of folks know who she is. Right before the Super Bowl, Katie was nervous, and so she felt God tell her, you've got this and I got you, and Katie, growing up evangelical, thought, hmm, I wonder if this is just me, or if this is just God, and she saw a guy she didn't know with a headset on, and said, oh, you've got this, and so she said, yeah, there it is, God talked to me. Now, that obviously, so she told this story after the Super Bowl, and that obviously was picking up by people, and some folks would say, did God talk to her? Some folks would say, God doesn't talk to anybody. Other folks would say, God talks to everybody, and others still would say, Katie has left Orthodox Christianity behind. Why should God talk to her? So what do you think? Do you think God told her, you've got this and I got you, or not? For most of us, whether the answer to that question will often come from the assumptions that we bring to it. I have a friend, former Christian Reformed minister, who now pastors a liberal church in Canada, and he's quite vocal, and former editor of the Bayer, John Sook, he's quite vocal in that God doesn't talk to people, and he's upset and offended when Christians talk this way. So I sent in the article about Katy Perry testifying that God spoke to her. But many in John Sook's camp are basically from the secular perspective. If there is a God, he wouldn't be so foolish as to bother with our little lives. Katy Perry thinking God is talking to her is just superstition. Katy, however, and many in her demographic, who may not be specifically Christian, but would consider themselves spiritual but not religious, would probably look at it differently. God is everywhere, always giving us encouragement to do our best and to be our best. It's cool that Katy received this word, and except for the left shark, gave a great performance. God is there to help us have a good time and realize our dreams. Many sectarians, Christians and otherwise, Christians, Muslims, and other religious groups, would probably say something more like this. God only speaks through authorized parties. By their fruits you shall know them. According to how we judge Katy Perry's life and express beliefs, we will determine whether or not this word from God is authentic or not. So what do you think? Did God talk to Katy Perry? We have a lot of assumptions about God talk. If God says something, we imagine, then everyone has to listen to it or will listen to it. And that's kind of the reason behind a lot of God talk. Well, God told me that you should do this. The implication, and what so unnerves us about signing God's name to things that we feel or messages that we claim to receive, is that it seems to put an obligation on you. Now most of us who have been around Christians long enough, who use this language enough, get pretty resistant to it. Well, Pastor, God is telling me that we should do this. And when folks come to me and say that, I'll usually say to them, that you should go do that. But Pastor, God is saying that we should do this. And I usually say, well, when God tells me that we should do this, I'll go there with you. But until that day, if you believe God said you should do this, you go do it. In other words, we kind of have this understanding that signing God's name behind things can sometimes be a manipulative way of controlling other people. Added to this, however, is the fact that beneath it is this assumption that if God speaks, we will obey. And I can understand where we have this assumption, but pause for a minute. Do we always obey what God says? Is this sometimes something natural for people? In other words, the Christian church has said, God has said a great many things that we simply ignore. So why should your own private revelation be any different? Anthropologist T.M. Lerman, a well-known Ivy League anthropologist, decided that she wanted to study some of this God talk. And so she moved into a vineyard community as an anthropologist and began to study them. Now anthropologists have been doing this ever since the discipline was created. They would go to Africa or to some jungle somewhere and move in with a tribe and become a Christian. And move in with a tribe and become indigenous so that they could understand how the tribe worked. So she decided she wanted to move into this vineyard church and understand how the tribe worked. And one of the things that kind of surprised her was, having grown up kind of in a marginal Jewish community where if God spoke, the community would take this very serious, she discovered that for this vineyard church, God was talking all the time. God was helping them find their parking space or encouraging them after a good day. And God would tell them to do this this week and that the next. And one of the things that surprised her was that if God said one week, you should go and be a doctor. So you started working towards that. But two months from now, God said, oh, you should go and be a lawyer. You might imagine that one of us would stop and say, now, does God want you to be a doctor or a lawyer? And she noticed within the vineyard church that God changes his mind a lot or they change their mind or it doesn't really matter. It's just kind of an ongoing kind of, Marcia's laughing here because I think many of us have experienced this. And so she discovered that for them, God is different. She notes this in her book. This is kind of John and Sook's Jesus. There are references to friendship with God and with Jesus in the Bible, but this friendship is not free and easy companionship of two boys swinging their feet on a bridge over a street. The remarkable shift in the understanding of God and of Jesus in the New Paradigm churches upon American Christianity is the shift that the counterculture made. Towards a deeply human, even vulnerable God who loves us unconditionally and wants nothing more than to be our friend, our best friend, as loving and personal and responsive as a best friend in America should be. And toward a God who is so supernaturally present, it is as if he does magic and as if our friendship with him gives us magic too. Can you hear Katy Perry in this? God retains his holy majesty, but he has become a companion, even a buddy to play with. And the most ordinary man can go to the corner church and learn how to hear him speak. What we have seen in the last four or five decades is the democratization of God. I am now into you and me and the democratization of intense spiritual experience arguably more deeply than ever before in our country's history. And what is interesting is that Katy Perry, although in her own words, having evolved beyond Christianity, continues to hold these assumptions that she picked up in the church she grew up in. God is available everywhere and God just really wants me to have my best Super Bowl performance yet. And so if I am nervous, he says, I got this and I got you. And the random man says, I got you and confirmation. Is God this democratic? How does God speak? In today's text, we have a conflict about exactly this. And the environment is not on the Super Bowl stage. It's in the desert. Last week we had this Israel murmuring in the desert and this week it's Miriam and Aaron murmuring. Miriam and Aaron began to talk against Moses because of this Cushite wife where he had married a Cushite. And we need to pause here because we know earlier in the story that Moses was married to Zipporah who was a Midianah. There's a lot of discussion whether Moses took on a second wife or if they're talking about this wife where there's a lot of discussion, is this an issue of race that they didn't like her because of her dark skin? Is this an issue because perhaps Zipporah or the new wife was now in the context of Israel exercising leadership and Miriam and Aaron began to feel pushed out? One of the things that people who don't know anything about church or know only just a little bit about church sometimes are surprised that Christian leaders can sometimes be the most petty, possessive, and competitive people around. And so what we see here are Miriam and Aaron feeling in some way slighted perhaps by Moses' wife and demanding some status and some acknowledgement. Has God spoken only through Moses? They asked. Hasn't he also spoken through us? And the Lord heard this. Now right there you have kind of an interesting dynamic where you have Miriam and Aaron just kind of talking, God talks through us too you know and almost saying it as if God is not in the room. And so here in the story they're complaining about Moses' wife and they're saying God talks through us too you know and then the text stops and says, and God heard this. And then what he has to comment about Moses. Now Moses was a very humble man, more humble than anyone else on the face of the earth. Now keep that in mind because it will be important later in the story. What we would expect from Moses is that for Moses to get defensive and for Moses to say, look I brought the people out of Egypt, God talks to me, you sit down and stay in your place. You might expect to hear pastors talking like this. Moses, we don't hear this from. At once the Lord said to Moses, Aaron and Miriam, come out to the tent of meeting. It's almost like Miriam and Aaron were fomenting more murmuring and dissension within the camp and the Lord says, come out to my tent, we're going to settle this today. So the three of them went out. Then the Lord came down in a pillar of cloud and he stood at the entrance of the tent and summoned Aaron and Miriam. When the two of them stepped forward, he said, listen to my words. When there is a prophet among you, I the Lord reveal myself to them in visions. I speak to them in dreams. But this is not true of my servant Moses. He is faithful to the Lord. When there is a prophet among you, I speak to them in visions. I speak to them in dreams. But this is not true of my servant Moses. He is faithful at all of my house. With him I speak face to face. Clearly and not in riddles, he sees the form of the Lord. Why then were you two not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? The anger of the Lord burned against them and he left them. When the cloud lifted from above the tent, Miriam's skin was lecherous. It became as white as snow. Aaron turned towards her and saw that she had a defilement skin disease. What's going on in this passage? Now Moses is going to beg for her healing and will do so. The Lord will give her a sentence of seven days outside the camp. But notice what's going on here. Miriam and Aaron said, hey, what are prophets too? And the Old Testament refers to Miriam as a prophet in Exodus 15. Aaron becomes Moses' mouthpiece. We also learn about that in Exodus. And the Lord here says that I give prophecies and I give visions, but with Moses I talk face to face. You two had better be a little bit careful about talking this way. And the question is why? Because of Moses? But the Lord is basically saying no. Because I am free to communicate with Moses and to relate to him how I wish. You are complaining about Moses, but you are really complaining about me. So this then begs the question, is God available? To whom is God available? Is God available only to the holy and the righteous and the moral? Or is God available to everyone? How is God available? Is God available through reason? Or is God available mostly through intuition? And often when I listen to people debate about whether God said this or whether God did this, often people come either from a position of reason, well, all-knowing, all-powerful God would therefore, and they deduce some outcomes. Others come to it and say, well, I feel God is more like this. And basically justify their positions on the basis of their feelings. So how is God available? Is he available through reason? Is he available through intuition? And more importantly, who can lay claim to God? Knowledge of him or knowledge from him? We hear this debate on and on throughout our culture wars in America. Because one group will come up and say, God says these people shouldn't be doing that. And the answer from the other group is, who's God? Who says, is God going to speak? How can we know? How can we listen? And round and round we go with these arguments. But one of the real issues is the question, is God democratic? Now I don't mean if he's a Democrat or a Republican, but when I say is God democratic, I mean is God simply available to all? That is kind of a difficult question. If a Muslim girl leans down at prayer and says, dear Lord, who hears her? I would assume the only real God would be the one who would hear all the prayers. In fact, if he's all knowing, he should be able to hear every prayer, regardless of to whom the prayer is addressed. In the Old Testament, the Old Testament, the Psalm 8 says, the heavens declare the glory of God. They put forth the knowledge of God through speech. Romans 1 talks about God revealing himself to everyone. And Romans 1 talks about how we suppress the truth in our hearts. So is God democratic through reason? The Bible often says yes. God is available. When we see the world, we see God's glory. And through the glory, we can get a sense of who God is. Is God available through unauthorized intuition? You start rummaging through the details of the Bible, you find all kinds of things. You find Abraham and this shadowy figure Melchizedek in the Old Testament. And it's said of Melchizedek that he is a priest of the Lord. And you think, how did he find the Lord? Why was he not worshiping all these other gods? We have no idea. When you find Israel coming up into the land, as we go through the book of Numbers, we'll run into Balaam. And Balaam was a servant of the Lord. And the king of Moab once Balaam to curse Israel. And Balaam keeps trying, but the Lord won't let him. And we look at these relationships and we say, how on earth does any of this work? How would Balaam find God being a prophet over in Moab? Wouldn't he be worshiping the Moab gods? And you start doing more rummaging in this and many more questions arise. So is God available through intuition? We find in the Gospel of Mark, this unauthorized exorcist who is doing exorcism in Jesus' name. And the disciples say to Jesus, hey, we should make him stop and force your intellectual property here. We've trademarked your name. He shouldn't be exercising your name. And Jesus says, leave him alone. He's exercising by the Spirit of God. And they say, now wait a minute, Jesus. I thought you had an exclusive. So, is God available more broadly or is God not available? Then you look at the words of Jesus himself. On one hand, Jesus says, Seek and you will find, knock and the door will be opened. All who seek, find. Okay, so if someone with a sincere heart is seeking God, shouldn't they find Jesus? At the same time, Jesus says, at the end of days, a lot of people will say, Lord, Lord, and I'll say, depart from me, I never knew you. So, which is it? Seek and you will find or depart from me, I never knew you? They're both in the Bible. And Jesus says things to the tax collectors and the teachers of the law or to the teachers of the law and the Pharisees. Tax collectors and prostitutes will enter the kingdom of heaven ahead of you. So, is Jesus democratic where the heavens declare his glory or is Jesus specific? Loving tax collectors and prostitutes and telling Pharisees and teachers of the law, you take a step back. Which is it? Which is it? Does God get to pick and choose between us? Mirror him in air and say, no, we're prophets too. Moses, what gives you the right or your wife to have any kind of elevated status? God comes in and says, hey, if I want to have this relationship with Moses, I will. You better not talk about him like that because I've heard everything you've said. When God is undemocratic, God chooses Moses to have this relationship with. And if you remember the story, God just picks him. And if you know the rest of the story, you know God just picks Abraham. God says, I'm looking around for a man to make a great nation out of. I think I'll pick this couple that haven't had any babies. You might say, Lord, if you're looking for someone to multiply, they're a really bad choice. But that's who he is. And God does this all the time. Consider my servant, Job. Look at Peter. Peter, upon this rock, I will build my church. What we learn about Peter's character is Peter's of life. Under the withering interrogation of the servant girl, he tames and denies Jesus three times. What kind of God picks people? Says, yeah, you and me. What kind of God picks people? Says, yeah, you and you and you. And other people say, what about me? And God says, I didn't pick you. C.S. Lewis talks about this in one of his essays. We, with our modern democratic and arithmetical presuppositions, would so have liked and expected all men to start equal in their search for God. One has the picture of great centripetal roads coming from all directions with well-disposed people, all meaning the same thing, getting closer and closer together. How shockingly opposite is the Christian story. One people picked out of the whole earth, that people purged and proved again and again, some are lost in the desert before they reach Palestine, some stay in battle lot, some become indifferent. The whole thing narrows and narrows until at last it comes down to a little point, small as the point of a spear, a Jewish girl at her prayers. That is what the whole human nature was narrowed down to before the incarnation takes place. Very unlike what we expected, but of course not in the least unlike what it seems in general as shown by nature. To be God's way of working, the universe is quite a shockingly selective and undemocratic place. Out of apparently infinite space, a relatively tiny portion occupied by matter at any time. Of the stars perhaps only one has planets, of the planet only one has planets. Of the planet only one species is rational. Selection is seen in nature and the appalling ways in which it evolves appears a horrible and unjust thing by human standards. But the selectiveness in the Christian story is not quite like that. The people who are selected are in a sense unfairly selected for a supreme honor, but it is also a supreme burden. The people of Israel come to realize that it is their woes which are saving the world. Even in human society though, one sees how this inequality furnishes an opportunity for every kind of tyranny and servility. Yet on the other hand, one can also see that it furnishes an opportunity for some of the best things we can think of. Humility and kindness and the immense pleasures of admiration. I cannot conceive how one would get through the boredom of a world in which you have never met anyone more clever, more beautiful or stronger than yourself. The very clouds would go after the football celebrities and film stars no better than to desire that kind of equality. What the story of the incarnation seems to be doing is to flash a new light on a principle in nature. And to show for the first time that this principle of inequality in nature is neither good nor bad. It is a common theme running throughout both goodness and badness of the natural world. And I begin to see it, how it can survive as a supreme beauty in a redeemed universe. How interesting of Katy Perry before the Super Bowl to be concerned and anxious and to hear God say, I got this. Where many might look at her and say, well haven't you been enormously blessed by God? God gave you beauty, God gave you talent, God gave you opportunity, God has given you might, God has given you stardom. So, does God have her or not? You answer the question, I can't. What we see right from the start is that while God calls Miriam and Aaron to the tent, look who doesn't get defensive. Moses. I think if you were to ask Moses, Moses would probably say a couple of contradictory things. On one hand he would say, look I didn't look for God, he looked for me. He's the one who stops me in the wilderness with a burning brush and says, hey you, you're going to take people out of Egypt. And right away I didn't want the job. And again and again I want to get out of this job. If you ask me, this job is terrible. At the same time, when you ask him about the Lord, it is Moses that says, Lord I want to see your face, I want to know more of you. And these two things come together. And this is exactly what we see in Jesus. We don't see Jesus saying, hey I'm the son of God, you got to listen to me. Jesus is a man of sorrows. And so when you say, I want to be really close to God, I want to be the hand, I want to be the tool of the Lord. Or most of the time what that really looks like is suffering. You see when God talk is cheap, it's usually because it is manipulation. Or me and God are so tight, ah, ah, ah. And I think, I read the Bible, you know the kinds of people who are tight with God? You know how long they live? You know what their lives look like? This is what the book says. People pull out God talk to make things easier on themselves. In the Bible, authentic God talk is often weighty and it costs. You see God talk usually exposes what we are. We're self-centered. So when Katy Perry says, I'm so nervous about this. There's a million other singers in America that say, I'll take your kind of nervousness, okay? I would love to be on this stage where you are. And you're nervous? Oh, I feel so bad for you. Come on. God talk usually exposes what we are. We are self-centered. We imagine the universe is here to glorify me. And oh God, won't you be my assistant? Do you really know this God if this is what you're asking for? God talk is often manipulative and controlling. And the real offense is that God picks and chooses. Pastors get envious and jealous all the time. Oh, why is this person on stage? Oh, why are these, this person's books being published? Books being published. Oh, why does this person have a 30,000 member church and not little old me? God uses us as he wills. And if we don't come to terms with that, then the God talk just becomes very silly. What is alarming is that the one who had all power, who was itself the most exclusive community in existence, would become no one and nothing, the victim of his own creations of use. That he would become so non-defensive and non-jealous of status and privilege that he would hang naked, exposed to mockery and ridicule beside the democratic sidewalk to make himself available to the undeserving. That this would become the center of the human story that struggled for claiming authority and power in the search of fame, glory and exclusivism is for many literally beyond belief. That God would become man and allow himself to be brutalized the way Jesus was. We look at that and say, if that's what being close to God looks like, I'd rather not have it. That's how you know whether God talk is authentic. Because the one who was God himself became nothing for us. So one of the things we need to do is understand at one point that God is undemocratic. That God picks and chooses. And why you got this and not that, I cannot say. You will have to ask God. But if you ask him to justify himself, then you don't really understand who you are and who he is. At the same time, we have to recognize that God is also democratic. He is available, he is open, and he is waiting for us to call. This winds up becoming gratitude when we realize that to try and stay in control of the relationship is to deny who we really are and basically to ask God to get lost. He is undemocratic enough to relate to you as an individual. Receive the relationship and his own life. And it's always appropriate to ask for more. Let's pray. Lord, sometimes when you speak, we don't want to listen. And sometimes when we desperately want you to speak, we don't want to listen. Lord, sometimes when you speak, we don't want to listen. And sometimes when we desperately want you to speak, you don't. And we get angry and frustrated and anxious and don't know what to do. And beneath it all is the request to trust you. Lord, whether you wake us up in the middle of the night and come to us in a special revelation, or we go our whole lives and implicitly you tell us, read my word, trust in my son, and believe in my love for you. In either case, Lord, you are there. Help us to recognize what is at the core of your nature is actually joy that you invite us into. To imagine that what love really is, is the well-being of the other at our own expense. And so when you reveal yourself in our midst, that's what you look like. Help us to see you as you are, and help us to become how you already reveal yourself to us. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Big man, will you stand? Amen.