https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hv81-6nGf3k

 Thank you so much for the hospitality as I came to the offering of coffee. The more you can't go wrong without coffee friends. So that was a really good practice. Thank you. I'd like to begin today by introducing a friend of mine named Freddy to you all. Freddy is 25 years old and he is homeless. When he was born, his father was not present at home. So he grew up with that sense of abandonment all throughout his life. When he became 20 years old, his mom who had been seen and living with several different men one day without notice left home, and yet again Freddy was abandoned by his own family. Being forced to live out on the streets as a homeless, what he goes through daily is quite different from what you might experience in our lives. He is harshly rejected by people. Some people just cuss at his face and get that thought of you, you're a piece of ass. The only reason you live like this is because you are a weak dog. And he's hearing all these messages from people that he does not even know of. Securities and policing division shows up once in a while and tells him to leave the area for the sake of the city and to never come back home. And I want to invite you to take a moment right now and let's try to face ourselves in Freddy's position. What would have been the most consistent message, the most consistent voice that Freddy has heard in his life from his family, from the people that he encountered on the streets, and from his city? That he's not good enough, that he's not worthy enough to be welcomed or accepted by anyone. It is difficult for us to find a shared experience from his life. It's hard for us to resonate with Freddy. But when we try to live underneath his unique experiences into the deepest cries of his soul, I think all of us sitting in this room today, because here's something that sounds very familiar to our home years, because friends, in one way or another, we've all been there. There were times in my life where I felt like I was not good enough for anything. Where I felt like I just fall short in just about every demand and expectation in this world. Where I felt like I had to be this and that person in order to be accepted and valued by people around me. Were the times like you, friends? Or are any of you going through that season of life today where you feel like you're not recognized by anyone? Where you feel like you're not noticed by anyone? And if you are saying yes, inside, although we all come from different backgrounds and experiences of life, we have a shared experience today. And with this, we can enter into our text today that talks about a totally different message. That talks about the true dignity of who we are, how our creator got designed and destined us to live in this world. And it reminds us today that everyone that is sitting in this room is special and unique. That's who we are. It is us. And that is the good news that we're here today. And I hope and pray that we will be able to explore the true meaning of who we are, our dignity, our identity, through this text. And particularly in Jesus Christ, who gives us life and hope. And as we begin, would you pray with me? Father God, thank you so much for your word. And at this time we ask that you would breathe life into this word, into my near human words. And make your word come alive in our hearts. In the name of Jesus we pray. Amen. The text that we are talking about today comes from the Gospel of John, chapter 5, verse 1 through 11, the reason for ordination. I'm going to read from verse 1 to 8. It goes like this. Sometime later, Jesus went up to Jerusalem for a feast of the Jews. He was in Jerusalem near the Sheikah, a pool which in<|hu|> I have no one to help me into the pool when the water is stirred. While I am trying to get in, someone else goes down and helps me. Then Jesus said to him, get up, pick up your man, and walk. Friends, the man that we see in our text today was suffering from an illness that is equivalent to a modern day disease called paraplegia. And what this disease can do to a person is pretty devastating because it completely distorts one's ability to properly function as a member of society. And in the case of our man today, he was not able to function socially, economically, and religiously. First socially because he was not able to walk more than two steps. He was fully dependent on people around him, family and friends. Then someone had to take him to the restroom. Someone had to wash and clean his body regularly. And in our text today, he says that there was absolutely no one around him who was committing to help him out. So that leaves this man at a place of other helplessness. And on top of that, imagine his appearance. Imagine what kind of smell he would have brought up onto the streets, not being able to take showers for recent months. And how that would have affected his relationship with people inside. Such a strong hostility. And economically, this was not able to work, wasn't able to work, and therefore he had to live off of the baby. And that would have been very difficult for himself because he was not able to change spots. Not much profit on the day. And most importantly, religiously, it was very important in that time period for people to obey God's commandments. Such as keep the Sabbath and make offerings and sacrifices in the right time, in the right manner. And that's how people were led into a community. That's how people were recognized, given this socio-economic religious labels, titles. You are a recognized person because you do what you see. Maybe you're not. Maybe you'll come back in a month. Maybe we'll have that. And all these things that are meant today that have failed to fulfill. And gathering all these aspects together, friends, today, we see a man who was extremely, extremely alone. Completely isolated from the rest of the society. Unrecognized. Rejected by his own family and friends. Helplessly lying at the corner of the town. Waiting for someone to show up with mercy to take him into this pool of Bethesda. Which was known to be a healing place. The first person to go into the pool with a wise spirit will be healed from their illnesses. People believed. But no one came. For him. And yet we see Jesus. We see Jesus today approaching this man. And he is the one who is going to heal him. And what is so strange to me, friends, is the way Jesus initiated this conversation. Now Jesus is the son of God. He knows all things. And even our text today indicates that Jesus already knew this man's condition. And that's why perhaps he approached him in the first place. But Jesus comes and says, Do you want to get well? Do you want to get well? And Jesus says, Do you want to get well? And Jesus says, Do you want to get well? What is absurdly obvious question that is for a son of God to ask? I think when we try to look more into this particular scene, Jesus is getting into something deeper. And in order to understand the intention of this question, I think we must look into the man's answer. Because that sort of reveals where the man's heart is at. Now the man replied to Jesus, Yes, I do need you. Look at me. But there is absolutely no one in this town who is willing to take me to this pool of Bethesda. That pool of Bethesda, where is the best place? And it is as if Jesus is asking this man, What is the object of your call? In other words, What would make your life better, friends? What are you looking at to be recognized in your life? And the man's answer without hesitating, was that, in the pool of Bethesda, if only I could get in there, my life would be better. I will be recognized. I will be a different person. People will notice me then. This is starting to sound a little bit more fluid, to our own nature. If only I could get promoted by the end of this year. If only my kids can get through prestigious college. If only my husband was a little bit more romantic. If only we could buy that house by the end of this year. And life would be better. I will feel like a cooler person. Friends, we live in a highly empathetic culture where we are surrounded by cultural voices and so many different types of demands and expectations that tell us that we have to live up to them. Our girls are constantly reminded by the culture that we come from, that we are not just a group of people that we are a group of people. We are constantly reminded by the culture that we come from, that they are not beautiful enough if their bodies do not resemble Victoria's system models. Our college residents are constantly reminded about the world around them in conversations with their parents and friends in relationships with their workplaces that they are not good enough if they are not making X amount of salary. What are the cultural voices? Those demands and expectations that are surrounding you today. And what is scarier to me personally is the fact that we have absolutely no power to change those cultural voices. The cultural structures and demands and expectations are too big for us simply beyond our capacity. Our kids and grandkids are next generations who will be hearing the very same messages about our future years about who they are in this world and how they are to survive this world. So the more important question seems to be how do we change the culture that we live in? The more important question seems to be today is not how do we change the color of our skin. The more important question for us as a group today is how are we responding to these voices? And how will we respond to these voices at the church? What will we teach to our next generations to our kids who are in the society who are going to school? What will we teach them? Jesus asked one of us every one of us sitting in this room today Do you want to hear that? The best moment was a track star. She graduated from her high school at the Valuatory and she goes off to college and in her freshman year she signed up. She not only continues her legacy of success at the track star but she grows and grows academically. Whatever she does, she does it so well. And many people are just surrounding her and being lovers. Naturally charming and quiet girl who seems like she liked absolutely nothing in her life. Who seems like she was completely fully recognized by people around her. And then in January of this year 2015 after suffering from several months of depression that just rendered her whole life. And these are the last words that she left for her friends and family. I thought how unpleasant it is to be locked outside. So I tried, tried, tried so hard to get it. And I was in. And it felt so good for a while. But I realized how worse it is to be locked inside. I just don't know who I am anymore. Trying, trying, always trying. I love you. I'm sorry, I love you so much. Again, I'm sorry. How did this all happen? Madison wants to tell all of us today that our lives are so much more than trying and trying to achieve and learn more things in this world. That it's simply more than that. Her life speaks about something that is very true and real about humanity, about who we are, creators. Friends, when we begin to measure ourselves through all these voices of demands and expectations to be recognized, to be noticed, to reach somewhere, to climb up that ladder. And all of these are ever changing. They're so constantly and rapidly changing the standard of it. So when we measure ourselves to those voices and demands and expectations, our lives simply become repetitive. Endless cycle. Endless cycle. We come back and back and back because our desires are never ending. They never dry us up. When we achieve something in our hands, there's always more and more to it. And to the man who was pulling a trigger at the pull of the president saying, if only I could get it there, my life would be better. If only I could have this career, my life would be better. If only I lived a little bit more in my futuristic heart, my life would be better. Jesus said, Get up. Pick up your man. Pick up your man and walk. The man instantly regained strength in his ankle. He wasn't able to walk for 38 years. Imagine that. His muscles felt that tension coming back to him. He stood up, picked up his man which was probably happy, picked it up and started walking. He didn't even need a time to recover. There was a sense of fullness in this healing. And it is as what Jesus is telling us. Friend, no, it's not the pull of the president. It's not the career. It's not that relationship. Although they are important in your life, they are crucial. They are vital to the flourishing of your life. They are important. But they are not the source of your identity. They are not the stability of your life. It's I. I am the living water. Come to me and drink the water that I give you and you will never go to waste. I am the true source of your identity. Friends, Jesus is the object of our hope. He is the source of our identity. He says, I love you. You are special and unique to my eyes. Just as you are. When you come to Jesus, yet I think none of us in this room can fully articulate this whole concept of Jesus being the source of our identity, object of our hope. How does that work? Because it is a huge part of this experience, its relation. It's the relationship that we choose to have with Jesus. And so I'd like to turn to a narrative in the Bible and the Gospel, hoping that this would bring this whole concept of the moral clarity. Something miraculous, miraculous happened when people encountered Jesus. Zacchaeus was entitled by people in his town as a traitor, because he was a Jewish person working for the Romans. He made illegal profits by collecting taxes from his own people, fellow Israelites. So of course people were pointing their fingers at him and condemning him to the acts. And one day, Jesus visits his town. A large crowd of people are gathered to see Jesus, to hear him speak, to see his miraculous eyes to touch him. And we see Zacchaeus among that crowd of men who seems like to lack absolutely nothing in his life in terms of possession. He had a lot of money, probably had a large house, probably had a nice boat to cruise with at some time. He seems like he was ahead in that race, within that cycle. He was off-ground. And yet he still finds him at a place of desperation. There is something missing in his life. He is longing for something more, and he desperately climbs up the tree to see Jesus. And of course Jesus, knowing this, recognizing him, comes to him and says, friend, turn my eye on your state your eyes. And he not only spends some time there, but he sleeps over, and nobody knows for sure what happened at Zacchaeus' house at night. But something miraculous happened that night in Zacchaeus' heart when he encountered Jesus. Because he wakes up in the morning and he comes to Jesus and says, Jesus, Jesus, you owe all the money that I paid to people. I want to give that back. I want to give them all back, not the exact amount. Oh, no, I don't want to give that. I want to give that all back. Zacchaeus, a man who stole money from his own people to reach some place in his life, overnight he comes and says, I want to give that all back, not the exact amount. How can that happen overnight? Perhaps, probably, Zacchaeus lived his life up until that night to be recognized, to be loved, to be noticed in this world by doing all sorts of stuff, by trying and trying to possess things, to have things in his hands. And perhaps that man has encountered our faithful Savior, Jesus Christ, he perhaps utilized that he is already recognized, he is already loved, he is already noticed by him in Jesus Christ, and therefore I no longer have to live this egoistic self-conscious life, trying to live for recognition, trying to be noticed by people around me. I am free from that, Jesus, thank you. And therefore, I want to now live my life because I am already recognized. I want to now live recognizing people around me. And that's why I want to get this on that. Not the same amount, doubling the amount. Just look around you, look at the people in front of you, sitting next to you, behind you, your husbands, your wives, your kids, your friends, your co-workers. The truth is, all of us recognize. Take our clarity and longing to be recognized just as you are clear-seeing and longing to be recognized. Jesus invites us to pay because I recognize you. What if you can live and recognize others? And some of us hear about the asking, how do we encounter Jesus? I want to encounter Jesus. We can say, okay, this is the way to encounter Jesus. You will meet Jesus tomorrow at 4 p.m. Don't be late for that. There is no room for how many encounter Jesus because it's entirely in His grace. It is Jesus who comes to us. We saw it in our text today. It is Jesus who comes and initiates the conversation. It is Jesus. It is Jesus who heals us. It is Jesus who recognizes us. I think there is something in our part that we can do as a way to well receive or initiate that process. And that is by responding to the invitation that Jesus already sent to all of us, not some of us, to all of us. But I think when we go through difficult phases of our lives, especially when we remember hurtful memories and experiences being abused as a child, failing in relationships, failing in faith business, losing a loved one, we just can't take that feeling of guilt off our hearts. A very natural inclination, natural reaction for all of us human beings, for all of us, I think is high-flying. We open this little door, a door of a small window of Christ, we open it up, we gather all of those hurtful memories and experiences, we put that, squish that into this room, shut the door, lock it, never to show it again, never to open it to anybody in our lives. And it is as if we are telling ourselves, it is open. I will be a living person. I will be a dead person. I have a career to pursue. I have this relationship to invest. And could those fully fulfill and satisfy a deep longing to be loved? How are you all doing within that cycle? That tiring cycle. And this is the good news, right? Jesus is inviting all of us, encouraging all of us to open that door and to give it to him. What Jesus is interested in are not the experiences and environments and what we can't achieve and cannot achieve. What he is interested in is simply you, me, who we are and how we are doing and perceiving ourselves in times of difficulties, when we feel like we are not recognized. He wants to help us live in us, live through us. Five years ago, I was a student who was active and completely famous. I couldn't follow a student like that because my life had become a mess. And I was a friend who was drug addicted. I couldn't touch one thing without drugs. And I was a pastor's kid who was at the very head of body culture. Oh, I was talented. And meeting my friends was a big challenge. And when my whole life was falling apart like that, in the fall of 2010, my dad was a pastor. One day he closed down his church and left home with his family. And I felt like my life had ended there. Extremely lonely, realizing that there was absolutely no one in this life who could understand what I am going through. I was scared to death because I didn't know what to do. My college was my life from that point. And strangely, what I remembered most clearly in that time was my mother's prayer that I used to hear people's walls going up. And I was just really literally late to go to church. I was sitting at this small, developing, local Korean church in Sacramento. After their New Year service, I gave God my first full-fledged prayer. And what I mean by that is I felt like I was weak. I didn't have anything to do. Not to my self. I was desperate. I said, God, if you were alive, would you help me? I was so scared. I don't know what to do. If you're a living God, show me that you're alive. I'll read your words and I'll create you every single day. I was surprised when I started doing that. And I remember reading the Bible verse that said, your body is a holy temple. And I said, what? I am so sorry. God, I didn't know that. I put all these hazardous stuff into my body not knowing that you live inside of me. I didn't know that I'm holy like that. I want your change, God. Can you help me? And in a few days, God instantly cut me off from all those afflictions and bad access, like crazy to die. And that was a way of inshowing me. Remember my first prayer? Show me that you're alive. Show me that he is alive. Not only that he is alive, but that he is deeply interested in life, that he has a bright future ahead. Insane love matters. John 3, 16, For God so loved the world, he gave his only son, whoever believes in his name shall not perish, but have eternal life. His son came, not for those who are in the hand of that race who has the houses and boats. He came to me in a drug addict whose life is completely falling apart. What did he say in those words? He simply said, I need you. That's all. Something miraculous happens, when people encounter Jesus Christ, our Lord and faithful servant. And he says to me, I recognize you, and I long to love you every moment of your life. Will you come with me and recognize your neighbors and friends much? He has the same question for all of us. As we leave our church today, we are still surrounded by all these cultural voices and expectations. They're big. They will not go away. They are from stronger ends. And how God's grace calls us today to this place, we have a choice. We can choose to live like a kid, having accomplished so many things in our lives and having things in our hands, yet still feeling empty and longing to be recognized by something or someone. And we can choose to live like a kid, having accomplished so much in our lives and having things in our hands, yet still feeling empty and longing to be recognized by something or someone. But you can all choose to live lost and wandering around, listening to our desires. We don't have to. We don't have to. That's the grace of God. As we receive this invitation that Jesus gives to every single one of us today, and to all of us outside the church, come. Come, all of you who are weary and burdened. Come to me and I will give you rest. Let's pray. Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, thank you for your work. We ask that you seal this living word inside of our hearts today. So as we depart and go on to our lives, our separate ways, help us to be walking through you. Help us to recognize your permanent love. And help us to recognize others' problems. We thank you and praise your faithful one. In the name of Jesus Christ, our faithful Savior, we all praise you. Amen. Would you please stand? Amen. He was so heavy He raised up to mercy And He brought down to the cross for Jesus Come, all of you who are weary and burdened. Come to me and I will give you rest. Let's pray. Come, all of you who are weary and burdened. Come, all of you who are weary and burdened. We should get back there. Amen. Amen. Thank you, Q, for sharing your time with us. I hope after the service you'll stand over there and greet the folks as they depart. Now receive God's blessing. May the Lord bless you and keep you. May the Lord turn His face toward you. Make His face shine upon you. And give you His peace. Amen. Amen.