https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=t1l0pBv0i3k

 What is God for? It seems like a strange question. Most Americans would answer it in this way. America's most common religion is not really Christianity, although many Christians and Muslims and people who don't go to church embrace it. The idea is this. There's a God who exists and who creates and orders the world and watches over life on earth. And this God wants people to be good, to be nice, to be fair to each other. That's common in the Bible and by most world religions. The central goal of life, this religion says, is to be happy and to feel good about yourself. God is not involved in your life. It's somewhere you need him to resolve a problem and good people go to heaven when they die. This idea that was called moralistic therapeutic deism was developed by a sociologist named Christian Smith who interviewed hundreds and hundreds of American young people. People who were raised in Christian households and Mormon households and atheist households all over the spectrum. And the vast majority of people essentially believe this. And so if you ask the question, what is God for? God is for helping me have the kind of life I want and to feel good about myself. Now we might ask ourselves, who is to blame for what we've seen going on in Baltimore? And if you listen to all of the news over the last couple of weeks, there are lots of candidates. America's race issues, bad police training, procedure or bad police culture, the elected officials who have failed their people, economic failure, local police, economic failure, globalization, high taxes, lack of opportunity, social failure, poor education, welfare state, breakdown of the family. One of the most interesting things that is in this discussion, however, is no one notices that what we believe in is in fact a system. Some people might say, well maybe God failed Baltimore. But more people would likely say, if something bad happened to them, they might say, well why did God let this bad thing happen to me? In other words, God is kind of this personal protector. But when we look at Baltimore, we say the system is to blame. Over the last couple of years, we've been trying to get through Charles Taylor's 900 page book called The Secular Age. And in this book, Charles Taylor tries to figure out why 500 years ago, almost everybody in Western civilization believed in God. And why today, for many people, belief in God is kind of an option. It's maybe an idea that helps me feel good about myself or try to piece my life together. And one of the things that we noticed is one of the things that developed in the West was this idea of an order. The idea that if we educate people, if we order people with police and government institutions and society, if people cooperate with one another, then suddenly we can figure out how to have a healthy situation and a healthy culture and a healthy community. This idea, in fact, is so deeply entrenched within us, we really can't help but think in these terms. And so when Baltimore explodes, nobody says, well God is clearly angry with Baltimore because the city is coming undone. We all look around for a failure in the system and we look for ways to try and address these failures to correct the situation. Now, as many of you saw, the district attorney filed charges against the police officers, and so the protest rally turned into a celebration rally. But I ask you, okay, let's say the protests and the celebrations are done. What will happen tomorrow in Baltimore? Will there be more jobs? One of the things I thought of when I saw Baltimore, a little while ago we saw Ferguson, Baltimore is like, I can't tell you how many places in the United States or how many places in the world. We believe that somehow we can fix Baltimore, but I ask you, show me one place in the country that is fixed. Now you might say, well there are wealthy, affluent communities where they are not tearing up the street. But as one other columnist I read just this morning noted, that the sum total of the bonuses, just the bonuses, not the salary, the bonuses given on Wall Street last year was more money than what all of the people in North America earned making minimum wage. And so then you have to ask yourself, do we really have a grasp on any system? One commentator noted that the United States spends about $14,000 per poor system in the United States. And one of the things you could do is if we simply handed out $14,000 to every one of these poor people, a family of what poor would have something like $60,000 a year, would that solve everything? It might make it better, it might make it worse, but here's the thing, we all believe that this system provides for us happiness and opportunity and contentment and prosperity and affluence, but we all know that none of these systems work. And we all look and say none of these systems have ever fully worked. So why do we believe in this system? Charles Taylor goes on to note that one of the differences, say in 1500 and 2000, in 1500 if a city would riot, it would have whole reasons for why the city would riot. None of these reasons would be about an impersonal system that we have somehow filled. Now, that is immediately the idea that we grasp on and we immediately set about usually more arguing about how to fix it. See, the past 500 years, Taylor says, this idea of deism has come about, where God orders a universe and our prosperity and our benefit and our happiness is very much determined, not necessarily by how we relate to God, but how we relate to this system he has created. God created an eminence order that intends human flourishing. We can interact with this order instead of with God to get good outcomes. God will not violate this order by miracles or by answering prayer, because this will be working against himself. God's primary interest is our flourishing and those interests, we believe, are obvious. But we say they're obvious, but when we swatch this entire debate dough up after Baltimore, we're all sure of exactly what will fix the problem. But we have a thousand different answers what would fix the problem, so I'll be really short. Well, what do you think? Could you imagine God making a rule for us that makes no sense for us or would seem opposite of what seems right or good for us? Think about that. Could you imagine God allowing, now I'm going to get more personal, God allowing something into your life that was unwelcome or you believe it's wrong? I dare bet on the second question you would say, oh yeah, I can imagine that and I can give you examples. Why is it you can see that clearly for the second, but not for the first? What does that say about us? John 15 says this, I am the true vine and my father is the gardener. He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit. Well, every branch that does bear fruit, he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful. I love, I mean children's sermons are way more fun for me than they are for you because I'm right there in the kids' face and they're just ravenously going after those grapes which was tremendous fun. But here's this verse from John 15 and we have songs about it, you are the vine, I am the branches, help us abide with you, it's such a nice song. But if you look at these two verses, what do you notice? Who gets cut? Everybody. In other words, we might imagine to say, well God punishes the bad people, oh he cuts off and throws them into the fire, okay I can deal with that, but the good people he leaves alone. What does this say? What also is the implication here? What is God looking for? Does God sit down and say, oh where's Reggie, okay there's Reggie. Does God sit down and say, boy, what would make Reggie happy today? Let me just throw things in Reggie's life that would make him happy today. Is that how your life works Reggie? Pretty much. Is that how life works for the rest of y'all? I must be on a different page. Because if you look at these two little verses, what God is looking for from us is what? Fruit. Right there we have attention. Because what we really want from God is to make us happy, to help us feel good about ourselves, to arrange things the way we want them to. But what he's really looking for from us is fruit. And I just put that little graphic below about vine trimming and I've told this story a number of times. I've told this story a number of times. Everybody used to have this fruit tree in the backyard. We had just come here and Morrie shows up at the house one day and says, oh I'm just going to prune your fruit tree a little bit. And I didn't grow in an agricultural situation. We didn't have any fruit trees in Patterson. Morrie gets up into this tree and starts whopping humps of the tree off. And I'm thinking, Morrie, what are you doing? He's pruning the tree. Did you ask the tree if it thought it needed pruning? If it thought you try climbing up there and lopping things off would make it happy? He'd say, I'm not going to ask the fruit tree. The fruit tree serves me. And I know by pruning this it will be more fruitful so I won't prune it. The America's most common religion says what does it mean that God's primary interest is not giving you the life you want or making you feel good about yourself? I've had this idea around before and sometimes people pull me aside and say, pastor, you really shouldn't talk this way. Because if you talk to someone and say, well, you know, why should I have a relationship with Jesus? Because he's going to prune you. I'd rather not have a relationship with Jesus. And this gets back to the whole moral social order thing. Because we very much imagine that there's, you know, I can be okay in this world if I get a good education, if I make the right friends, if I make good choices, if I do the right things, I can work with this social order and get for myself the kind of life I want. Or if that isn't working out then I can go looking for God and maybe get some help from God. And what this text says is this is a false choice. Because really there's life away from God, which is life away from divine. And then there's life with God where he prunes you. And so people say, pastor, you're not giving me a plan that gets me what I want. And then I say, have you lived it all? You have a plan that gets you what you want. But pastor, this is depressing. And I'd say, not necessarily. You see, if you believe in this order fully rational, can improvements in systems make life better for people? Yes. I would say that yes. You can improve the life of poor folks in Baltimore in a number of ways. And maybe we can help and maybe we won't. Usually there's a lot of trial and error and some things help and some things don't. But usually, by God's grace, we can make progress in this world, and that's a good thing. But the difficulty is, show me one place in this planet where the moral order is fully developed and functioning perfectly. And this is where we start to look at filters. Because you might say, well, in Baltimore where they're poor, it's obviously not working. But on Wall Street where they're wealthy, it obviously is working. But then you say, but wait a minute, didn't you just say that they're making all the money on Wall Street, that they're not getting involved tomorrow, and this is the source of the problem? Do you really tell me that just flushing people full of cash fixes their life? Have you ever gone to the internet sometime and googled what happens to lottery winners? It's a disaster. Do you know that three years after retirement from professional football, 75% of the players are divorced or bankrupt or both? Now, just this young man in Elk Grove, he's drafted on a team, alright. What's that going to mean? He's now going to be flushed with fame, flushed with cash, flushed with opportunity. You know, I love my son here, but if someone were to give Philip a million dollars and put him on every magazine in America, it'd probably ruin his life. He's got doubts, but I don't know. Jesus says to his disciples, That's an amazing statement. Apart from me, you can do nothing. We don't believe that. We very much believe that Jesus has this option over here that may be very well enhanced by life, but over here in this world with all of these moral structures and all of these systems, we can do just fine for avid. And Jesus says, apart from me, you can do nothing. If you do not remain in me, you are like a branch that is thrown away in withers. Did you notice that? It's thrown away in withers. Such branches are picked up and thrown into the fire and burned. If you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish and it will be done for you. This causes us to all other questions which we don't have time to get into, but those are important and hard questions. This is to my Father's glory that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples. And right now we begin to wonder what is real and what is good. I saw another news article where some of these young men in Baltimore were trying to stand between the cops and protestors, trying to buffer them just so neither side would be hurt. And I was thinking, what kind of courage does it take to do this? Jesus basically says, if you are not connected into me, you wither and die. Now this makes a ton of sense when we are looking at fruit, but we have all kinds of questions about how this actually works in our lives. What we often don't notice right away where this begins is Jesus begins by this and says, I am the true by. And the implication in this is that there are a lot of false bys. There are a lot of other things that we plug into. There are a lot of other ways that we try to make life work. There are a lot of other ways that we try to figure out how to get what we need. That first building over there, the nursery is, I've been around here long enough to know there are a lot of dead outlets in that building. There are a few in this building too. I pretty much know which one. But sometimes people will come in and use the facility and they will have a projector and they will have their extension cord and they start heading for something. And I will say, don't bother plugging into that one there. But they won't listen to me so then they plug and what happens? Nothing. This is kind of the picture that we run around with an extension cord in life and we are looking around and we see outlets and we are trying them. But life isn't quite as obvious as these plugs here where you plug it in and I got no power so I try another one. Usually what happens in life is we plug into a lot of things and things kind of work and we think it's okay and we think it's going. Jesus says in a sense, I want to help you cut to the chase. I am the true by. You will get life through me. And this is exactly where we have our problems because we look around and we say, but that's life and that's life and that's life and that's life. And Jesus says the only true life, the only true shape of life is mine. And this causes us a lot of trouble because if I, I would ask you, how many of you want to have the life of Jesus or you could have the life of Lebron James? Well, let's see, Jesus walked around and was tremendously popular for a while but then eventually was arrested and abandoned by his friends and died a horrible humiliating death naked on a cross. Or you could be Lebron James and get your own little mix of Sprite promoted, yesterday I saw on TV, and have lots of money and pretty much anything in the world you want. You might say, Lebron sounds good, Jesus, get a God and all, but I don't know. I am the true by. Being sources of true life and its source. Do you see God as the resource to help you shape your life and your world or do you believe that you can somehow appropriate systems that give us life apart from any system giver? One of my favorite movie lines was in a rehab movie called 28 Days where this woman named Glenn Wenders, a party animal, out there partying all the time, but soon discovered that her life of partying and alcoholism was destroying her. She thought booze was a good outlet to plug her extension cord into and she kept waiting for it to produce and it didn't. So then her boyfriend visits her in rehab and what is he sneaking for her? A thermos full of booze. And says, come on, let's have some fun. This little speech he gives her. No one adult human being is happy. People are born, they have a limited amount of time going around thinking life is dandy, but then inevitably tragedy strikes and they realize life equals loss. The whole point of the game is to minimize the pain caused by that equation. Now some do it by having kids or by making money or taking up quite collecting. Others do it by getting wasted. He's right. Life does equal loss. And we try to amuse ourselves and occupy ourselves and find meaningful things until they put us in the ground. Jesus comes and says, yes, life does equal loss, but I am the true vine being grafted into me. And this is what he does. Because Jesus is the true vine and we might think, wow, that ought to be great. But what do we see happening to Jesus? He is cut. But he isn't cut for himself. He's cut for us. We, in a sense, are the fruit of this cutting. And then the resurrection happens. So if I said to you, well, you can live like Jesus, which would mean running around being a carpenter and then doing some ministry for about three years, make a whole lot of enemies and have them kill you and crucify you, but after that you'll be raised to life. Or you could live like LeBron James. You might say, well, the resurrection piece is enticing, but I can see what LeBron gets now. And in a sense, there's your choice. You have the 28 Days Guide who looks around and says, everybody loses. Make the most of it while you're here. Or Jesus says, take your losses and turn them into mine by being engrafted into me. So the moralistic therapeutic deists, when they get in trouble, they cry out to God. Should you cry out to God? Yes, you should. Because part of what the moralistic therapeutic deists have is truth. God does help us. God does listen. God does answer our prayers. Not always how we want, not always when we want. Maybe in fact, he's pruning us and grafting us and tying us deeper into him so that we can have more of that life. I love the line in the song that we sang this morning about God seeking this joy that seeks us through pain. And some of you know that joy. There have been times in my life that have been the most painful, that have also been the most joyful. And I cannot explain it to you, but I know that it's true. And I know that a number of you have been there too. And so he comes to us and says, I am the true mine. You are my branches. Every branch that bears no fruit, the gardener cuts and throws them into the fire. But the branches that do bear fruit, he prunes. He cuts that and he cuts them hard. Why does he do it? To make you more fruitful. And I know some of you are sitting there and you're listening to this and you're resonating with this because you're saying, oh, the cutting is so hard, but I do taste the sweetness of the fruit. And then he weighs that as a Christian life. Because on the night he was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. This was him accepting his cutting. And he said, this is my body broken for you. The cross is this mysterious place where on one hand Jesus is experiencing unspeakable horror. But he did it for joy. And the joy he did it for was the joy of having us. And so while this bread goes through this morning, I want you to think about what he said. He is divine. We are the branches. Branches that bear no fruit. He cuts off and puts them into the fire. Branches that do bear fruit, he prunes. By this bread he feeds us. By his blood he gives us life. And I believe through what he prunes from you, he will use to make that fruitful. The table is for you. The Lord of God is strong. He is my God. Thank you God in me. He will come and save you. He will come and save you. He will come and save you. Thank you for giving us your time. Your time is ready. He will come and save you. He will come and save you. He will come and save you. And from your eyes he will arise again. He will come and save you. Take your souls to our spiritual garden. Do not be afraid. The Lord of God is strong. He is my God. Thank you God in me. He will come and save you. He will come and save you. He will come and save you. Thank you the Bittering One. Your God is strong enough. He will come and save you. Thank you God in me. He will come and save you. He will arise again. He will arise again. He will come and save you. Just as the vine feeds the branches, your Lord is feeding you with his body. Take, eat, remember and believe that he gave himself completely for the forgiveness of your sins. This is of course the product of the great. And Jesus says, this is my blood. Blood is how the cells and the members are fed. He gives it to his disciples and he says, take it and drink it. I give my blood so that you may have life and you may be fruitful and you may flourish. Connect it to me. Thank you God in me. Thank you to those who have broken our hands.