https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Cc7SsT5d74o

 If you follow the Jewish calendar, the Day of Atonement, Yom Kippur, happened just a little while ago. And some enterprising person decided that they would put up a website called eScapegoat and gave people the opportunity to confess their sins on a webpage. I didn't know a lot about the actual practice of Yom Kippur. According to Jewish tradition, God inscribes each person's faith for the coming year into a book. The book of life on Rosh Hashanah, and waits until Yom Kippur to seal the verdict. During the days of awe, a Jew tries to amend his or her behavior and seek forgiveness for wrongs done against God and against other human beings. The evening and the day of Yom Kippur are set aside for public and private petitions and confessions of guilt. At the end of Yom Kippur, one hopes that they have been forgiven by God. Daniel's had a tough week. We've been reading through the book of Leviticus, and when I read the Day of Atonement, or Yom Kippur in the book of Leviticus, I noted to me it seemed a lot more like the struggle with Ebola than with the contemporary celebration of Yom Kippur. Aaron is told what to wear, what not to wear, what to do, what not to do. The Lord spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, who died when they approached the Lord. The Lord said to Moses, Tell your brother Aaron that he is not to come whenever he chooses into the most holy place behind the curtain in front of the atonement cover at the ark, or else he will die. For I appear in the cloud over the atonement cover. This is how Aaron is to enter the most holy place. He must first bring a young bull for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering. He is to put on the sacred linen tunic with the linen undergarments next to his body. He is to tie the linen sash around him and put on the linen turban. These are sacred garments, and he must bathe himself with water before he puts them on. If you continue reading through Leviticus chapter 16, there's description after description and command after command of exactly what to do and what not to do, and as we saw a number of weeks ago, if he fails to do this, it may cost him his life. Now the tabernacle, as we've seen, is this tent that God has commanded them to set up, and the tabernacle is in the midst of the community, and the tabernacle itself is divided into two chambers. There's the holy place that has the lamp stand, and behind the far curtain is the most holy place in which sits the arm of the covenant, which has the mercy seat. Scholars debate whether that's God's throne or God's quick stool. In either case, that's the room that we're talking about, way in the back of the tabernacle, and it's the most holy place. And that is where the pillar of God, the shekinah glory of God, dwells above the ark. And Aaron is commanded, you may go there only once a year. What we've begun to see, however, is the potion of the tabernacle is really, in a sense, God's death to life factory. The sins of the people get converted into sacrifices, and those sacrifices get converted into fire and into blood, and sometimes water was used to wash away. And the tabernacle is the epicenter of this death to life program that God sets up in Leviticus. The difficult thing we have is if we were to say, now if you go to this, if you go to this Ebola tent, you must cover yourself from head to toe, and you must wear a mask, and you must wear gloves, and you must wear boots, and you must follow all of these procedures exactly, because if you don't, you may contract Ebola. And all of us listen to this and say, absolutely. After the two nurses in Texas who contracted the disease, after caring for this one patient, now all of us would say, if you're dealing with an Ebola patient, you absolutely must follow all of these procedures. But when we read about this kind of thing in the book of Leviticus, and Aaron has to do this and Aaron has to do that, we say, why? This is crazy. Is God like Ebola? What Leviticus would say is that sin is something. Sin exists. And in fact, Leviticus would say, sin is something that is so serious, you should pay as much attention to it as Americans are paying to the Ebola virus. Because in fact, while Ebola may be exceedingly rare in North America, sin is all around us. And so what the title of the Bible says is that sin must be managed and contained and dealt with with utter seriousness and utter care. And we listen to that and think, really? A lot of times people will say things like, whatever happened to sin? And they have a point. The difficulty is sometimes they think, if I ask the question, whatever happened to sin, then everyone will somehow snap up. But that isn't true. One of the things that we've been seeing throughout this series is that, as psychologists have noted, there's a fairly tight connection between sin and disgust. There are certain taboos that when we hear them, we are disgusted by them. Incest is one such taboo. A brother and sister marrying each other. We hear that, we say, that's horrible. Last year, an African American pastor from a church in Washington, D.C. wrote this article on the National Coalition. The importance of your dad reflects when discussing homosexuality and gay marriage. This article received a lot of fairly negative attention. People were disgusted by his disgust. About 20 years ago, Lee I. Haas wrote an article called The Wisdom of Repugnance and said, we should pay attention to what disgusts us, and these things should give us fear and we should want to keep sin far away from us. That, too, received a lot of negative attention, and in many ways, they have their point. A lot of people say we need to encourage disgust for sin because if we don't, all kinds of things will happen. We see a lot of these things happening. We have a married lesbian problem expecting their first child. Three women decide that they can be married together. In France, just a couple of weeks ago, a story of a 48-year-old stepmother marries a 45-year-old son. One of my friends on Facebook said, neither of them looks like a cross. Similarly, an article where in another country in Europe, this brother and sister decide to get married and they're having children together. Many of their children are having disabilities. The difficulty is that we say, if we have no moral bounds, then anything goes and this kind of thing will happen. I put Miss Hemsley there and her dog, not because they were allowed to marry, but because, quite famously, when she died, she left everything for the pooch. Won't people just do this kind of thing? On the other hand, people also note that the ick factor has been used in a lot of other situations. It's been used to justify racism. It's been used to justify sexism. We often see people saying, I don't want to live by those people because they're dirty. And you see these kinds of things. So does this ick factor, does this gag reflex, is that really a good moral guide? One commentator talking about Mike Huckabee when he was making some of these points made this comment. But the ick factor is gone. Maybe not for ordinary people, but for their leaders. Even in front of an audience of evangelicals, a Republican politician can cast aspersions on gay people, at least not directly. After all, everything's being recorded. But if you're going to cite the Old Testament as the basis for your beliefs, that's exactly what you're doing, since those passages call same-sex relationships an abomination. On the other hand, there will come a day when most Christians put as much stock in the verse saying that homosexuality is an abomination as they do in the nearby passage saying that eating selfish, eating selfish is also an abomination. And this is how the discussion goes back and forth. One and not the other. Here's the book of Leviticus. What should we do with it? What should we do about it? One of the most interesting concepts of this day of atonement in the book of Leviticus is the issue of the scapegoat. From the Israelite community, he is to take two male goats for a sin offering and a ram for a birth offering. Aaron is to offer the bull for his own sin offering to make atonement for himself and his household. And he is to take the two goats and present them before the Lord at the entrance of the tent of meeting. He is to cast lots for the two goats, one lot for the Lord and the other for the scapegoat. Actually, if you look in an older translation, there's a name in there, Azazel, and there's a lot of discussion. Is that a demon? Is that the wilderness? What is it? But the idea is that there's two goats. One becomes a sacrifice and the other becomes, as is known often, as the scapegoat. Aaron shall bring the goat whose lot falls to the Lord and sacrifice it for a sin offering. But the goat chosen by a lot as a scapegoat shall be presented alive before the Lord to be used for making atonement by sending it into the wilderness as a scapegoat. And we hear this and we say, now this is truly strange. But the idea is this, and I don't think it's too hard for us to understand. Sin is seen as something. And the idea is that sin is a burden. In fact, one of the most common words for sin in the Old Testament is the word for burden. It's a weight, and sometimes the word is used as something that is weighing down or sometimes it is lifting. It needs to be lifted up. I remember an old song that was sung when I was a child. Bergens are lifted at Calvary. And that uses that Old Testament language. But the idea is that the sin of the community gets put on the goat. And the goat takes the sin out into the wilderness, which in terms of their culture is the land of chaos. And you think about the Old Testament, the tov huwabohu at the beginning of Genesis 1, this chaos that God brings order to. And the idea is that the sin gets put on the goat, it's taken out into the wilderness, and it's gone. It's like the discarded coverings of people caring for those with Ebola. It's taken out and it's disposed of in a safe way. Now, what's interesting if we talk about the its factor and burdens and sin as a thing, is that moralists, both moderns and religious traditionalists, actually have more in common than they might think. Both see morality and its failure as a burden. Religious traditionalists will say things like, deny yourself in terms of sex. Deny, hold certain days of the week special. Of course, Jews have Saturday, Muslims have Friday, Christians have Sunday. There are foods to eat and foods not to eat. Christians, not as many unless you're a Roman Catholic. I grew up in New Jersey and fish was popular on Friday because they weren't going to eat and eat. Jews obviously have their dietary laws, Muslims do. They're not allowed to eat pork or drink alcohol. And their indulgence is to avoid. But all of this is both seen as a burden, because sin is a burden, but also as a burden to embrace. You might say, well, secularists don't have it. Secularists, many of the secularists that I know, are highly moral people. And they have their own rules. Many of them decide not to eat meat because it's bad for the planet or its ruled animals. There's the moral taint of unscrupulous manufacturing. Everybody loves their iPhone, but if you find a real moral secularist, they may turn their nose up and say, I'm not going to encourage Apple who's using unscrupulous methods in boxed on in China. Many are concerned about their carbon footprint and how much damage they are doing to the environment. And also don't have judgmental thoughts, words or actions unless people actually deserve it. And so what I see is that sometimes people say, oh, well, there's the religious people over here who are moral and the irreligious people are moral relativists. My experience is that just giving up religion will not make you immoral. It may change the morality to embrace, but both sides, in fact, are working to be moral. And both sides, in fact, are asserting that the morality is vitally important in terms of the health of the community and the planet. The apostle Paul said, what about sin? The wages of sin is death. Religious people will say, violating these moral laws will bring death to you and death to your community. Irreligious people will similarly say, violating these moral laws will bring death to you and death to the planet and death to the community. Both groups actually say the wages of sin is death, but they'll define sin differently. Morality brings life, immorality death. That is exactly what the Levitical system says. They'll read the text and look at Aaron with his garments and robes and say, oh, that so has been. But almost everybody today has a moral system and asserts that, in fact, one moral system brings life and another death. A failing moral system brings death. Morality requires sacrifice and caution. But both groups also say it's up to people to save the world. One group will say, if you're not scrupulous in terms of your sexuality, you're bringing God's condemnation on the world. The other group says, if you're not scrupulous in terms of how you use your money and what you do in the environment, you'll bring destruction to the world. Both groups say it's up to you to save the planet. They'll just give you two different sets of rules. Traditionally, lots of traditional morality is bringing divine judgment. Secularism, violations of morality as bringing social and environmental catastrophe. We cannot fully appreciate Jesus unless we fully appreciate the book of Leviticus. Because here what we have in the tabernacle is essentially a death to life factory where God says you're doing all of this sinning. And what the day of atonement really was in the book of Leviticus was the clean up day of the factory. Aaron goes into the Holy of Holies once a year to sprinkle blood on the Ark of the Covenant itself. Why? Because of the accumulated sin of the people. And so actually when the tabernacle is gone and the temple is gone, I did the research because why on earth do they continue to have the day of atonement? As you can see in Judaism, it becomes a more generic day of atonement for the people. But the original purpose of the day, as you find in the book of Leviticus, which is essentially the cleansing of the tabernacle and the tabernacle and the temple from the accumulated sin of the people, that's gone. Why don't Christians have the day of atonement? Jesus, when the woman with the flow that made her unclean came and touched him, became not only clean but well. Jesus, when the letter comes to him and Jesus touches him, becomes not only clean but well. Well, Jesus acts in a very surprising way towards the temple. Jesus, who could be very scrupulous with respect to a lot of the laws of the Old Testament, when it comes to the temple, curses the fig tree and clears out the court of the Gentiles from the money changers, and is accused of threatening to destroy the temple, and all of the New Testament begins to say, Jesus replaces the temple. Now, why would I talk this way? Because you see in the Old Testament, they all had a very concrete sense that sin brings death. And how must sin be dealt with? We need to do a sacrifice. We need to be very scrupulous. We need to watch all of this clean and unclean stuff very carefully because our sin must be managed. Our sin must be burned on the sacrifice. Our sin must be cleansed. But then when Jesus comes in, he touches a woman and she becomes clean. He touches a man and he becomes clean. And Jesus essentially says, you don't need the temple anymore because cleanliness is so embodied in me. I send sin and uncleanness to the ends of the earth. Jesus is so powerful that the temple is obsolete. At Jesus' crucifixion, the curtain in the temple gets torn in two. And what that meant was the temple is finished. What happened with Jesus and then the church differs markedly? Jesus in his life possessed the power to cleanse that the temple could not offer. Jesus in his death becomes a sacrifice for sin so permanent and ultimate that Christians believe that Christians believe made the temple sacrifices obsolete. Jesus in his resurrection becomes the ultimate embodiment of the power of the world to wield death, being overturned into a life that cannot decay or be corrupted. This is why Jesus coming is considered good news. Israel failed in its ability to operate the law temple death to life machinery. Israel could not save herself by using the tools God gave her. Do you believe modern humanity can save itself with the tools it possesses? The apostles break into the long conversation of Israel with good news. The old death to life factory has been eclipsed by the one far more powerful than the temple ever would. The woman with the issue of blood, the lepers, the religiously and politically wobbly, have seen a great light. This Jesus comes with the power to make clean the frightened woman who dared to try to touch him. This Jesus makes whole the man with the defiling skin disease touched by them. This Jesus dies publicly in shame and humiliation and breaks the power of death itself. The tabernacle and the temple are replaced by the risen Christ. The thing the Romans could not understand about Christians was why don't they have a temple? Why don't they have a statue? They believed Jesus was in their midst. They believed that a man with this kind of power was right there, available to them, and was in fact for them and committed to them. I think in many ways we underappreciate Jesus. Do you believe you have a personal relationship with the God man who could do these things? That can utterly destroy death, that could heal with a touch, that can not only handle what in the Bible is the smaller burden, which is our physical health, but the larger burden, which is the rebellion within our hearts. Jesus brings huge improvement in his sacrifice. Jesus makes people morally better through conversion. It is resurrected by Jesus brings the new creation, creation 2.0, the end of the age of decay, and will remake the universe. The Bible says nothing less than this about Jesus. Do we believe it? Annie Dillard said this, why do people in church seem like a cheerful, brainless tourist on a package tour of the absolute? Does anyone have the foggiest idea what sort of power we blithely invoke? Or as Isis said, does no one believe a word of it? The churches are children playing on the floor with their chemistry sets, mixing up a batch of TNT to kill a Sunday morning. It is madness to wear lady straw hats and velvet hats to church. We should all be wearing cratch helmets. Usher should issue light preservers and signal flares. They should latch us to our feuds, for the sleeping God may wake some day and take offense, or the waking God may draw us to where we can never return. When you read the book of Leviticus, you get an image into the deadly seriousness of sin, into the other scope of our rebellion and the determination of God to free us. In Leviticus, in a sense, God gives us tools and says, go ahead and try to make your way to me. And Israel failed. So when Jesus, he comes and says, you cannot make your way to me. I make my way to you and I will save you. I will change your life. I will turn it around. I will drop you in your tracks. Some of you have had experiences of this and can testify to it. Others of us have seen it in tiny incremental pieces. But what I want us to see this morning is that the man we talk about is the kind of man who could renovate an entire universe, the likes of which we see with the word. Do we believe him? Do we believe it? Let's pray. Lord, we are silly children mixing TNT on the floor of the church. We have no idea who we're dealing with most of the time. We imagine that you're far away or we imagine that you're tame or we imagine that you're this sycophan, divine butler who's just waiting for us to show you a little attention or adoration. When the word of this book says, you are the kind of man who could still a storm. You could heal a woman's disease unintentionally with her just grasping you in faith. You turned death into life and when we killed you, you walked out of the tomb. Forgive us Lord for having such small imaginations. Forgive us Lord for treating you some like some religious object that we venerate and maybe grab. Maybe it'll help. Help us to imagine that you are the master of the universe and that nothing is outside of your power. May we give our lives to you as we should. In the name of Jesus, amen. Would you stand? Would you stand? Jesus, Jesus, the Father, come for us. Now pass me on the name of Jesus.