https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rWwKvxp6Ucw

 What happened to the picture? Don't worry about it. All the pictures are gone. When Roger isn't back there, we kind of make things up as we go. Hope not all the pictures are gone. Are all the pictures gone from the sermon? Why don't you pull up the original sermon file and then that's separate. Should be in the drop box. There we go. Is that the original sermon file? Okay. This was the Valentine's card that Mia Farrow gave to Woody Allen in 1993. It's a very sad card, as you can see. She has pictures of her various children with a letter opener piercing it and a picture of her daughters who he taped to the letter opener. We often say that hurt people. Go on to the next one, Sydney. There we go. Some of you who have long memories might remember that all of this drama is 20 years old and it was reawakened on February 1 when Dylan Farrow printed an open letter in the New York Times detailing her allegations of abuse that she suffered when she was seven years old by Woody Allen. And it came up because he's on track for a Golden Globe lifetime achievement award and she basically said, why should anyone celebrate a moral monster like Woody Allen? Now this sparked what has been a lively ongoing internet back and forth raging on all kinds of things. But if there's anything that isn't in that, it is that what Dylan wants here pictured in his arms when she was young. What she wants is for him to be known as a moral monster who destroyed her innocence, not a great filmmaker whose work should be a thaw. She was hurt and she wants it to hurt, too. She was robbed of her innocence and she wants to be robbed of his glory. And so back and forth the fighting goes. And what's interesting is that her chief target is his reputation. Next slide. Skin is one of the most amazing and amazing things about our body. We don't think about it often. We take it for granted. But it is our body's largest organ and it has this amazing capacity to keep out the bad and to let in the good. And in fact, skin is so vital to us that if it's critically damaged, we can't live. Next slide. This is a very difficult picture to look at of a burn victim. And when our skin is so utterly compromised, we are subject to infection and in fact, if there's a burn victim, the last thing you would ever want to do is get to touch this burn victim. And so burn victims are in a strange space where on one hand they want and need human contact. They would love nothing more than a hug. But a hug would destroy them. They can't be touched. And so how on earth can you treat someone whose skin is completely destroyed to touch them is to hurt them? Now let's imagine Woody Allen and Dylan Farrow. If Woody Allen just came to her and said, I'm sorry you feel this way. Would that heal her? Or would it hurt her? If Woody Allen came and gave some kind of part of apology, what would that do? She would probably want him to get away, want him to go away, want him to get as far away from her as possible. My thesis is that in our relationship with God, a lot of what we are in this world are relational, emotional burn victims. We can't stand to be with God, nor can we live without Him. This story actually starts many, many years before. You see here Mia Farrow, 21 years old. In the fullness of her beauty, her talent, she was born to a couple of Hollywood celebrities who were also beautiful. And she was born with the kind of power and privilege and wealth that none of us can really imagine. And at the age of 21, she marries 50 years old Fred Sinatra, also at the peak of his power and his talent. Could you imagine any better start? Could you imagine anyone more privileged or with more assets or possibilities? Two years after the marriage, they're broken up because Frank didn't want her to work on Rosemary's baby, and so he simply sent her papers of divorce. So then for the next year she goes to India, eat, pray, love style to try to find herself, and then she comes back to America. And what does she do? But she begins taking up with a man who is actually in his third marriage, Andre Previn, and while he in fact is married to Dory Previn, Andre and Mia are having an affair. She's again 16 years older, and she becomes pregnant with her child. And when the news of that gets out, Dory, Andre and Previn's wife, goes into a mental hospital because she is completely undone by this betrayal. And while she's in the hospital, she writes a very eerie, powerful, beautiful song, Beware of Young Girls. And in this story, she, you can look it up on YouTube, it's easy to find, in this story she just sings about the betrayal and the pain about, you were my friend, you came to my home, you said you liked my wedding ring. And she sings of her pain and her betrayal. But what is Mia trying to do? She's trying to construct a life. She's trying to use her beauty and her power and her afterwards and her power. She's trying to construct a life for herself. And if this means that she needs to take a husband from another woman, so be it. The heart wants what it wants. And so, next slide. And so what she and Andre begin doing is having a family. They have three children biologically together. But it seems that in Mia's quest to find shalom, to find well-being, to find peace, she wants to construct this family so she starts adopting children. So with three biological children on her own, she then adopts two more. One of them being Soo Yi, who is between five and seven years old, having been in a poor Korean orphanage. But there's not enough, it seems, to fill the hole in her heart. That marriage lasts nine years and then she takes up with brilliant filmmaker Woody Allen. And together they adopt two more children and have one child between them. But actually now we learn that a child that the world thought they had between them was actually Frank Sinatra's child because even though their marriage broke up after two years, now she claims she's basically been with him, stayed with him for the next 20 years. She and Woody Allen would never actually marry and would never actually even live together. They lived across the street from each other. But on and on the cycle goes. How can we find rest? How can emotional burden victims find well-being and secure it? And here you have two people with enormous financial power, enormous talent, enormous fame, brilliant, beautiful. Oh, Woody's not really beautiful. And they put it all together. As you well know, while she is cheating on Woody with Frank Sinatra, he's beginning a romantic relationship with her 19-year-old daughter, Soon Yi. And then she discovers what's been happening. And the song, Beware of Young Women, has to haunt her bitterly. What she has done to one has now been done to her, her own daughter. And so then in the custody battle that was played out in the papers in 1993, the molestation accusation arises and other pieces arise. And so today, even today people say, well, did it happen? Did this happen? One columnist, Matthew Linker, notes, he says, I don't know what happened, but what I do know is that Woody Allen is a nihilist. And that basically if you look at his films, especially Crimes and Misdemeanor, which is the story of an ophthalmologist who is having an affair, cheating on his wife, and then his mistress decides to confront his wife and divulges the affair, decides that the best way out of this is to kill his wife. And so he successfully does this in the movie and then gets away with it and at the end of the movie he's a happy man because he solved his problems by himself. The lower picture, actually Suzy and Woody Allen have been married for over 20 years and they've adopted two young daughters. What stories will these girls tell 20 years from now? We are relational, emotional, burn victims, trying desperately to construct whatever way we can, with whatever power we can, a life that suits us, a life that will bring us meaning. Mia Farrow tries to construct for herself a family, but in the construction of that family, within that very family comes the betrayal, something parallel to what she had offered years before. It's amazing because all of us are susceptible to the idea that if we only had more opportunity, more success, more talent, more power, if we in a sense could be like the Greek gods, then we could construct for ourselves a life, but in some ways Mia and Woody are like Greek gods, powerful with opportunities, but most of us don't have, and what they actually build looks so much like a Greek tragedy. So if you're in my Sunday school class, you can't answer this question. What is the first of the Ten Commandments broken in the Bible? If you're really clever, you'll say, well, we're on the third commandment, I bet you that's it. It is. Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, did God really say you must not eat from any tree in the garden? The woman said to the serpent, we may eat fruit from the trees of the garden, but God did say you must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it or you will die. You will not certainly die, the serpent says to the woman, for God knows that when you eat from it, your eyes will be open and you will be like God, knowing good and evil. When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it, and she also gave some to her husband who was with her and he ate it. Then the eyes of both of them were opened and they realized they were deep. So they sowed big leaves together and made coverings for themselves. The serpent is the world's first reputation assassin. The serpent was crafter than any of the other animals and the serpent knew all they needed, the man and the woman, was the tiny little seed of an idea that this God who had made them, that this God in fact they walked with in the garden naked and unafraid, that this garden, that this God, somehow is holding out on them there. The serpent was the first reputation assassin. The catastrophe of human society began with our fearful suspicion that God was holding out on us and we must take matters into our own hands to secure the power and the well-being we deserve. So the woman reached out her hand, takes the fruit and shares it with her husband. The fruit was good and the power they acquired was good, but they immediately realized that power, what power entailed. And in the new light of their power, they also discovered their vulnerability. The great gift of skin would always be a vulnerable gift. And with their new eyes they realized they were surrounded by threat. And if you continue to read the story you'll know that it goes on and on. Next slide. The irony was that they did not lead a serpent who was the true threat, but they fled the sound of power itself even as they wished to wield that power. Just the chapter before at the sight of the woman's skin, the man cried with delight. Skin would be for them a garden of delight. Now even skin is a threat. Beware of young girls, Adam. Beware of older men, Eve. When Mia found Woody's pictures of the skin of Soon Ye, the threat was clear. Joy Kreven was slower to realize the threat of Mia's skin, but I would imagine that she, on the basis of her song, would not make the same mistake twice. All young female skin would be seen as a threat no matter the person it contained. What happened with Adam and Eve? What happened on the basis of the threat of God and his lost reputation? What would happen when Cain and Abel would both be offering sacrifices and Cain would see that his sacrifice was not received? What did he do? He killed his brother. To seek Shalom, we kill another. See, it's not about God's ego that this commandment is given. When we often hear this, I remember growing up and hearing this commandment, I used to think, well this seems like a petty one. And this is another one of these commandments where initially things, well I can skirt this commandment if I at least, you know, be careful what I say so I won't cuss and I won't say bad words. And of course the Jews for centuries said, ashamed, which is basically a way of saying the maid instead of saying the maid. So therefore they would comply with the third commandment. But the third commandment is not simply about the words we think. And the third commandment is not given because God somehow is insecure and he's afraid we're going to say bad things about him. The third commandment is given because when we begin to imagine that we are on our own and it's simply up to us to make this world work and to construct for ourselves the life we want, we then begin to take whatever power we have and we begin to use it, usually at the expense of other people. And the human catastrophe turns another cycle, turns another generation in our hearts and in our lives. This garden, this God whose reputation had just been damaged came to the garden to visit his friends. They did not come forward in joy as children to greet him. He called to them and they answered him from their hiding place. Who told you you were naked? The man who's only heard at this point had been self-inflicted, blamed his maker and his wife in the same sentence. He became the first human judge and his judgment was defensively false. And on it goes from there. God turns to the woman. It was the serpent. It's always at another's expense. And then the man and the woman who are poorly covered by fig leaves, God gives them animal skin so right away we begin to see animals are now bearing the brunt of our betrayal. You know there's really three options when it comes to God. And right now atheism is on the rise. I heard that I was listening to a Tim Keller sermon this week. He made the observation that during the Cold War when many of us were being raised, the great threat was communism. And because communists were godless, anybody know when we started putting God we trust on our money? It was during the Cold War. Because our threats were communists. So we're going to be religious people. In God we trust to hold back the communists. Well the communists are long gone now. Where does our threat come from today? Religious fundamentalists. And so now suddenly Americans hop on the other line and we're not like those religious fundamentalists and atheism is on the rise. So when there is no God, who is life left up to to make work? Philip Lockham wrote an amazing poem. An atheist poem. I read it this week and it's one of the most brilliant things I've even read. It's one of the saddest things. He notes the specious stuff that says no rational being can fear a thing that will not fear. When I talk to my atheist friends they say, atheism is much better. No heaven, no hell. When you die there's just nothing. Philip Lockham notes, no rational being can fear a thing it will not feel. Not seeing. No sight, no sound, no touch or taste or smell. Nothing to think with, nothing to love or link with. The anesthetic from which none come around. He basically says, the stark hole of the grave. We flee from all our lives but all will be contained by it. And if that is all you're left with, you'd better grab what you can now. The second option is that God is good all the time and in the end, one way or another, he will bring justice, he will bring joy, he will bring righteousness, he will bring blessedness. But can relational, emotional burden victims believe this? Next slide. And so then, what the man and the woman begin to imagine in the garden is that God is not good. God cannot be trusted. So God must be hid from. God must be manipulated. God must be coerced. God must be bought off. In one way or another we're going to find the religion or find the mechanism to get what we want at God's expense or at anyone else's expense and that's how we'll make life work. And so we gain all the power we can and construct for ourselves a life that we imagine will bring us peace and well-being. But if Mia Farrow with all that she has can construct this, what chance can you have? Next slide. There are two ways to violate God's name. One is to use God and to have him co-sign with everything that you think or do. Well I just don't think this, this isn't just me, God is telling you to do this. Okay. The other way is to live as if God is not there and he can't be trusted. It's a great scene in The Fellowship of the Ring, the movie where Bilbo has been having this ring for a long time. Gandalf tells him you should get rid of the ring and Bilbo just keeps fingering it. Why should I get rid of this ring? Why can't I keep it? It's mine. And Gandalf confronts him. Bilbo you have this ring long enough. I'm not trying to rob you. I'm trying to help you. But Bilbo is an emotional burden victim and if you touch him, he flees. But if you stay away from him, he feels abandoned. Next slide. If you've ever tried to love a person who cannot trust, you know what I mean. Mistrust is a prison whose doors are locked from the inside. If you approach an emotional relational burden victim, they will attack you or flee from you. And if they flee, they will condemn you as a man made them. What we are, when we are in the grip of our burdens, are like wild animals who flee or run. In the midst of a world full of pain and fighting every bit as bitterly as we see between Mia and Woody, God came to us covered with skin. He tried to communicate to the defensive that they are indeed guilty and that they are fearful that they are in fact loved. And this resulted in what was completely predictable, his death. In the midst of a world full of pain and fighting every bit as bitter as what we see. We took him and tore off his clothing, leaving him not a fig leaf or an animal skin. And we nailed his naked body to a cross on a hill because we thought that mocking, his nakedness, should be shared as many mockers as possible. And from this cross, he asks us, now do you see that I am not trying to rob you but to help you? Now do you see that I am for you with you on your side? Now can you see that I will bear your hurts, bear your guilt, bear your hell? Now might you try to take the first cautious tentative step to trust me and love me once more? You see the cross is the answer to the garden. And we who would flee from him and cover our skin as best we can with fig leaves of money and power and opportunity, he comes to us stripped by us and says, I only want to do you good. Would you let me in? If you recognize that you are an emotional, relational burn victim, can you admit it to yourself? Can you admit it to another? Can you recognize that our wounds are so deep and so painful that anyone who wants to help we actually push away? And if we can recognize that, maybe then we can begin to see our deliverance. That the God who saw them in the garden and said, why are you hiding? Comes to us on the cross and says, stripped of my power, stripped of my glory, stripped of my threat to you, now that you have safely nailed upon a tree, now can you see that I am for you? Because in fact you can see that you can begin to heal. You can begin to recognize that all of the things that you found were problems. Your lack of money, your lack of power, your lack of everything else really isn't the problem you thought it was. Because in fact, if he is with you, who can be against you? And if we can become even slightly less ripped by this pain and this fear, maybe, maybe, we can begin to open his eyes and feel his peace and find his peace even in this broken world. Let's pray. Lord, you come to us and you tell us that you love us and we doubt you. You ask us not to destroy your reputation with others because we know that mistrust is a virus and once it lodges, it's hard to be free from its grip. And so you come to us as a man full of skin and that skin we flay with whips and that skin we expose on a cross and that skin we mop with our words and with our spittle. And from that cross you ask, don't you see I am not here to rob you? I gave birth to you. Would you let me heal you? Help us Lord to say yes. Help us Lord to let you in. Help us to realize that although our skin is charred and broken, there is a balm in Gilead to heal us and to make us whole. You are our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand?