https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PxZdBMFkzJw

 This picture was taken from our church camp out in New Jersey in 1977. You know, we're all parts of different tribes in different ways. And as a young, I was born and birthed until I went off to college, I was part of this tribe. And it was a small church like this one, full of a lot of diversity. And it was a good tribe to be born into and to be raised into. One of the changes that we're doing is we're playing with, we don't have the old remote, so we have this remote. So we're still getting the kicks out of a bunch of different things. We can get this board right here if I want to. We're parts of lots of different types of tribes. One of the things that I learned when I moved here to Northern California is that there are Raiders fans and there are Niners fans. And the two don't mix a lot, or at least they love their rivalry. There are Kings fans, and then there are Lakers fans, and there are Giants fans, and there are A's fans. And then there are those of us who have our little gadget tribes, and there are Android people and iPhone people, and there are Mac people and PC people, and there are political tribes, there are Democrats and there are Republicans, and there are ethnic tribes, and there are language tribes. And in fact, we have tribes all over the place. And these tribes inform us and mold us and shape us and change us. One of the most interesting things about American history that most people are unaware of is that race-based slavery did not start at the beginning. Anybody know the first state, the first colonial, the first colony to institute legalized slavery? Any guesses? Massachusetts. Not Virginia. Not a Southern colony. Massachusetts. And in fact, early in the colonial period, there were many indentured servants who came across, and some were white Europeans and some were black Africans. And initially, once you worked off your period of indentured servitude, you were free. But at some point, people got the big idea that, you know what, we can, if we make slavery race-based, we can perpetually enslave this group of people. And that's how African-American racial slavery began. It didn't start that way. But then these things dig on and they perpetuate, and of course, we know the history of what happened based on those decisions. Tribes are important, and tribes are strong. Some of our strongest tribes and tribalisms are religions. And sometimes they're Christian, non-Christian, sometimes they're groups within the Christian church, Roman Catholic versus Protestant versus Orthodox, and sometimes they're even churchy. This is our church versus their church, and Living Stones has its way, and another church over there has its way. You'll find tribalism in the Bible, and one of the most startling passages about tribalism comes in the book of Numbers. When Israel lived in Shittim, the people began to commit sexual immorality with the daughters of Moab. These women invited the people to sacrifices of their gods, and then the people ate and bowed down to their gods. When Israel joined themselves to Baal-Pior, the anger of the Lord flared against Israel. The Lord said to Moses, arrest all the leaders of the people, and hang them up before the Lord in broad daylight, so that the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel. So Moses said to the judges of Israel, each of you must execute those of his men who were joined to Baal-Pior. Just then one of the Israelites came and brought his brothers, and he brought his brothers a Midianite woman, in the plain view of Moses and the whole community of the Israelites, while they were weeping at the entrance of the tent of Bede. When Phidias son of Eliezer, son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he got up from amongst the assembly, took a javelin in his hand, and went after the Israelite man into the tent, and thrust through the Israelite man and into the woman's abdomen. So the plague was stopped from the Israelites. Those that died in the plague were 24,000. Until we hear this story, we think, oh my, what is this story about? And in fact, many who hear this story have their own tribal bias responses about the Bible. Some will read this and say, this is more of what we need. In fact, the story of Phidias' zeal becomes important in terms of the life of Israel. And on in the Bible, when you talk about zeal, this passage will be remembered. Others will read this passage and say, see, this is the kind of tribalism that religion and the Bible fosters. This is all the stuff we should try to get away from. Careful readers of the Bible might know there are a number of interesting things going on in this passage. In fact, as we will see in today's passage, there are some very interesting things happening. Part of what happens in the Bible is that different passages in the Bible are often, in a sense, in conversation with one another. For example, here we have Israel defiling themselves with Moabite women. So some would say, see, Israelites need to keep to themselves. But don't forget, later on in the book, the sons of Elimelech will go to Moab and they will marry, and one of them will marry Ruth. And then in fact, after Elimelech and his two sons die, Naomi, who is bitter, will go back to Bethlehem. But Ruth binds herself to Naomi. And if you read the book of Ruth again and again and again and again, the book of Ruth keeps reminding you, Ruth is a Moabite. Ruth is a Moabite. Ruth is a Moabite. And then, as we go into the end of the book of Ruth, you will recognize that, Ruth, this Moabite girl saves Israel by marrying another Israelite. And in fact, Ruth, the Moabite, will become an ancestor of David, who will save Israel from the Philistines. The other irony about the story of Numbers is, it was a Midianite girl that is taken into the camp, but Moses is married to a Midianite girl. And in fact, Moab come from the descendants of Lot. And so all of these Bible passages are in conversation with each other. And they're exploring the dynamics and the nuances and what it means to live in a diverse context. And how tribalisms, good and bad, healthy and unhealthy, have to be worked through in the Kingdom of God. Jethro, Exodus chapter 18, Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard about all that God had done for Moses and for his people Israel, that the Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt. Now, isn't this interesting? Moses not only marries a Midianite girl, but her father is a priest in Midian. Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, together with Moses' sons and his wife, came to Moses in the desert, where he was camping by the mountain of Yad. He said to Moses, I, your father-in-law Jethro, am coming to you, along with your wife and her two sons with her. Moses went out to meet his father-in-law and bowed down and kissed him. They each asked about the other's welfare, and then they went into the tent. Now, there's a lot of discussion here about what tent did they go into. It seems quite clear that both the story in chapter 17 of the Israelites' war with the Amalekites and this story with Jethro are placed in the book thematically, not chronologically. And so it's quite likely by what follows that the tent they go into is the tent of Midian, which is the place that Moses goes to meet God. It's the tabernacle. It's the place, in fact, that the Israelites go to meet God. And so Moses and Jethro go into the tent. Moses told his father-in-law all that the Lord had done to Barak and to Egypt for Israel's sake and all the hardships that had come on them along the way and how the Lord had delivered them. Jethro rejoiced because of all the good that the Lord had done for Israel, whom he had delivered from the land of Egypt. Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord who has delivered you from the hand of Egypt and from the hand of Pharaoh, who has delivered the people from the Egyptian control. Now I know that the Lord is greater than all the gods, for in the thing in which they dealt proudly against them, he has destroyed them. Then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, brought a burnt offering and sacrifices for God. And Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat food with the father-in-law of Moses before God. Now you might think, what's with the coming to eat food with them? Do you remember one of the chief complaints about Jesus in the New Testament? He ate with sinners. Who is Jethro? Jethro is a priest, a Midian. Now if you look at a map, you'll notice that Midianites are right next to the Moabites and the Ammonites. And in fact, if you remember the story from Numbers, the Moabite religion was no nice religion. In fact, on through Israelite history, the religion of the Moabites and the Ammonites and the Gideonites and the other Canaanites, these were terrible religions where they would sacrifice children, where shrine prostitution was simply a way of doing church. Jethro is a priest in Midian. What kind of faith do you think Jethro had? In fact, how much of the sermon is in this? Because when did you put the sermon in, Roger? Where's Roger? There's another file in the drop box under sermons that, because I updated the sermon this morning. And I knew when I got to this part that if the update wasn't in, I'd know it. So can you find, I should have said that before the sermon, because actually the whole second half of the sermon isn't in the file you put in. And you might look and say, wow, we got out of church ten minutes early. I kind of want you to hear the second half of the sermon. See, we don't have two outlets in this new computer yet, so they're quickly flipping between the monitor in the back and the monitor here. Okay. Yeah, there it is. Jethro is a polytheist. Jethro knows how to run a religious organization in a late Bronze Age Canaanite people. He in fact believes there are many gods. And in fact, what he declares after hearing what Yahweh had done for them is that Yahweh must be a stronger god than the other gods. Because as we looked at during the Egyptian stories, the people understood then that these conflicts between nations were conflicts between gods. And to have Yahweh beat down so hard on the gods of the Egyptians must mean that Yahweh is a superior god. And in fact, if you go back earlier to the book of Exodus, you'll notice that this is one of the reasons that God gives three times for what he is doing. I want the whole world to know me. And so what is in fact happening now, and we're seeing in this meeting up between Moses, his father-in-law, and Aaron and the elders is in fact Exodus-style evangelism. Jethro is a polytheist. Jethro has been practicing all kinds of religion, but just now in hearing the story of what Yahweh has done for his people, lights are beginning to come on in Jethro's head that maybe Yahweh is not like the other gods. And then what happens is even stranger, because Jethro begins to give advice to Moses. In fact, you'll notice that Moses is sitting down and judging the people, and they're all in the desert, and conflicts arise, business conflicts, relational conflicts, and how do you sort them out? Well, in the ancient world kings would sort them out. They didn't have three branches of government, so everyone would come to Moses. And so Jethro sees that Moses is spending day after day after day listening to all the people's advice, choosing between people, and Jethro says, wait a minute, this is stupid. Moses, you need to get organized. You have a whole people to manage here. Why don't you select judges who will hear the easier cases, so judges over groups and then judges over tribes, and then you can hear only the hardest cases, and that way your workload will be manageable. But now I've heard a number of sermons on this passage, and often it's saying, well, see, you know, we should all be organized. But what they miss in this passage is that Jethro is a priest of Minian. He is a pagan priest who has been operating religious organizations among the Canaanites. And then you might think, well, why don't they do judging God's way? A little bit later in the book of Exodus you'll see that it's not hard for God to give detailed instructions. In fact, later in the book of Exodus, there will be enormously detailed instructions given to the specific laws of the Israelites and the construction of the tabernacle. It seems here quite likely that God wants Moses to listen to his pagan father-in-law and learn from him. And this is a startling thing. Could God have just told Moses? God in fact seems that he wants Moses to be in community with Jethro and in fact to learn from him. Why is this important? We are seeing God's mission and action here. God is doing his missional work through the messy tribal boundaries and conflicts of our world. Do you know that you live in one of the most tribally complex situations in America today? Just look around yourself in this church. We have people from how many different ethnic paths? Do we have Niner's fans in the room? Yeah, I know who you are. And we have Raiders fans in the room. And I'm not going to ask you to shout out, but we have Democrats and Republicans in the room. And we have people from European ancestry and we have people from African ancestry and we have people from Asian ancestry and many of us have ancestries from how many different places in the world? And we have people who, in fact we have so many tribes in this room I can't begin to detail them all. I'm using an Android phone, let it be known. Not an iPhone. All these different tribes. And in fact, you're living in the midst of all of these tribal complexities. And how on earth do you get along with each other? How do you relate to one another? And where does God fit into this entire matrix? And how do we navigate this? These are tremendously difficult, complex, and important things. And I think what we have here in the story of Jethro and Moses is the beginning of a window of learning how the Gospel moves into our tribally fractured world. Not necessarily to get rid of all our tribalism. I'm glad we have Raiders fans and Niners fans in this room. Did the Raiders make the playoffs this year? What? Oh, oh, that must mean no. I'm not a Niners fan. I have no fan. I play fantasy football. Curtis has thoughts about that too, but people are probably there now. But this is the point. The Gospel doesn't mean our tribalisms end. Because there's nothing wrong with many of our tribalisms. In fact, some of our tribalisms are the spice of life. The Gospel means that somehow God appropriates the good things of this world and brings us together. In fact, in the book of Revelation, there's a vision where God has before him the tribes and the peoples of the earth. God doesn't wash away our tribes. God claims what's good in our tribalisms. And brings them to himself. Isaiah 60 in fact is one of the most important passages that talks about this. Arise, shine, for your light has come. The splendor of the Lord shines on you. For look, darkness covers the earth. And those of you who have heard John chapter 1, the New Testament so often rips on the things in the book of Isaiah and the Old Testament. For look, darkness covers the earth and deep darkness covers the nation. But the Lord shines on you. His splendor appears over you. Nations come to your light. Kings to your bright light. Look around you. They all gather and come to you. Your sons come from afar. And your daughters are escorted by guardians. Then you will look and smile. You will be excited. And your heart will swell with pride. For the riches of distant lands will belong to you. And the wealth of nations will come to you. Camel caravans will cover your rows. Young camels from Midian. Isaiah 60 is this glorious vision of the nations of the world for whom they suddenly begin to realize who Yahweh is. And they suddenly begin to realize that a lot of what they've been developing, God has seeded in His good creation. A lot of what they have been developing, God has given to them. And suddenly they find their home in Him. And it's not just a Jewish God. And it's not just a Palestinian thing. He becomes, you know, that among all the major world religions, the Christian religion is unique. Why? Because every other major world religion is still based in the place it was founded. Christianity has been the most amazing, has shown the most amazing capacity to hot cultural and tribal groups. Now I have Jewish ancestry in me, but I bet or bet most of you don't. And you call yourselves Christians. Isn't that a funny thing? You live a complex tribal life here in Northern California. And often you do it without a thought. I just look at the rows and I see how you're clustered together. We see people, we see Jackie sitting next to Carol. And if you come in during the middle of the week, you find those two putting up Christmas trees and cleaning and doing all their things. And they're just carrying on like the best of friends. And you think, how can this African American woman and this Hawaiian woman have such community and fellowship? Where does that come from? But at the same time, we have a number of difficult tribal walls that we don't know how to negotiate. Moses, in fact, must have had a very complex marriage. Later on, there'll be some conflict that arises because Miriam and Aaron have a conflict with Moses' wife and she's called a kushite. We don't exactly know what's going on in that passage because her father-in-law is from Midian, but she's called a kushite, which means she's from Africa and has dark skin. And so right away, all of these tensions are in there. And how on earth do we work together when we're different? Moses and Israel will be the place through which the revelation of Yahweh comes. And Israel's mission is a witness to the nation. And Jephro is the beginning. Over the last couple of weeks, the big hubba on the social networks have been, I don't want to say Phil Nickerson, that's not Phil Robertson, the Duck Dynasty dudes. And there's been a ton of discussion about what Phil said about his beliefs about homosexuality and his quote from Corinthians. What's really interesting about this is, in fact, in Spanish, the Pope is El Papa. And it's been really interesting watching, in fact, the developments between Papa Duck and El Papa. Because one man is reviled and hated, and here Pope Francis wins person of the year. But if you were to look at what they probably actually believe, you'd think Pope Francis is a liberal guy on a bunch of stuff. I don't think I'll see in my life the overturning of pre-Cyclist celibacy or their teachings about birth control or a number of other things. But somehow Pope Francis has been able to communicate in a very different way than Phil Robertson. This is taken from that highly conservative religious magazine called The New Yorker. Who am I to judge? With those five words spoken in late July and replied to reporters' questions about the status of being priests in the church, Pope Francis steps away from the disapproving tone, the explicit moralizing typical of the Pope's ambitions. This gesture of openness, which startled the role of the Catholic world, proved not to be an isolated event. In a series of interviews and speeches the first few months after his election in March, the Pope unilaterally declared a kind of truce in the culture wars that was dividing the Vatican and much of the church, much of the world. Repeatedly, he argued that the church's purpose was more to claim God's merciful love for a people than to condemn sinners for having fallen short of strictures. Especially those having to do with gender and sexual orientation. His break from his impromptu media press, that's John Paul II, who died in 2005, and Benedict XVI, the traditionalist German theologian who stepped down from the vacancy in February, is less ideological than intuitive. That's key, because I don't really think Pope Francis believes a lot different from Benedict XVI. It's less ideological than intuitive. An inclusive vision of a church centered on an identification with the poor. From this vision, theological and organizational innovations flow. The more you rule by non-negotiable imperatives to leadership, by invitation and welcome, is fundamental to the meaning of the faith as an dogma. That's from James Carroll's piece in The New Yorker. It's very interesting that one of the first interviews that Pope Francis gave went like this. I had the first question ready, but this is from a different piece. I had the first question ready, but then I decided not to follow the script that I had prepared for myself. I asked in point blank, and I remember why is Pope Francis so historical? He's the first Pope from the Americas. He's from Argentina. So this interview asks in point blank, who is Jorge Mario Bergoglio? The Pope stares at me in silence. I ask him if this is a question that I'm allowed to ask, because he knows the Pope. He nods that it is, and he tells me, I do not know what might be the most fitting description. I am a sinner. This is the most accurate definition. It is not a figure of speech, a literary genre. I am a sinner. And when I read this, I thought, my goodness, this is the height of our catechism. How do we know ourselves? I am a sinner. And that's how he begins the conversation, when the man asks, who really are you? He could have said, I'm a great saint. I'm the Pope. I've got lots of power. He says, the first thing you need to know about me is I am a sinner. And I read that and I said, wow. Just recently he published a 250 page document, and I'm thinking, the dudes run it all around the world, visiting people, making all this news, and isn't it time to write a 250 page document? The name of the document is The Joy of the Gospel. And this is how it starts. The Joy of the Gospel fills the hearts and lives of all who encounter Jesus. Those who accept his offer of salvation are set free from sin, sorrow, inner emptiness, and loneliness. With Christ, joy is constantly born anew. In this exhortation, I wish to encourage the Christian faithful to embark upon a new chapter of evangelization marked by this joy, while pointing out new paths for the church's journey in years to come. I invite all Christians everywhere at this very moment to a renewed personal encounter with Jesus Christ, or at least to an openness to letting him encounter them. I ask all of you to do this unfailingly each day. No one should think that this invitation is not meant for him or her, since no one is excluded from the joy brought by the Lord. The Lord does not disappoint those who take this risk. Just in fact this week I got an email from a friend of mine who's connected to another much more high profile person who got a letter from a man who basically said, I'm a naturalist and I want to become a Christian but I don't know how. And when I read this I think, this speaks to you. And in fact so many of the things that the Pope have done have led a lot of people to say, I don't know if I can become a Catholic or I don't know if I can become a Christian, but something's going on there that attracts me. And I think about Jephrah. Now is the time to say to Jesus, Lord I have let myself be deceived. In a thousand ways I have shunned your love, yet here I am once more to renew my covenant with you. I need you. Save me once again Lord Jesus. Take me once more into your redeeming embrace. I would imagine over a lot of the course of the Christian Reformed Church or Protestantism in general, who would have imagined that we'd be quoting verbatim from the Pope given the Protestant Catholic feud over the years. But here I look at a lot of my Protestant colleagues and they're excited by this Pope. How good it feels to come back to him whenever we are lost. Let me say this once more. God never tires of forgiving us. We are the ones who tire of seeking his mercy. Christ, who told us to forgive one another seventy times seven, has given us his example. And he has forgiven us seventy times seven. Time and time again he bears us on his shoulders. No one can strip us of the dignity bestowed upon us by this boundless and unfailing love, with a tenderness which never disappoints, but is always capable of restoring our joy. He makes it possible for us to lift up our heads and start anew. I want to be very careful here because I don't want to take sides on the papal duck thing either. Quite frankly, I watch Duck Dynasty quite faithfully. I think if you take a look at Phil Robertson's life, there are some links on my blog that you can follow. When I listen to him I get the sense that this is a deeply Christian man who I want to have him tell you exactly what he thinks might be wrong with your life and then give you the shirt off his back if you need it. It just seems to be that kind of guy. But what I find in this pope is someone who is able to communicate across tribes and to let the gospel shine across tribes. And while there will be many things that we all have to work out in the end, what I see in fact is someone like Jesus who gets in trouble for keeping the friends he kept, who allowed a simple woman to wash his feet, and in fact who died forgiving his enemies. So Jethro comes to Moses, and I think in many ways, in that little meeting, in the Tent of Meeting, we see the beginnings of the gospel going out and the beginnings of misery. I am a sinner. Deliverance. Jesus has expended himself enormously to rescue me. Gratitude. If God could be so generous to send his Son and to rescue us while we were yet sinners, are we not ready to show generosity and to be a light to those around us who are still far from him? Let's pray. Lord, for God so loved this world that he sent his Son to be barbarized by us, to be abused by us, and while in fact we were killing him, he was saving us. Forgive us, Lord, for how we let our tribalisms justify hatred. Help us, Lord, to in fact be known in our Christian tribe for our love. Lord, there are many things to sort out between tribes. Not everything is good. And in fact, Lord, in your Word we see your zeal for your people, and not wanting them to succumb to the veil of Peor and to the religion of the Moabites and the Midianites. At the same time, a Midianite priest comes and says, there's something about this Yahweh, and I wish to worship him. And it's the same thing, Lord, that comes with the kings who come to baby Jesus and lay down gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. And Lord, the truth is that we are no different from any other sinner in this world. If you ask us what we are, we with the Pope should say, I am a sinner, saved by grace. And so you call us, Lord, to figure out our tribes, good in that, healthy and unhealthy, and to learn to love across them. Here are our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Would you stand? Our last song is in the Psalter, it's number 509, however the tune will be used in a different way, we'll be using the tune for the auto-punctuation. Oh, that girl's got a sky where your flock of eggs to lay. Your gratefulness is greater than a big strain's overtake. Your parents do your goodness, and we bear these we call. And both do this and this, one church, one faith, one Lord. Your heralds brought the gospel to the greatest and to the least. They summoned men and women to share a great deal's peace. And this was the 15th tree in every tree of the world. To all of life's old claims, one church, one faith, one Lord. Your mercy without fail, Lord, if your word was done, if your right hand could help us, the victory shall be won. And then, Father, my father, your name shall be adored, and it shall be our anthem, one church, one faith, one Lord. The Lord bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face to shine upon you and be gracious to you. The Lord turn his face towards you and give you his peace. Amen.