https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=feo0exksoOk

 Last week, when we began when, I read a little bit from Elie Wiesel's story of his time through the Nazi concentration camps. In this story, he tells the story of a kiba-droomer who was a rabbi from Poland. He was old and bent, his lips constantly trembling. He was always praying, in the lock, at work, in the ranks. He recited entire pages from the Talbot, arguing with himself, asking and answering himself endless questions. One day he said to me, it's over. God is no longer with us. And as though he regretted having uttered such words so coldly, so dryly, he added in his broken voice, I know, no one has the right to say things like that. I know that very well. Man is too insignificant, too limited to even try to comprehend God's mysterious ways. But what can someone like myself do? I'm neither a sage nor a just man. I'm not a saint. I'm a simple creature of flesh and bone. I suffer hell in my soul and in my flesh. I also have eyes and I see what is being done here. Where is God's mercy? Where is God? How can I believe? How can anyone believe in this God of mercy? Poor Akiva-Drummer. If only he could have kept his faith in God. If only he could have considered this suffering a divine test. He would not have been swept away by the selection. But as soon as he felt the first chinks in his fate, he lost all incentive to fight and opened the door to death. When the selection came, he was doomed from the start. Offering his neck to the executioner, as it were. All he asked of us was, in three days I'll be gone. Say Kaddish for me. Last week we began our time at Lent with the question, can we believe in God even when we suffer? There's a lot of suffering that is in this room this morning. There are many in this room who are still in grief because you've lost loved ones. Some of you are in panic because things are spiraling out of control. Others of you have been carrying certain kinds of pain for a lot of years. And maybe it's not an acute thing. Maybe it's not something that's come to a head, but maybe it's a dragging thing, wondering, could God be there with this much pain in the world? Psalm 18 is one of my favorite psalms. And it's actually in the Bible a couple of times. But I love it because it pictures God rending the evidence and coming to our rescue, kind of like Yahweh as Mr. Incredible. In my distress I called to the Lord. I cried to my doctor, from his temple he heard my voice. I cried before him into his ears. The earth trembled and quaked, and the foundations of the mountain shook. They trembled because he was angry. Smoke rose from his nostrils. I always found that to be an amazing passage of the Bible. Smoke arising from God's nostrils. So it evokes so much. Smoke arose from his nostrils, consuming fire, came from his mouth, burning coals blazed out of it. He parted the heavens and came down. Dark clouds were under his feet. He mounted the cherubim and flew. He soared on the wings of the wind. He made darkness his covering, his canopy around him. The dark rain clouds of the sky. Out of the brightness of his presence, clouds advanced with hailstones and bolts of lightning. The Lord thundered from heaven, the voice of the Most High resounded. He shot his arrows and scattered the enemies. With great bolts of lightning, he routed death. The valleys of the sea were exposed, and the foundations of the earth laid bare at your review, Lord. At the blast of breath from your nostrils. He reached down from my eye and took hold of me. He drew me out of the deep water. He rescued me from my powerful enemy, from my foes who were too strong for me. They confronted me in the day of my distress, but the Lord was my support. He brought him out. He brought me out into a spacious place. He rescued me because he delighted in me. The Lord has dealt with me according to my righteousness, and according to the cleanness of my hands, he has rewarded me. I could imagine, in fact, I'm quite certain that this Polish rabbi knew this song by heart. And so he wondered from the Christian camp of Auschwitz, when will Yahweh come down? When will we see the smoke come out of his nostril? When will he blaze the Germans and give them what we deserve? Because we have done nothing to deserve this treatment. Why won't God act like Mr. Incredible? Last week, in fact, we began to answer that question in Jesus' temptation. And we see how Jesus, who was legitimately hungry after 40 days of fasting, the devil comes to him and says, And he does that. And the devil says, Go up to the pinnacle of the temple, throw yourself down, and be saved in front of everyone by an angelic presence. And Jesus does that. And Satan says, cut a deal with me and I'll give you political and military power, and we can cut your mission short and give you the success that the whole world is waiting for. And Jesus does that. Why won't Jesus act like Mr. Incredible? Theodore of Obsesia says, It is not through miracles, but a patient, long-suffering endurance that must prevail over the devil. We should do nothing, merely for show. Then Jesus starts his ministry in the Galilee. And what does he do? He does miracles. And everyone is excited because, Oh, this man has shown up. He must be a prophet. He's doing miracles. He turns water to wine. He makes the lame to walk. He makes the blind to see. He gives hearing to the deaf. He even raises the dead and brings them back to life. And everyone's excited because here's someone with divine power. And this woman, you remember the story, who's been bleeding for years and has spent all of her money on doctors. She has so much faith in him, she knows, if I can only touch his garments, I'll have the healing I'm looking for. And so everyone sees Jesus, kind of like Miracle Max. Give me a miracle. I need it out. Won't you rescue me? Even Mr. Incredible observes, no matter how many times you save the world, it always manages to get back into jeopardy again. Sometimes I just want it to stay safe. You know, for a little bit, I feel like the maid. I just cleaned up this mess. Can we keep it clean for 10 minutes? Everyone that Jesus healed died. Every eye that Jesus gave sight to would close. Every ear that Jesus gave hearing to would shut down again. We live in the age of decay, when everything will be taken from all of us. And some of you know that too well, because a lot has been taken from you. And you know the taking will continue. Now while he was in Jerusalem at the Passover festival, many people saw the signs. He was performing and believed in his name. And we see this throughout the Gospels. People see the miracles and they're excited and they're drawn to him. But why are they drawn to him? Because he's an answer. He's an out. He's a rescue. And it's okay to begin our relationship with Jesus in that way, but it can't stay there because Jesus understands what's driving us. But Jesus would not entrust himself to them. You see, he understood that his relationship with them could never truly be whole, be transparent, be giving and receiving because they were desperate and they just needed and wanted to take. He did not need any testimony about mankind for he knew what was in each person, which means he knows what's in each of us. We live in this world of loss. And when things are going okay, we think, okay, I can manage, I can manage. I'm smart, I'm competent. I can handle this. And then something comes and we're in over our head and we're out of our depth. And then it's, well, Anne Lamott says it well. She says, I have two prayers. Thank you, thank you, thank you. And help me, help me, help me. And we wobble between them all the time. And so what we become is religious. And we begin to build our case with God. And we begin to say, okay, Lord, I'll straighten up and do the right thing. Okay, Lord, I'll go to church. Okay, Lord, I'll tithe. Okay, Lord, I'll give. Okay, Lord, I'll be right. I'll do my devotions, I'll pray. I'll become a Christian. I'll become a visible Christian and I'll witness for you. I may even become a pastor, but if I do, you owe me. And you have to give me the kind of life I think I want and deserve. Here's God's problem. When he shows up to rescue us from ourselves with power, we approach our relationship with him as a tool to gain power in order to continue to take the world from him and to turn it towards ourselves, usually at the expense of our neighbors and enemies. This is what we do at our rebellion, even when we think we are doing good. This is what is at the heart of religion. We attempt to appropriate God's power in order to accomplish what we imagine to be good. Now there was a Pharisee, a man named Nicodemus, who was a member of the Jewish ruling council. He came to Jesus at night and said, Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God, for no one could perform the signs you are doing if God went out with them. How much do you really believe this Nicodemus? You come to Jesus at night. You come to Jesus secretly. Why? Because you fear for your reputation and you're not exactly sure who this man is and you want to come and feel him out. And what you're really hoping for is that somehow, now the Pharisees were part of a conservative religious movement that were attempting to resist the Romans by being privately pious. They were really devout, moral, upright, serious, strict God followers. And so he wonders, is Jesus, he's showing amazing power, what if Jesus can become one of us? What if Jesus can be on our side, but I best not risk too much on him. So I'll come at night and no one else will know. Jesus replied, very truly I tell you, no one can see, even see the kingdom of God unless they are born anothen. Unless they are born anothen. Now, this word anothen, like many words, has two meanings. It can either mean again or it can mean from above. Now what happens here is something that happens again and again and again in the Gospel of John, where Jesus will give someone an ambiguous word and they will go one way with it when Jesus goes the other. And so Nicodemus hears this and says, wait a minute, I came here to appropriate you and your power to my agenda. I came here to see if you could be a tool in our religious project. I came here to see if somehow I could use you and make you useful to me. And Jesus right away says, I'm not dealing with anyone. How can someone be born when they are old? Nicodemus says, surely they can enter a second time into their mother's womb. Nicodemus is like, wait a minute, you had power, but now you're just talking crazy. As if I would somehow crawl back into my dead mother's womb and be born again. How can you be serious? Jesus answered, very truly I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and the spirit. Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the spirit gives birth to spirit. You should not be surprised at my saying, you must be born anotha from above. The wind blows where it pleases, you hear it sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone born of the spirit. This had to be absolutely crushing to Nicodemus because if you approach Jesus to appropriate him, Jesus is just refusing to be appropriated. And if he's approached Jesus, he's trying to approach Jesus to show him as credentials, his moral credentials, his learned credentials, all of these things that he thinks Jesus would value. Jesus says, look, no one can even see the kingdom of God unless he is born from above by the spirit. And the spirit blows where it wills. And so Nicodemus has to be saying, what are you saying to me? That I can't somehow reconstruct the tower of Babel, my religious tower of Babel to somehow make my way to God? And Jesus says, yes, you cannot make your way to God. You cannot buy yourself, construct from yourself something to have God look in favor upon you. In order to even understand the kingdom of God, you have to be born from above of the spirit of God. But that makes us completely helpless. Yes. And aren't you completely helpless? Who of you can stop aging? Raise your hand. Can you stop aging? Can you secure for yourself your life in this world? Mori just turned 80 and Mori's in great shape for 80. He's running around. John is 94 and he's still running around. But it's just time. Can you be moral enough to control your life? Nicodemus says, how can this be? You are Israel's teacher, said Jesus. You do not understand these things. Nicodemus, you have the whole Old Testament. You probably got most of it committed to memory and you don't understand any of this? This should be obvious to you. Very truly, I tell you, we speak of what we know and we testify to what we've seen. But still you people, Jesus has now switched to the plural. Still you people do not accept our testimony. Who's our? Jesus is speaking for the Father and the Spirit to all of Israel. I have spoken to you of earthly things and you do not believe. How then will you believe if I speak of heavenly things? No one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven, the Son of Man. Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up that everyone who believes may have eternal life in him. You see, at this point, Nicodemus being a good Pharisee really only has three options. First, he can storm out of the room and say, this man is nuts and I have no idea how he's doing the miracles that he's doing, but he's crazy. Or he can try his best to kill Jesus with his bare hands because what Jesus has just said is unblasphemy. He's claimed to be God and for a Jew, this deserves death. He could drop, or he could drop to his knees and worship him. But notice, Nicodemus doesn't do any of these things. He sits on the fence and doesn't know. He does nothing. He came at night hoping to appropriate Jesus and now he's just confused. When Jesus said Son of Man, Nicodemus knew what he was saying because this is from Daniel seven. In my vision, I looked, at night I looked and there before me was one like a Son of Man coming with the clouds of heaven. Does it sound like Psalm 18? He approached the ancient of days and was led into his presence. He was given authority, glory, and sovereign power. All nations and people of every language worshiped him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that will not pass away and his kingdom is one that will never be destroyed. Jesus has stood in front of Nicodemus and said, I am the Son of Man. I have come. But Yahweh in Psalm 18, through the clouds and the beast that you read about in Daniel are the nations of the earth and you didn't even see yourself being crushed by Rome and you believe that the Son of Man will come and lay waste to these rebellious empires of the world and establish a kingdom that will never end. And I stand before you saying, this is who I am. And what will you say? That could be this. Will you still try and cut a deal with me? Will you meet me at night? Will you try to meet me halfway? Jesus continues, for God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have everlasting life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world but to save the world through him. Whoever believes in him is not condemned but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of God's one and only Son. This is the verdict. Light has come into the world but people love darkness. So instead of light, instead of light because their deeds were evil. Everyone who does evil hates the light and will not come into the light for fear that their deeds will be exposed. But whoever lives by the truth comes into the light so that it may be seen plainly that what they have done has been done in the sight of God. Remember, what time of day does Nicodemus come to meet Jesus? In the dead of night. Why? Because he does not want his deeds to be seen. Now wait a minute, this is Nicodemus. This is a man who is a good man, who has devoted himself to the study of the scriptures, who is upright and moral. In fact, he is so moral, he is very careful about what he eats and where he goes and who he associates with so that his testimony may be pure and perfect. And Jesus basically says to him, you live in utter darkness. That those born of God are born from above. They're born by the spirit and the spirit blows where it wills. And we hear this and we say, what chance do we have? The Son of Man comes and he will be lifted up. And all who see him lifted up and believe in him will be saved. Now what's interesting about the story is if you follow again in the Gospel of John, you'll notice very quickly, Nicodemus just kind of poofs in the story. We start the story with Jesus and Nicodemus and then Jesus goes off into a long discourse and Nicodemus is not to be seen again. Actually until after Jesus is crucified and his body is hanging on a cross and the Sabbath is proceeding and his disciples have all run away, Nicodemus is one of two men who comes and says, I'll take his body. And at that point he comes in the full light of day to all of the people that he was afraid to expose himself to when he met Jesus this first evening and by taking his body he essentially publicly said, whatever you think of this man that was killed, I'm with him. Have you been investing in a religious system? Have you invested in God so that God will fix your problems? Have you invested in God so that God will not send you to hell? Have you invested in God so that God will give you the life you think you want or deserve? Have you invested in God to try and find a way to corral the universe towards what you want? If you have, you stand with Nicodemus in the middle of the night trying to cut a deal with Miracle Max. What Nicodemus discovered is that Jesus is not Miracle Max. Have you developed a religious system that tries to put God in your debt? You try to appropriate his power to make the world according to how you think it should be. And the real test of this is a terrible test. Do you worry? Because as John Calvin said at the beginning of his book, his commentary in the book of Daniel, to the degree that you worry, you doubt God. What worry indicates in us is that we believe we know how the universe should be run. And if you are religious and worried, it means we're trying to get God to make us God. And we all start this way. The good news is that the Son of God has come and he was lifted up. The Son of Man has come and he was lifted up. And all you need to do is to look upon him and believe. You might say, well, that's certainly not enough. And Jesus says, all who are, you can't even see the kingdom of heaven unless you are born from above. Flesh gives birth to flesh. Spirit gives birth to spirit. To trust in him, this is my definition of a Christian. You trust in Jesus more than you trust yourself. Now think about that. You trust in Jesus more than you trust yourself. Because the degree that we worry, it's revealed to us that our hearts don't trust him. We don't worry about what we can handle. We worry about what we can't handle. And we tend to trust more in ourselves than we trust in him. It's interesting going through Bissell's book because at times I find him amazingly insightful. And how on one hand Bissell keeps going back and forth over the line with us because on one hand he says, there is no God, God is dead. On the other hand, he recognizes full well that if this rabbi could in fact have continued to believe in God, he could have endured. And that in fact proved correct. This man, Victor Frankl, was also a Jew in Europe and he was a psychologist. And he went into the death camp and he saw his parents and his siblings and in fact his pregnant wife put to death by the Germans. But while he was in this camp, as a psychologist, he began to study those who would just drop like this rabbi and those who endured. And the thing he discovered was this, that in fact those who placed their life in the things around them, my life is my wife, my life is my children, my life is my job, my life is my books, my life is my reputation. Those who placed their lives in the things the Germans could make, died. But those who would back place their life in things the Germans couldn't touch, lived. And Jesus comes to us and says, you gotta put your treasure where moth and rust consumes in the age of decay. Put your treasure in heaven, where it can't be consumed. Because this is the thing, if in fact you believe that he has come for you, you believe that he has parted the skies, you believe that the Son of Man has ascended with the clouds from heaven, and you believe that the Son of Man came. And unlike Mr. Incredible, did not exclude himself, but suffered in fact on our behalf, what then can touch you? Even Nazi death camps are just sped up versions of the age of decay. It's true. All of your loved ones will die. Everything you now own will be given to another, and even the buildings and the institutions you develop will one day fall. It's just true. You will lose everything. The only question is, if you know this, will you realize that we are complete recipients of his grace, and we have to stop trying to manipulate him, coerce him, bribe him, buy him, put him in our debt, and just stop for a minute and become recipients of his love because of his goodness, not our own. Because if in fact we see that he has parted the skies and come to rescue us, then suddenly we can begin to stop worrying and no longer fear, and even in the midst of all of this loss and tragedy, believe he is on our side, he will set the world right, and he will in fact raise me, and not allow his loved ones to see decay. Once again, it's misery, deliverance, gratitude. Everything will be taken away from you. But he came and did not spare himself, but took your penalty and invites you to follow with his cross to his grave and out of it again. And if this in fact is true for you, and if you receive this purely on behalf of his goodness, what really can this world take from you? That is the gospel. Let's pray. Lord, I thank you that there are times when you do swoop in like Mr. Incredible, and we're in pain and we're in trouble, and you come and you answer our prayers, and we're delighted. But as Mr. Incredible said, even when you rescue us in the moment, there'll be another tragedy that comes. We get ourselves into trouble all the time in the age of decay, the world does not stay safe. And so you came and achieved for us a deeper salvation, one in which in fact you were subject to our brutality, and you became subject even to death, the most shameful, horrible death the Romans could deal out. And yet you rose from the grave. And you invite us to stop trying to coerce you and manipulate you. You invite us to stop trying to put you in our debt, to try and get you to make us God of the universe. And you instead invite us into the relationship of a father and a child who trusts his father. You invite us to with open hands accept the truth and open hands accept the pardon that Jesus achieved for us on the cross. And to begin living out the radical freedom that says, yes, everything will be taken from me, but all that really matters can never be touched by this age. May we live in that freedom, may we live in that love, and may we live out of that hope. In the name of Jesus, amen. What do you say? All right. align