https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=B_BbaZFHXCg

 Anybody eaten at the White House recently? What's that? Cory Bell. Cory Bell. That was the White House? It was White. It was White. I don't mean that White House. I mean the White House in Washington. I don't mean thinking at the Bar when you're on the White House tour. Obviously an invitation to the White House or even the Governor's mansion would mean something important, something special. And we like to say things about, you know, they're the people's servants and all of that, but all of us understand that in this world there's a pecking order. There's an interpersonal economy. And we value people very much on a whole number of things. If you're wealthy or famous or powerful in politics or even if you bite someone at the World Cup, everybody knows your name and people want to be with you. Does God work this way? Because on one hand if any of us had an invitation to the White House we would probably be thrilled and, you know, wear our best clothing and tell our friends that we're going there and maybe try and take a selfie with the President. But what if the Lord of the Universe invited you to dinner? There's a passage in Exodus 24 after the book of the covenant that we looked at briefly last week. Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and the seventy elders of Israel went up and saw the God of Israel. And if you've been reading through the Old Testament you know that that is a very big deal because the Hebrews believed if you saw God you would die. But they saw the God of Israel. Under his feet was something like pavement made of black piece lazuli. If you Google that you can find that it's kind of a bluish stone as bright blue as the sky. But God did not raise his hand against these leaders of the Israelites. They saw God and this is amazing. They ate and they drank. It's a truly incredible thing to think about the role that eating together plays. It's rather a strange thing when we think about us human beings. You know, the chair just sits there day after day and it doesn't have to eat and it doesn't have to drink. It doesn't have to sleep. It's just always a chair. But for us to continue to sustain ourselves we take in nutrition and that rejuvenates ourselves and keeps us going. And so when the Lord invites the leaders of the tribe of Israel up into the mountain what would they do together? He sets a table before them and they eat and they drink. And don't you just wonder what did they eat? What did they drink? The Lord said to Moses, come up to me on the mountain and stay here and I will give you the tablets of stone with the law and commandments I have written for their construction. Now, we know the President of the United States is a powerful, important, famous person. But to think, you know, boy, if I was invited to the White House that would thrill me. What's interesting is that in our culture we read a passage like this and we don't, it doesn't amaze us. And we don't ask the normal questions. Like if your neighbor or someone here was invited to the White House probably one of you would say, why? What did you do? Why should the President invite you? But for most Americans to think about having a relationship with God we don't stop and ask the question, does that make any sense? Why should God want to know me? And part of it is this rather unique American cultural thing that we in fact think God must be crazy about me. In fact, Americans believe a number of things about ourselves which are deep within our culture. We don't critique them or explore them because we simply assume them and we assume them to be true. This is a list I actually got from Tim Keller who after reading Robert Geller, Habits of the Heart, some Christian Smith books that I've referred to in other sermons and another author named Charles Taylor trying to get a sense of how Americans feel about spirituality. Americans believe there is no moral higher authority than the self. My personal happiness is the highest good. And we see that often with each other. If someone abandons their children or abandons a spouse they might say, but I had a duty to me. And in American culture you almost can't say anything to them. In the end the good of the individual always trumps the good of the community. Well I had to do this for myself. The self is the highest good. The greatest good, the person of utmost importance is me. And when I say this this way you say, well that sounds awfully selfish. We have a lot of other language we use to talk about this. If God exists he does it for our benefit to make this a good world to live in. And Pastor Hermans I've talked about moralistic therapeutic deism which is a term concocted by sociologist Christian Smith who surveyed many young people in America across the religious spectrum. And basically what he decided was that Americans really believe this and that if something bad is happening to me I think God must be asleep at the switch. And underneath that is this idea that God really owes me what I want. Whatever meaning or happiness there is to be found it must be found within this material world. You only live once. And so all come together is this idea that I am at the center of God's attention. Okay. Do you imagine you're at the center of the attention of any other human being? Well I sure wish I was. In romantic relationships Americans often think that this other, your romantic partner should always be thinking about you. In fact you hear that in music, old songs and new songs. Remember this one old song, You Were Always On My Mind, that I think that's a rather shallow way to live isn't it? You were always on my mind. Look at that car going by. Oh. You were always on my mind. But for Americans this just sounds normal. Why shouldn't I be at the center of the universe? Why shouldn't the universe wrap around me? So on one hand we recognize none of us get invited to the White House. Why? Because we don't have any value in this world. On another hand when we start thinking about ourselves we think well God should be so focused on me that God should be just all about me so he should be arranging the universe so that everything goes well for me. Now this idea tends to grab us especially when we're young. As we grow old and enough bad stuff happens to us we begin to wonder does that way of life really make sense? I was reading a very interesting book talking about American spiritual nostalgia and sentimentality. And it referred to a number of authors some of them evangelical. Just listen to Max Lu, this quote from Max Lucado's in the Grip of Grace. God is for you. Turn to the sidelines that's God cheering you run. Look past the finish line that's God applauding your steps. Listen for him in the bleachers shouting your name. Too tired to continue? He'll carry you. Too discouraged to fight? He's picking you up. God is for you. God is for you. We know he has a tattoo and we know what it says. I have written my name. I have written your name on my hand he declares. Okay. But really? I read this and I almost feel like I've been to Leather Bees and just had one of those enormous Sundays. And it's just kind of I'm a little ready to burst. Joel Osteen another very popular pastor in our country says similar things. You can hold your head up high and walk with confidence knowing that God loves you unconditionally. His love for you is based on what you are not what you do. He created you as a unique individual. There has never been nor will there ever be another person exactly like you even if you are a twin. And he sees you as a special masterpiece. God sees you as a champion. You may not see yourself that way but that doesn't change God's image of you one bit. God still sees you exactly as his word describes you. You may feel unqualified insecure or overwhelmed by life. You may feel weak fearful and insignificant but God sees you as a victor. Okay. But then suddenly other things start to happen and things don't go right in my life. So then where do I go with this? Does God see me as a victor? Does he see me as a champion? And what if quite frankly many times I shouldn't be seen as a victor or I shouldn't be seen as a champion? What if many times I'm just plain selfish and I'm using people to get what I want? See if Lewis makes a comment that sometimes we kind of cast God in the realm of this spiritual grandpa who at the end of the day just basically wants to say, oh did you have a good time? Well I was at school selling drugs to children. Oh did it go well? Did you get lots of new clients? Is that really how a relationship works? If you had a father or a mother who was simply constantly uncritical of you would you really think that person loved you? What tends to happen is that we tend to flip. So also in Exodus 24 we have this part. When Moses went and told the people all the Lord's words and laws, they responded with one voice, everything the Lord has said he will do. Moses then wrote down everything the Lord had said, got up early the next morning and built an altar at the foot of the mountain and set up twelve stone pillars representing the twelve tribes of Israel. Then they sent young Israelite men and they offered burnt offerings and sacrificed young bulls as fellowship offerings to the Lord. Moses would cap the blood and put it in the bowls of the other half and splashed it on the altar. He took the blood, he took the book of the covenant and read it to the people and they responded, we will do everything the Lord has said, we will obey. So on one hand the Lord invites them to the mountain and has a meal with the leaders of Israel. On the other hand you have this sacrificial system where they're killing animals and sprinkling blood and the Israelites say, just tell us what to do and we'll obey. Maybe in fact you started a relationship like this once where you fell in love with another person and for a while you looked across the table and that other person could do no wrong and you thought, they're wonderful, they're perfect. And then you really tried to always do what the other person wanted, but what happened in time? Well, the other person didn't seem all that perfect anymore and all of the vows that you made about you weren't going to do this or you weren't going to do that started backing off on that. So how does this work? There's kind of three images before us. One is that we don't get invited to the president's house because you know what? The president invites people that are useful to him and none of us have enough fame or value or power or money in this country that we're useful to the president so we don't go to the White House. Point two, we think that God is just all in love with us but that doesn't really make too much sense if you really look at it. Point number three is, what about morality? In fact, what so happens is that the first Sunday you go to church and you hear, God is so in love with you. So you come up to the altar and you say, God is so in love with me, God accepts me as I am, isn't this wonderful? And then the next week you come back and the church says, yeah, but we've got some rules for you. Well, I thought he loved me unconditionally and now you're telling me about these rules? And then very quickly this unconditional love comes to be, well, God can only bless you if you keep these rules. Then God will bless you. So which is it? Does God love us unconditionally or does God only love us when we do right? It's interesting, sometimes I try and get out to lunch with people in and out of the church and I'll talk to them and I find that a great many people really believe that God only loves us if we behave, that if we're bad. And when I'm saying behaving, I'm not saying just small stuff, little mental sins or I was a little mean to someone. We should be a little honest about how we are and the things that we do. One of the things that I also experience as a pastor is you'll take someone out to lunch and they'll begin to feel comfortable with me and people want to confess their sins. They want to tell you the kinds of things that they've been doing. If they have a conscience at all, and not everyone does, that they will want to share with you how they hurt their children, how they hurt their parents, how they hurt their spouses or their ex-spouses, the terrible things that they've done. I mean, sin sounds like a churchy word, but the way we hurt each other sometimes is real. And when you've been hurt deeply by someone, you can't just say, ah, don't worry about it, because sometimes real damage has been done, relationships have been violated, and sometimes there's no going back to that place that you were before. The Bible and other religions tell us to keep the rules. It tells us that keeping the rules gets rewarded and you break the rules and get punished, and they're certainly true to that. But people disagree about the rules, so then we kind of go back to this happy place and say, well, be true to yourself. Well, that doesn't really work, because if you're in a relationship with someone, being true to yourself might not be being true to the other person. So what we have in this mishmash of American spirituality is really three contradictory ideas. We know that you will be loved and valued to the degree that you are useful to those in power. And maybe someone really loved you when you were young and powerful or pretty or skinny or wealthy or something, but then as the years went on, they looked at you and thought, I can get someone better. And they left you. That's part of the way Americans work. Americans like to say, God loves everyone all the time, no matter what they do. Well, yeah, but God isn't always happy with what we do, nor should he be. And we want to say, God rewards those who do good and punishes those who do bad, but the rules are up to us. That doesn't make much sense. So why does God invite Israel up into the mountain? Well, if you read the whole story, you learn that God invites Israel to the mountain because God made a promise to Abraham, which pushes the question back. And so you have to ask the question, why does God invite Abraham? And I don't think there's any better answer than he wanted to. Well, why does God pick Abraham? I mean, you don't really have an answer for that. Christian theology has always called this election, which basically means that God chooses Abraham. God chooses Israel. And God doesn't choose Israel because Israel is great or Israel is great. And God doesn't choose Israel because Israel is great or Israel is wonderful or Israel is powerful or Israel is beautiful. He just chooses him. There's this little trap that young couples play. They're all in love with each other. And then one of them will say, why do you love me? Now, if you're a young person in love, I want to let you know this is a trap. Because if you give an answer to this, you're sunk. Why do you love me? Because you are hotter than everyone else. All the way out, right in the back of their mind, they're thinking, what happens when I'm not hot? I loved you because you are smarter than everyone else. Well, what if you meet someone who's smarter than me? What's the best answer to give that question? Why do you love me? Because I just do. And this is, in a sense, what God does with Israel. If Israel were to ask God, why do you invite me around your table to sit with you? God would say, because I love you. Why do you love me? Because I just do. Because if God starts saying, because you're beautiful, or because you're moral, or because you're good, everything goes away. It just simply starts with God's choice. Why does he love you? He just does. You're not chosen because you're moral. You're not chosen because you're beautiful or powerful. He just chooses. The idea of God's love, in fact, comes into this story. Most of the world saw the gods as hostile and tried like crazy to find ways to placate or manipulate them. In this story, the creator God is disposed to us. But we see that the relationship is complex. This is no senile grandfather who's just happy that the kids have had a nice day. He realizes that while we are certainly unique and amazing species, we are also deeply troubled, violent, a danger to ourselves and others. He's not only looking to heal us from our hurts we feel. He's looking to free us from the rebellion and brokenness we perpetuate. As I noted above, this God chooses Abraham and following to do a work, a costly work through them. They are chosen not because they are moral, but in order to make them moral. They are chosen into the presence of God because God freely chose them and freely invited them, not as a reward for good behavior, but because God needs something from them. The spoken expectation about their behavior is, in a sense, house rules. If they want to continue to live with this God, he has expectations on their behavior according to the mission that he has chosen for them. In other words, his love is just choosing them. But it's not syrupy like too much of a leathery Sunday. But it's not also because they're good. This weekend, you might find this amazing for Internet fans among you, I first saw the dog shaming meme on the Internet. I am a dog, so I understand this. So basically you take a sign and this dog, I'm a thief, I stole five pieces of bacon off the counter, off the kitchen counter. Or this dog, I ate the baby Jesus off our Christmas Nativity scene. Now looking forward to the second coming, literally a figure is a figure. Now if you have a dog, you know this. Because we have a dog, and Cynthia saw our dog yesterday, a tiny little dog. And on one hand I sit here and I think, why do we have this beast in our house? It isn't very well behaved, and it has accidents that choose on things. If you come to my house, this dog will act like he's going to kill you, but it's this big so he can't do anything. So, do we love the dog unconditionally? No, not really. Do we love the dog because the dog does well? No, not at all. We just love the dog. And what do I want for the dog? I want for the dog to be able to live with us in a happy, mutually beneficial way. Now I'm not saying that we are God's pets, and I'm not saying we are dogs. But we all understand that true relationships are complex. And there's, you know, so why do I love Mookie? I didn't even choose Mookie, the kids came home with him one day and, here's your dog, okay. But I love the crazy little dog, and the dog is the pain. It's both true. Part of the issue, which is what the unconditional love meme tries to get at, is that we're deeply afraid. So when the lover says, why do you love me? What that person is really expressing deep down is some insecurity. What the person is really asking is, do you really love me? Can you really love me? What if God isn't really for us, but more like the president looking to use us? What if our goods really don't align? What if the good God says for us we don't think is good for us? And what if God brings something into our life that is obviously hard and difficult, and maybe even evil or stubborn or something of significant loss, do we still love him? And this prompts our wishful thinking, oh, I just wish God would always give me what I want. But anyone who's ever raised a child knows that if you simply always give a child exactly what they want, you're not really loving the child. You give the child what the child needs and you as a parent know better than the child does. What if God chose to relate to us through a way like election that was completely opposite of the qualification pecking order that we treat each other with? What if God in fact modeled faithful commitment to a poorly behaved and rebellious people in order to demonstrate the contrast of this kind of love from our own? Why don't I just kick my dog out? But what would that say about me? My dog is in fact a rescue dog. Someone else already kicked out this cute little dog. Why? Because the dog didn't fit what they wanted. How many of you have been kicked out because you didn't fit what someone else wanted? And don't just kick out my little dog because I don't want to be the kind of person that looks at even a dog and says, to the degree that you give me what I want, I'll love you, but the day you cross me, you're gone. What if God in fact wanted to not simply care for us or indulge us, but to make us qualitatively more like him in the manner of our relationships? What if his goal is not simply to love us, but to make us capable of loving like he does? See, our therapeutic narcissism puts us in a prison. So we say to God, I'll only love you if you give me what I want from you. Okay, but what happens when someone says that to us? Do we want to live in a relationship like that? See, our therapeutic ideas actually put us in a prison that tries to treat other people and other people in a way that we don't want to. That tries to treat other people and in fact God like we're consumers. Now, I'll tell you, if my car doesn't do for me what I want it to do and I can have a chance to get a new car, I'll get a new car. I'm not going to feel bad about it, but I don't even treat a dog that way. And I know I shouldn't treat people like that because I certainly don't want to be treated like that. What if we are the problem? Can God both love us and confront us? One of the most difficult things we have right now in our culture is that when someone comes to us and says, I don't think you did right, we get all full of our own ego and say, how could you say something like that to me? That doesn't really say whether or not the other person is right. It says a lot more about us. For God breaks in and he shows us what real love looks like. To release us from the penalty of our own rebellion against him and the crimes against each other. What do you really want from the other people you're in relationship with? You don't want for a minute to have them treat you, well as long as they do what I want them to do, I'll be in relationship. But the day they cross me or do something I don't like or say something even a little bit negative to me, they're out of here. None of us want to be treated that way. But that's what we do to each other. And so God breaks in and says, I want to show you what love looks like. And so he sends his son. And Jesus comes and we treat him poorly. We treat him in fact abysmally. And he walks around teaching people and as long as he's doing miracles he's got big crowds. And so when he feeds the 5,000 one day they say, woo hoo, I'm coming back tomorrow. Nothing is worse than that, I'm just going to keep following Jesus if he keeps giving out meals. And then one day Jesus says, you don't really care about me, you're just looking for your next meal. And everybody says, that's right, and off they go. And again that doesn't say anything about Jesus, it says everything about us. And so Jesus comes and says, I know how you are. So I'm going to become one of you. And I'm going to live in the midst of one of you. And I'm going to practice your well being at my expense. And I'm going to do it and do it and do it. And he did it and we killed him. And what did this show us? Maybe it should show us how we are. And how God is. And maybe in the midst of it we should recognize, maybe I'd rather be more like Jesus. Unlike all of those people seeking his miracles. To release us he dies, to release us from the penalty of our own rebellion against him. And crimes against each other. What does Jesus say from the cross? Lord, get him back for what they've done to me. Isn't that what he says from the cross? He says, Father forgive them. They don't even know what they're doing. To do for us through Jesus what we couldn't do for ourselves. And so this is the Christian life. You can walk around as a spiritualist consumer. Either valuing people to the degree that you find them useful. Which is basically using people instead of loving them. You can walk around just so full of people that you can't even see them. And you can just pull over yourself saying, God just loves me as I am. I'm just that wonderful. And you're going to be pretty much all by yourself because nobody else sees you that way. Really. Or you just walk around thinking, I'm only going to value people who meet my standard. God comes and says, all these three positions are prisons. What I want you to do is to learn to love even though it costs you. Well how can I do that? And God says, because that's what I've done for you. And we come to God and say, but if I live that way then people will treat me poorly. Oh you mean they're not going to treat you poorly anyway? You mean all these other devices keep people from treating you poorly? If that really worked then all of you would be living golden ideas, golden lives. But you're not. God says, people will treat you poorly. Period. The question is, how will you treat them? And what Jesus' invitation is, if you follow me, if you learn to love like me, you may die the death I died. But you can also rise again to live the victory I was given. So when God invites you to the table, will you accept? Will you accept his invitation to receive his love? And will you respond to his grace by learning to love people instead of using them? So on the night he was betrayed, did you hear me? He was betrayed. Someone who he trusted, someone who he loved, probably basically said, this Jesus thing isn't working out like I want, like I wanted it. If I turn him over, I can get 30 pieces of silver, and that's better than him. So on the night Jesus was betrayed, he took bread and he broke it. And he said, this is my body broken for you. What was he saying? He was saying, I'm giving myself for you, not because you deserve it, not because you're powerful or beautiful and I can use you. I'm giving myself to you because I love you. And what I really want for you is to learn, it's for you to learn how to love just like I'm showing you how I love. Most, many of you have been to church before. This is Christian communion. And they might, well, they're not going to eat it. What we're saying with this bread is basically, on one hand, I want to receive this love he gives me. But we're also saying, on the other hand, I want to live this gift he gives me. I'm wanting to bless instead of hold people conditionally. I'm wanting to love instead of demanding on being loved. So as we pass out this bread, you can take it to receive his love. But by taking it, you are also saying, I don't just want to be a receiver. I want to be a lover. I want to be a giver. And so if you've made that commitment, this meal is for you. If you haven't, you can let it go by. It's absolutely no big deal. But this is him giving you his life and saying, live like I want you. The others can come forward. Thank you.