https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rAlmXRJt0u8

 Well Matt, it's a pleasure to see you. Hi, nice to see you Paul. Nice to meet you finally. Yeah, nice to meet you too. I've enjoyed your videos actually for quite a while. I discovered your channel maybe a couple years ago. All right on. Yeah, yeah. And I appreciate you sending me a note and I rewatched your conversation with Jonathan Peugeot, which I thought was was fascinating. And yeah, so it's just getting things all kind of set for me here. It's how are you weathering this these strange times? You know, I'm actually I'm really enjoying it. I have to say that just being home with the family has been great and we went on walks evening walks together with everyone. I just really enjoyed it. I think I saw a statistic that said like 80% of all Americans feel like they're close to their families now. And I think that's that's the upside of this. It's really been wonderful. Yeah, yeah. I just was walking to work this morning and saw a father and I assume a father and two small children walking down the street. And you just don't see just haven't seen that much. And now you see it quite commonly. So yeah, it's pretty pretty pretty extraordinary. Well, why don't why don't you introduce yourself a little bit and and then we'll jump into wherever this goes. OK, I am. Well, hold on. Let me can I can I see if I can try to minimize my picture because I don't like looking at myself. Is there a possibility of doing that? I'm not sure how to do that. There's a setting if you move your mouse over the screen, there's speaker view and and the other view and you can switch back and forth. There you go. That's much better. I don't I kept jumping in showing my face and I'm like, I don't want to see myself. So so you're asking me who I am? Yeah. Introduce yourself a little bit for those who don't know who you are. OK, well, I'm I'm Matthew Miller of Logos Made Flesh. I have a YouTube channel called Logos Made Flesh. It existed long before the YouTube channel. I had a blog that I started back in probably, I don't know, the the the tens or whatever you call them, the odds. So about 2006 or so, I started this this blog and just my thoughts, just like you started yours. I mean, just these random thoughts is like a means to get out in front of you, the things that you have inside your head and to wrestle with those ideas without anybody judging you or whatever. And so that's where it all started. Just some ideas that I had. But it goes back further than that. I started I'm I don't know what you want me to say about myself, but I usually do a lot of autobiography on this on this channel. So you can go you can go all the way back to the home you grew up in. OK, so raised in a Christian home. Yep. Raised in a Christian home. My mom and dad come from two very vastly different worlds. My mom was raised in a Christian home, you know, conservative Dutch convert who came to the United States in 1950, got saved here in a Pentecostal church and started his own church. And so she was raised by a pastor and had read the Bible every Sunday after after meal times or actually after meal times in general, they would have a time together. And so very traditional, very conservative home. My dad came from an alcoholic home. He is the bastard son of an adulterous affair and was did not find that out until he was probably 30 years old, but had suspicions of it. And so of four kids, he's the only one who's not the biological child of his father. Wow. Yeah. So anyway, so he but about the age of 13, 14, he was invited to go to a church service by someone who felt like felt like the Lord to invite his his brother to a church service. And the Millers were not they were the kids from the wrong side of the track. So they they weren't the ones that you traditionally do. But the guy felt like he was called by the Lord to ask, invite this particular my uncle, Larry to a church service. And my dad said, I'd like to go to let's see what it's all about. And he got saved. And the whole family went the following week and they all got saved. So from an abusive alcoholic family, totally turned around and saw things change in his own life. And my dad is became an evangelist basically. And he has characterized his life as telling stories and going out. He became a a teen evangelist. He counselor, teen suicide prevention counselor. He goes around and spoke at what do you call it? Seminars throughout the whole entire United States. So he spoke like three million teens or something like that in high schools and and all that. So he's done remarkably well for himself. So that's the that's my background. So very different home, very different perspectives. How how did the how did how did the the conversions and entrance into the church change your what was going on in your father's family that he grew up in? Was there a big transformation? Yeah, I think my I think my grandfather, I mean, as far as the stories that I've told, gave up alcohol obviously right away and and then smoking, I think for a time, I think he probably went back to it. But, you know, I don't think it healed all the damage that was done. But like I said, the family became something different, something it hadn't been. And about the time my dad was 17, 18, he was still on his way out. And so he he ended up with his brothers moving out here. They were in from Michigan. It was Detroit that he grew up in. They moved to Missouri. And then from Missouri, my dad moved out here with his brothers just to see what they could find, which is I live in Washington state. So they basically went on an adventure just to see where what the where the road would take them. And he planted himself here. My grandparents followed for a time with all my uncle's my uncle's and my aunt. And they eventually left and moved to Florida. So I haven't I haven't been close to them for a very long time. So my dad's been kind of just his own person. So that side of the family just really don't know that well. But my dad, distinct and unique and everything like that. We just recently found we think we found the biological my biological grandfather. So really through my genetic testing and things like that, which my dad wasn't seeking, but my my sisters were. So we found that information out. So. So how many brothers and sisters do you have? I have three sisters. I grew up in. Yeah, I grew up basically. My dad was on the road a lot and always in his hand in some kind of pie somewhere. And so he was around. But I really grew up with my mom and my three sisters. And my mom is really I would say the two of my father and my mother. She is the real prayer warrior and the spiritual influence on my life. Not to say my dad doesn't. He has a spiritual influence, but he's more the rational, the talk, the argumentative that side of me and the other ones, the more emotional, the more actually my dad can be in his storytelling, can be quite emotional. But my mom really, I mean, she sings, she plays the piano and she wrote a children's musical. Just has done some wonderful things. So she would read the Bible to us every morning as we went off to school. Even when we just brushing our teeth and getting ready for school, she'd be reading the Bible, reading the Bible. So I knew the Bible apart from my reading it myself. I knew it fairly well by the time I graduated from high school. So you mentioned to Jonathan Peugeot that you wound up going to Bible College. How did how did that come about? Well, I got saved my own conversion, my personal conversion about the age of 13. And I and I say, you know, I probably accepted the Lord, I don't know, two or three, four or five, half a dozen times before I actually felt like I made a real conversion about seventh grade, obviously, just like everyone else. I didn't have a sense of identity, a sense of self trying to figure out who I am. And I wanted to fit in and be popular and everything like that. And obviously, in that setting, that personal struggle, I mean, it was really pretty pretty deep at the time. I ended up going chasing after girls, trying to find a girlfriend. My girlfriend who I got, she was ninth grader. I was a seventh grader. You know, very cool. I thought I was that I thought I was really awesome. And then she found out I was a seventh grader and dumped me. I thought I could get her back. So she was on a trip going out of Mexico on a missions trip. And I said, you know, I'd like to go on this missions trip, too. And I asked my parents to borrow the money and they gave me the money because they thought, well, I mean, God's good. So they sent me on this mission trip to Mexico. And I grew up Pentecostal. So, I mean, my grandfather was Pentecostal, my dad was Pentecostal. And so, you know, we had this idea of speaking in tongues in our denomination. And so for me, that was something I'd always tried to mimic. I heard services and people praying for and stuff like that, something I just felt like, you know, I never felt like it was real. I always felt like it was made up and I didn't quite know how it worked or anything like that. We went on this mission trip to Mexico and I'm feeling depressed. I'm feeling like I'm rejected by this girl. And I start just gravitating. My heart starts just gravitating towards God. Like, God, you hold the answers and whatever you want for my life, you make that a reality. So, sorry. That's OK. So anyway, I started praying that prayer. And I remember sitting in an empty room and right before we went to Mexico, we went down to LA. It was the YOM based and then LA and we're handing hanging out there. I think the night or two before we go down to actually cross over to Mexico to Tijuana to build a house or do whatever. And I was an empty room. And I remember praying that prayer. You know, God, just fill me with your Holy Spirit if you want me to have it. And it was quiet, it was silent. And nothing happened. And I said, that's OK. That's OK. Yeah. Whatever you want. Yeah. So, whoo. So anyway, the next night, we had this kind of time together with a bunch of different churches, a bunch of, you know, you know, different denominations had come together to do this, you know, different things down in Mexico. And we were all training in this YOM base. And we all were showing what we had learned in the week that we've been there preparing to go down and or the few days. And I what did I do? Anyway, so at that night, it was kind of a worship service. And I felt like God was asking, you know, wanted me to receive the Holy Spirit that, you know, maybe that was the time. And I remember walking out, nothing happened. There was there was, you know, Baptist different denominations there who don't quite see it the same way we do. Remember going out and a guy who was with me, you know, 16 year old, I was 13 years old at the time, used to tell my youth pastor, he said, I felt like we should have had this prayer time for that tonight. And I said, I did, too. I did, too. And so we end up going back to my our cabin. And he said, a friend of mine, another person who just got radically saved like the year before said, hey, we're going to pray for you tonight. So in the same quiet room, the room that I'd been in the night before, we just stood up and held hands about four or five guys. No music, no repetitive prayer, nothing that was hyping us up or anything like that. Just a general, just a genuine longing for the Spirit's presence. And and boy, I experienced it in such a powerful way that obviously it's changed my life forever. And I knew that I knew at that time, I knew that I knew that I knew that it was real. Yeah. And and no one could shake it from me. It was like it was like, you know, the light switch had gone on and it couldn't be turned off. Yeah. Yeah. So anyway, that's where it all starts from. But I'm also a person that wrestled with with doubt. And I would say the doubts came probably within a year, a year and a half where it was fairly radical. I felt like I was fairly sure and confident of the thing that I knew so well. And yet the doubts came. And so wrestling with what I knew and what I didn't know and how I knew the things that I knew became a life. Long quest to try to wrestle with these ideas and and to help others see because I really wanted others to see it was my heart's desire to say, is joy that I have. Yeah. Man, I want other people to experience that, too. So, yeah, yeah. So that's where it all kind of all springs from. So that's how what led me to Bible College, just the desire to have other people see and experience this joy in this this this new life, this this this forgiveness, everything. And so to be able to understand the Bible, to be able to if it, you know, it indeed is God's word. It's the most important thing that's ever hit the world. It's important news that needs to be shared with everybody. And I want to know it so deeply and intimately that I can share it with others. So that's what led me to Multnomah Bible College, which is here in Portland. So, OK. So what did you do after what did you do after Bible College? Well, yeah, I went to Bible College and kind of sojourned there for about nine years in college. In the meantime, I got married, had some kids, did some youth pastoring, didn't quite know where I was heading. I thought about going into film. I thought about, you know, being a pastor. I bounced around between a lot of different ideas, didn't quite know how I was supposed to work that all out. So just sucking up everything for a long time. And so eventually, I would say probably about 2003, I came back from school down in Biola because I'd moved down to California, Southern California to go to film school at Biola University. I came back up and got a job at Clark County Sheriff's Office, where I've been a corrections deputy for the past 17 years. Yeah. So I make money and I make a living and it's a good living. But it's not, you know, it's not what my heart's desire is. And it's and I but at the same time, it's afforded me an opportunity to see the world in a way that I wouldn't have any other. So see real people, see where they're at and yeah, and some pretty crazy, insane ways. So no, I really appreciate that. One of my favorite jobs I ever had was a campus cop. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My uncle, my uncle was a career police officer on Long Island. It's kind of the two in my family, people are either preachers or cops, it seems. And I know, I'm not going to mention his name, but I know a guy, he's a world class theologian, brilliant man from a brilliant family. Family's just full of just off the chart, brilliant people. This person's son went into law enforcement. And I remember him telling me, he says, you know, I think my, I think my son's doing this to get his stories for when he decides to write. Yeah. Because, you know, and my own, my own church here is, I mean, just walking in now, I have a fair number of dealings with homeless people. It's the kind of the neighborhood that this church is in. And my father's congregation, my father was a pastor, my grandfather was a pastor. And there's a, there's a, there's a veneer of unamused, unadulterated, unadulterated, unadulterated people. In American culture, that is usually presented by, I think in a lot of ways, television and especially commercial, kind of a commercial image that gets presented that life is somehow stable and reliable and everybody has enough money and everyone is beautiful. And, and that's, that's normal in this world. And one of the, one of the things that I appreciate about ministering in a community like this and, you know, law enforcement jobs and counseling jobs and pastoring is that, that image is a lie. That normal, normal scales from, yeah, you can find normal at the mall, but you also find normal in the county jail. Yeah, yeah, absolutely. And you find a lot of normal in the county jail. And so there's a reality to that, that helps disbelieve the projected normality promoted by a consumerist society whose real interest underneath is to just, you know, relieve people of their discretionary income. But, so I, you know, when I, you know, again, when we were talking via Twitter message, and then when I re-listened to Jonathan Peugeot's, he heard your talk with Jonathan Peugeot, I, you know, I really appreciate that aspect of your story. And, you know, I want to get into a little bit how, how this, how your blog and then your YouTube channel started. But I, I think actually your day job is, is probably a, a really important piece of the giftedness you're exhibiting on your channel. Because you are not, and, and even your, I mean, one of the things I appreciate about the Pentecostal, the Pentecostal church really all over the world, I was a foreign missionary before I came back to North America, is the Pentecostal church is about, it's about the most racially diverse, socio-economically diverse. The Pentecostal church in some ways cuts through all of the demographic layers in North America in a way that no other church really does. And I think there are reasons for that, which I won't go into now, but, and so I, I think that your channel is, is in many ways, I don't think your channel would be the way it is if you didn't have the day job you have. Right, right. And, and so I really appreciate that. I really like that about your story, both the Pentecostal aspect and the, and the day job aspect that you have, because I find as a minister preaching, I have to do a lot of work to just try to push aside this very heavy veneer of projected normality that has colonized. The vast majority of Americans brains to the degree that when a disaster happens in their family, they run and say, well, this wasn't supposed to happen. And it's like, why do you think that? You think that because most of the days of your life, there's been projected at you an image of normality and the diagnosis of cancer or the betrayal or the bankruptcy or the lost job or any day of the Lord calamity that intrudes in your life. You somehow think this is an aberration. But if you're, if you work in a jail, you're like, now we see all kinds in here. Yeah. Yeah. So I, I think that's, I think that's really helpful. And what's, what's interesting, I think about the movie industry and, and motion picture arts are that in some ways, not always, but in some ways, even though, yes, the people are more beautiful than average. And at least the artists involved in making movies and motion pictures are have an intuitive sense of the lie. And so a good number of movies play with that lie. Yeah. And unmask the lies. That's right. That's right. Yeah, that's that's key to movies is to put you in somebody else's shoes. I mean, that's really what it's all about. And, and to show you the, you know, just to cause you experience a different way. And I think that mine having my having grown up in a Christian home, you, you, you tend to accept the world as it's presented to you. And so the world that I was presented to me was a fairly, you know, this is the box in which, you know, things are supposed to be. This is how it's supposed to be. And so I took that out into the world saying, this is the way it's supposed to be. And I found that the, the, the, the pieces didn't always fit in the box that I was given. And I was, I was very much trying to make sense. And one of my things that people have told me this, you don't compartmentalize very well. No, I don't. I don't compartmentalize very well. I take all of the information that I've been given and I try to have it all fit together. And it bothers me when it doesn't fit together. It really deeply bothers me. Part of my personality is that if the pieces don't go together, then they're not supposed to go together. Maybe they're supposed to be arranged in a different way. And so my beliefs about God and my beliefs about what I knew and how I knew it, and then wrestling with confronting with the very real aspects of the world and science and how, and how the world understands the, the, the world outside themselves. I, you know, when I was younger, it was like, you know, scientists, we were told that, oh, all the scientists know that evolution's a lie and, and they're just telling us a lie. And then we just can disbelieve it because we really know the truth. And then, you know, I realize, and people, I still hear that today, you know, that, that science is just a lie. And like, and I'm like, no, they have reasons for believing it. And you can't just discount it based upon saying that it's a lie, claiming it's a lie. So that's putting those. Opposite is told as well. All these Christians, they're just lying about this stuff. It's like, no, they have evidence for believing that. Yes, yes. And people generally believe on the basis of evidence, they might not come to the correct conclusion. Right, right, right. But they'll point to evidence. Yes. And that's, that's pretty normal for human beings. Yeah, and putting those two things together so that, you know, that the world could see and that Christians can see kind of bringing a middle ground. You know, like I said, I'm a fairly moderate person because I like to moderate everything. How does it all fit together? How does it all work together? And so in, in I think in YouTube and YouTube and then Logos Made Flesh, my channel, I've tried to do that for people is to find some common ground by which we can have a dialogue, have a discussion about these ideas. And and really wrestle with the hard truths, the facts, the opinions, all of those type of things in a way that is entertaining and people can get something out of, but also to bring some sense of hope rather than hopelessness. So I do have a bent. I do have an opinion. I do have a way, a position from which I see the world. But I also want to wrestle with other people's points of view and say, boy, they really have checked my point of view. And I need to wrestle with that as if it's as if it's equal to my own. And that's a lot of people don't want to give that to somebody like your, your opinion could be as great or better than my own. And that's, boy, I just need to know. I need to wrestle with that. So sit down with it. Well, let's, let's go back to what, what generated your interest in film. Well, my dad's a storyteller. I would say that probably and my dad being fairly liberal rather than my mom, my mom, again, they're both conservative, but my dad's fairly on the liberal side. So we were allowed to watch all sorts of films growing up. And it wasn't like rated R films were off limits or, you know, whatever. So I was supposed to television movies, all that stuff. And my dad's a storyteller by nature. So I've heard him tell stories all my life. And I just enjoy it. I enjoy the emotion, the experience. There's something about either either genetic by nature, by nurture. I just gravitate towards stories, even in the Bible. I gravitate towards the stories of the Bible more than I gravitate to the letters of the Bible. Some people just like talking about Paul's letters or whatever. And they don't quite focus on the stories, but I've always focused on the stories because I just see how they, how they're true, how they work, how they can change someone's opinion, how they can. And that's why I gravitate towards stories. And I've always wanted to tell my own, find stories that I could tell myself. So you went to film school in Biola. How did that happen? Well, about, like I said, in high school, I thought about how could I share with people my point of view, my love for the Lord. And, you know, I read books, you know, there was a lot of Christian, back in the 90s, there was a big Christian industry for novels, new novels coming out, you know, and Frank Peretti, his present darkness, really radicalized and changed. People, you know, producing. And so I'd read these really crappy books. And I was like, I can do that, you know, not to say they were crappy. I really thought they were good. And I was like, I can do that. So I decided I wanted to write my own story. So I had this idea of writing. I had this, man, we had this pastor who came, you know, this evangelist that came and he preached about the harrowing of hell, about Christ going down into Hades and rescuing the captives. And I thought, that's a great ending for a book. What were they doing down there? What was going on? I need to write that story. So I worked on that for, you know, a couple of years, you know, thinking about how can I write that story much in the vein of this present darkness, you know, about people trapped down there in Christ coming to set them free. And I couldn't figure it out. I mean, eventually, I just left it, you know, on the but I thought, well, maybe I'll go into film. Maybe I'll just do story. Maybe I'll edit my own stories. So I started reading books on narrative screenwriting, all that stuff. So I thought about being a screenwriter. That's why I went down there. But I added it a little bit in high school and in college and I ran us actually a group called human videos where we did music videos, but to kind of like I don't know, we listened to a song and then you would act that out in a dramatic fashion. So that's my bent is more drama and more Although I'm not that gifted in it. It's just something I gravitate towards. I think that's what I'm is that the question. Well, and and so well, you know, I'm trying to I'm trying to piece together. I mean, you got a day job you're working in a you know you're working in a in a in a lock up as a day job. You've got a wife, you've got a family. So, you know, already you've got that you've got responsibilities. You got things on your plate. You've got a heart that wants to share what you've what you've been given and And then you start. I mean, similar to me. I mean, I started with a blog. You started with a blog and what kind of things did you do with your blog. Well, Now gravitate. So I like I said, my idea of not having any compartmentalization like I'm just interested in everything. I'm just interested in the world. I'm interested in the way things tick. And so it kind of all stems from my love for the Bible. For one thing, the stories of the Bible. And particularly how the Bible works. Multnomah Bible College really opened my eyes to seeing how literature works. And I'm just not talking about the Bible being spent. They didn't want to describe it as literature. But right. But now that I know a little bit more. It is how literature works, how stories work. And I was really Taught that in my in my Bible college experience education. So I'm taught how stories work. And when I went to Multnomah Bible College, we had a class called inductive Bible study studies. And in the inductive method, I just thought was overkill. We went through Jonah four chapters, the Book of Jonah for the entire semester. I mean, we're talking about like 16 weeks or whatever it is. I mean, it was and I thought this is so dumb. This is so overkill. Jonah just means what it does. I mean, and I just had this flat surface the understanding that if I read the Bible, I know what the Bible means. Why would I need more than that? You're you're you're ripping into a word that goes on and on and on and on, which I had to do. I'm just like, this is boring and and and absolutely pointless. A year later, I had the same professor, his name was Ray Lubeck. And he said he never told us what he thought the meaning of Jonah was. And so we did this ripping apart this four chapter book for 16 weeks. And at the end, we just had no idea what it meant. So at the end of a second class, which was text and canon, which the idea of where the text comes from, can and all those kind of things. He says, there's going to be no final this class. But if you want to know what I think Jonah means, come to the final. And the whole place was packed. Not one person didn't show up. Because everybody had inductive Bible study, and they were intrigued like what what what did we just do? This is a year after the fact. So we don't have a test. It's our finals week, we all show up and we're like, what does it mean? And he told us he goes, well, you know, Jonah isn't one book. Jonah is part of the book of the 12, the 12 minor prophets, which originally were edited together as one composition in the Hebrew Bible. And if you look at like Malachi, I think it is, you know, same you have the destruction of Nineveh and all this kind of stuff. You you have this connection with the day of the Lord and how it all works together and how basically the book of Jonah is a book of the 12. And they're basically they're, they're, they're, they're cheering on the destruction that God's going to bring about. And God says, Hey, I care about these people, too. And so it becomes the key to the book of Jonah. And so it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you know, it's like, you and I have a key book in the New Testament where we're, you know that this is the heart, this is the heart of God, that he's not just about the Jewish people, but he's about all people. And, boy, boom, my mind just went like, wait, the context matters, like, it's not just these four chapters, but there's a much bigger things and everything started to click. And at the same time, I'm reading the Gospel of John, you know, relatively thereafter. I'm teaching my my students in the youth group. I just didn't know what to teach on. So I grabbed the book and that's, let's just, let's just open up the piece and just just didn't know what to teach on. So I grabbed the book and let's just open up the pieces at least. Let's read the chapter by chapter through every Sunday morning. We went chapter one, chapter two, chapter three. Got to chapter three and I asked him, so what does the water mean? That's where Jesus says you must be born of water and the spirit. Well, I didn't know what it meant. I had all these five different things that Bolin-Mobaba College had taught me what this could mean. Five different things, five different interpretations. And at the same time, I'm reading 1 John 5-6, which says he came by water. He didn't come by water only but by water and blood. And I thought the same author, two different books, but water is a shorthand reference for something and it clearly means something to him. And I would think why do those, that symbolism mesh? So here's my inability to compartmentalize. I don't see 1 John and John as distinct. I see them as one work by the same author and using a shorthand reference in the same way and therefore it probably has the same meaning. So how can I know what that means? So all the different, because I know that 1 John 5-6 is interpreted in vastly different ways than John 3-5 is. And I'm like, well, how does it mesh? How might it go together? So then I just started, I know context matters now because I just have the thing. I know context matters. So I opened up John, read it all the way from cover to cover and I realized that I've read John like three or four times before this. And I'm like, for the first time I'm realizing water is everywhere. It's not just in chapter 1, it's not just in chapter 1, it's not in chapter 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and then it's in 9, 11, 13 and 19. It's in almost in every chapter of the Gospel of John and it's used in this enigmatic symbolic way. And so that got me questioning and thinking about how we can know what someone means, especially the symbolism that they're using because this is something that I've never been introduced to or even talked about in even Multnomah Bible College or in my Pentecostal background, which tended not to be, it was biblical, I would say, but wasn't necessarily this symbolic approach to the Bible. Right. Which is interesting because Pentecostalism in terms of the different branches of the church, of course, tends to trade more commonly in dreams and visions, which of course are in almost every case purely symbolic. And then there's an interpretation and on and on. And so it's very interesting the way the different denominations sort of work around the various aspects of symbolism. Yes. Where Pentecostalism can be quite literalistic in its approach to the Bible, but highly symbolic in its life within the church and in the extra-biblical conversations within the church they're trying to align with the Bible. Yeah. Like Revelation, the interpretation of Revelation would be essential here is that the ideas that Pentecostals tend to think that they're much more literalistic when it comes to the interpretation of Revelation, and yet they're highly symbolic in the way they go about that. I'm like, they just think they're more literalistic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's funny to me. So. Yeah. No, that's very true. So on your blog, I haven't looked up your blog, what kinds of things did you do in your blog and how did that then sort of become a YouTube channel? One of the interesting things about your YouTube channel is you've been doing it, at least compared you've been doing it that long. I see. About four years. About four years. Yeah. The first of your videos I ever watched, which I really loved, was on Shawshank Redemption. I thought that was- Right on. I remember, I thought that was so cool. I showed it to my family. And it's interesting that in terms of the movies that you've done some treatment of, I mean, you've really got some, I mean, these are some of my favorite movies, Shawshank Redemption, Groundhog Day, No Country for Old Men, Cast Away. I mean, a lot of these are really, really good. But you don't, unlike me, who puts out four or five or six, or if you're looking at the two channels, seven or eight videos a week, you put out videos every now and then. Talk to me about that. Yeah. Well, I try to do something. When I sit down, I'm like going, I'd like to see a million people watch this. And if a million people are going to watch this, I want to put the thought and the time and the effort into it. I want to make sure that I'm saying something which is accurate, but also something that hasn't been said before. I don't want to simply retread ground that people have been at and stuff that they come to the channel and they say, you know, I've seen that before somewhere else and someone else did it better. I know that I'm not really that gifted in my speaking or my presentation. I mean, I'm off the cuff. I'm fine. I can communicate just fine. But some people are much better at being very focused and I don't know, it just seems like they just are prolific in this kind of stuff. But for me, I feel like I, you know, the emotion is a part of a movie. I want to recreate the experience of the movie. I want people to remember the movie. I want to not just simply cut out all the sound and talk over the images from the movie like some people do. I want to invite people into what they remember about the movie and then to show them something that totally turns it on its head. Like you did not see this before. And I think that's important. And I wanted to do that with the Bible. That's what I do with the Bible. I want to take people into the Bible and show them what they haven't seen before. The problem is, is that most people haven't read the Bible and don't know well enough to know if you're telling the truth or not. They just go, they kind of roll their eyes and they go, well, I don't know if that's radical or not. And they'll just go to their own teacher and they'll think, well, I either disagree with based upon what their teacher is saying. But when it comes to movies like The Shawshank Redemption, you can, everybody's seen that at least once, probably more than once. And they remember the story. And then when I say, well, this is how it's supposed to be interpreted, their mouths drop open and they go, I never saw that before. And yet it's there. It's true. I haven't messed with anything. I haven't told you anything different than what you already know. I just put the pieces in a way that you hadn't quite put together yet. So I'd like that experience. But finding that experience, because I don't, so I don't want to simply just talk about movies in a way that everybody else has done. So having that experience as part of the channel, Logos Made Flesh is to see the thing that you did not see. It's to see the unseen in what you already saw and moving beyond just the surface appearance. Okay. Okay. No, that's really good. My, but I, as a YouTuber, I'm about opposite you. I put everything out there and it's a mess. And it's like, ah, you know, here's a harem throwing, you know, I'm not sure what before, within, I don't sure what, if you can pick out something good in there, God bless you. You found something, but let me know if you find something, because I don't know something's good. But I, I'm very impressed by your channel and I'm very impressed by your work. You showed me, I don't see it on your channel yet, but you showed me, you know, what you've been doing with Arrival. And again, I don't know if that's maybe on Patreon only right now. No, it's coming. It's coming. My composer is still working on it. He's supposed to be done with it like today or tomorrow. So I'm hoping that we get it out like by the end of this week. Well, I think it's amazing. I saw Arrival a few years ago and, you know, what I like about your treatment of these movies, like you say, Shawshank Redemption is a film. I just, in fact, I've got three adult children living at home now with me during the pandemic. And so often what we do is we just throw the remote to a kid and say, you pick what to watch. It's very interesting to see what they come up with. And so my son, you know, picked up Shawshank Redemption and I watched that through again. And actually, because I had seen your video of it a while ago, I'd been thinking about your video as I was watching it. But your videos really do help just open up. And, you know, this is why, you know, when I saw you on Jonathan Peugeot's channel, I thought, oh, that's a very obvious, you know, you and Jonathan are doing very similar things. And actually, you know, I think about this a fair amount when I watch Jonathan's work. There's a funny interplay with symbolism, because symbolism is, in a sense, a, it's a proto language. It's a proto, nearly universal language that nicely translates between cultures and times. But like with language is a very funny thing, because on one hand, if you know multiple languages, so, you know, I worked in Spanish for a number of years when I was a missionary. By no means consider myself a Spanish expert. My wife's Spanish is far better than my own. But one of the things that if you live and work in another language for a while, you begin to inhabit that language. And inhabiting, and you go into this in your film On Arrival, inhabiting that other language opens you up to thoughts that you can't have, or at least are very difficult to have in your mother tongue. And symbolism, sort of like a language, but far a very translatable language, you know, permeates out. But both you and Jonathan are working in that liminal space between symbolism and our culture. And that's a very revelatory space to be in. And so your videos, I think, nicely inhabit that space, because as you said, you open up a movie and say, now you saw all this, you saw this whole movie, but in a sense to, you know, to harp on Jesus, but did you have eyes to see? So now by virtue of this other video, I'm going to give you eyes to see what was before you when you watched the movie, but you didn't grasp it, did you? It's a very powerful thing. Yeah, I think, and that aha moment, I think, gets people like, for instance, atheists and Christians alike, but particularly atheists who think that they see the world, that they think that science alone gives them information or value in the world, like they can see everything clearly. And then you give them that experience to say, not everything is just there. The surface level isn't just the only thing that's there. There's things that go beyond that. And talking about language itself is that symbolism and language symbolism, language is symbolism. That's all it is. A word is a symbol, and it has, you know, it's the signifier and the signified, those two things go together. So what we do every day in language is, is we work and manipulate symbols. I mean, that's the only thing we do. I'm thinking about doing a series on how I know. And I think this is probably where Jonathan and I differ, is Jonathan looks to symbolism as if it's a spiritual thing in the world. And I think it is, I'm not saying it's not spiritual, but I'm probably taking more of a scientific approach to it, saying that you can objectively know some of these things, and that it's not simply, you know, it's not an ether somewhere, we can find it, it's grounded in what we truly know about our experience. We know how to, we know far more about interpretation than we like to give ourselves credit for, because we're doing it every day. In our conversation right now, we are interpreting each other. And that requires a great deal of skill and experience and knowledge. I like to ask people, for instance, how do you know when someone's being ironic? When someone says the opposite of what they literally mean? How do you know that? I mean, you're able to probably with the most, some people are better at than others, some people might go over their heads. But we know a great deal about how to interpret in this non-literal sense, this long literal meaning that comes through all the time and in lots of different instances. Anyway, I don't want to get too far on that. But I think- That's a really interesting thing. Because I, you know, individuals on the autism spectrum, for example, they can be highly intelligent people that can do amazing things in certain areas, often technical areas of expertise that have to deal with what, you know, I have real issues with this word literal. But with these certain realms that are very much, very closely tightly cause and effect linked. But often a person on the autism spectrum, irony, some of these subtleties that you just mentioned, they, it's sort of like us hearing, you know, very low frequently sound, they just don't hear it. Whereas others in the room will watch and know, you know, know what's going on. And that's a very interesting thing about us. Yeah. Yeah. I guess when we think about words, and this is in terms of symbolism, when we see words, I guess I got two thoughts I want to go back to. I want to go back to Jonathan's thought, but about symbolism and how it's a universal language. Let me just go there real quick. Symbolism and how it's a universal language, why certain things are symbolic across cultures. Like for instance, a new birth, a new birth is symbolic across cultures because people know, everybody knows what birth is. It's not like it's unique to America. It's not unique to Russia. It's something a part of the human experience about birth and what it means to be born. We know what a baby looks like when it comes out. We know the umbilical cord. We have all of those things, which are common knowledge and we know what it means to be born, what it was like to not be born and then to be born. So that's not something that's unique to Jesus when he says you must be born again. That idea of being reborn is universally symbolic. It doesn't matter. Now, when he says I'm the bread of life, bread is specific to a culture because if you go to Asia, it's rice. It's not wheat. It's wheat elsewhere or barley or whatever, but it's rice elsewhere. So there are things that are there's imagery and experiences which are universal to everyone and by connecting in with those universal ideas, we can share that experience with others. When we show those images, those images become symbolic of something. Whereas if we get very particular, like for instance in Castaway, when we start talking about a box that may be looking like a missile, that becomes very particular to a cultural situation that existed between Russia and the United States in the 80s and 90s and you start recognizing what a missile is and that subtext there. So there are some things which are far broader in their symbolic approach because they're universal to human experience. Whereas other things because of our particular experience become more focused. And that's where I think that I think we're really objectively knowing why some things are symbolic and why some things aren't and why they objectively are symbolic that way. New birth is objectively understandable because we understand what it is universally. The same thing with certain other instances, but if you've got to know the context in which for instance, Castaway was produced, it's produced for Americans, it's produced for the Western world, it's not necessarily produced for the entire world. It's a specific context with people nowadays and that symbolism can begin to lose its power as we get further and further away from the context in which it was first delivered. People might not understand or know they have to get back to the history and read again. Anyway, so that's the idea of why some things are universal and non-universal and why it's not necessarily just a spiritual practice but more of an objective practice that we do every day. Does that make sense? I think I've got a side track on that. That makes sense. But there were two things there. There was that and then there was something else the other thing was oh why do words? So we look at words and people who are look specifically at a word and they see like for instance if I say the word dog, if I say the word dog you don't think about the sound or the combination of letters. You think about the thought of a dog because you're so keyed into the symbol that you fail to recognize the distinction between the sound or the letters and the meaning that it signifies. You instantly go to the meaning it signifies because you're so aware of that sound and that word. Now if you pull those things apart like for instance Spanish you say the word paro. If I say the word paro if you don't know that word very well like some people might not know you instantly hear the sound and you instantly hear the letters you're more tied into the physicality of that thing rather than the thought or meaning behind it. Even if you're told paro means dog you still have to translate dog or paro into dog before you can understand what it means but you probably know this that eventually you'll start to dream in that language that you'll start to connect those things so closely together so intimately together that the sound and the combination of letters becomes that thought itself almost to without I mean basically to the point where they're without distinction. But if we realize that words are not like for instance why does dog mean what it does? There's nothing inherent in the word dog which makes it mean what it does to us. It's only by our experience it's only because we've agreed to it. It doesn't mean dog for any other reason than that because it could be paro it could be something else but that's the idea is that it doesn't have to connect and when you see that words as symbols dog for instance so intimately connected with what we think we know about it and we realize that a different meaning could be attached to the sound or the combination of letters and when you realize that in our in English and in language that there is nothing inherently meaningful about the words that we say but they're all a but they're all more or less a rainbow a kaleidoscope of differing varying meanings and that we're choosing and selecting which meaning to attach to it by their use in context. So when we say dog I mean you think when you know what it means but in a coded conversation let's say we want to do a code all of a sudden I tell you well dog actually means key. Now you have to translate that out because now we know in the context that dog no longer means what we think it does it means something else and when you start to see how words play like that I think we instinctively know this. Some people are better at it than others recognizing that there's a great I mean I mean sexual innuendo is a common one I mean that we talk about things in a certain way in that jokey sense but when we start to play with the things we think are very concrete like we look at words and we think they're very concrete they mean it because the dictionary told me so. No they don't there's no meaning attached to any word other than the meaning that you give to it and the meaning which you give to it is the one you think your audience will understand. So you have to either allow them to understand it by telling it defining it for them or moving between those two things. So anyway. Well but that's really important with respect to movies because good movie makers do that with the elements of their film. Yes. Because you know a film is a little universe that's sort of you know here I'm going to make a universe and so the different elements I was watching you know one of my favorite shows on television right now Better Call Saul I was watching an episode where you know Jimmy puts a beer bottle on a railing at the beginning of the episode and Kim takes it off because you know a beer bottle on a railing that could fall and break in the parking lot and people could be hurt and glass and all that. Yeah. By the end of the episode Kim comes in and she's throwing beer bottles into the parking lot you know and so a beer bottle on a railing is you know you know they've created they've created a world. But that's meaningful right. It's meaningful but now of course for a North American audience one of the things that you learn in North America as opposed to let's say living in a place like the Dominican Republic a lot of these you mean it's a we live in a very rich world where things have meaning in one place that they don't have the same meaning or no meaning or little meaning in another place and so but movies are these wonderful things where these they take you know they can create a world in a sense and obviously the mastery of the artistry is creating that world. Yeah. Yeah. I would say that so when most people and it's funny because the conversations that I have online they have opened up my eyes to how people see things and why they see things in a certain way but I mean just instinctually when the kid sits down and watches a movie and when you're a little bit older and older if you don't grow in your sense of what things could be you just take things like if I watch a story about Shawshank it's about a couple guys in prison and it could be emotional because it's about these guys and it's not about me it's about those guys out there and they're doing their thing and it's interesting it's fun it's entertaining whatever but there's nothing beyond that that surface level and if we realize that in language that language the words we speak the conversations context how we interpret that thing is no different really no different than watching a movie on the screen if we see the correspondence and the correlation between those two ideas we could begin to see that movies themselves bleed over into different ways and the way we interpret those things are exactly the same even if they're they're different in the way they're expressed or visualized or whatever. Let's see here. Yeah it's just really fascinating to me that people can't that when you let me go back Ex Machina you know the movie Ex Machina I did a video on my channel called the death of God and that movie in that movie Nathan the billionaire tech boss who creates Ava the android he created a the world's most popular search engine and he names that world's most popular search engine blue book and blue book sounds like Facebook it sounds like you know it's probably a Google s type thing but the word blue book his meaning behind that word why Alex Garland screenwriter selected the term blue book is significant because it's the first it's the lecture notes for Ludwig Wittgenstein's the philosophical investigations and in that Ludwig Wittgenstein argued that he wanted to kind of break philosophy apart from you know why it works and why it doesn't work and basically he argued what language was and he said language or meaning let's just say meaning meaning is use meaning is use and that's really significant because when we look at Ava and the question of the movie whether or not she's conscious or not conscious whether we can whether she's you know having experience just like our own that question isn't significant in fact the film throws out the question whether she has consciousness or not because we don't know if anyone has consciousness really because I can see inside my own head I the experience this internal world I can see the world subjectively but there is no objective world let's just say that for anyone there is no objective world we're all seeing the world subjectively we're all seeing it through the grid of our internal conscious experience and I don't know if you're experiencing the world in the same way I am I don't even know if you're conscious all I know is that I can see your behavior your actions your whatever you're doing and what I what I infer from my own conscious experience is that what you're doing is comparable to what I see in me and so therefore I infer consciousness based upon use based upon presentation based upon how it physically presents to me you physically present to me I infer your conscious and that is like no different than the meaning of words when I look to a word do I know the speaker's intent no because I can't get inside the speaker's head there is no way for me to get back to what the speak even if he told me I mean it'd be closer perhaps but the thing is I can't get back into the speaker's head all I can do is look at the surface level and infer that meaning that intended meaning that consciousness that whatever that intangible spiritual aspect that we go what is it where does it come from all I can do is infer that from what I see in me so in some sense it is circular in some sense my understanding about your consciousness or the meaning of your words that you're using is circular as I'm going back and forth you know looking at how I would understand it why I understand it the certain way but also trying to recognize your meaning anyway I think that's a really foundational important aspect of looking at the world and recognizing why things are the way that they are and how we can see a deeper meaning in them so I'm trying to get to this this more objective approach to say no you can know that things do have a symbolic meaning even if they don't immediately present themselves to you so some people think that art some people think that art is just whatever you make of it it's just your own interpretation right you just make stuff up anybody can interpret anything and I'm like no that's not the way it works you can't just go to a movie now you could do that that's fine but if your goal is to understand what somebody else means then to recognize that is a sick little process of thinking and rethinking and going over what they've actually said to recognize the larger context in which they've said it yeah so how how how do you choose the movies you're going to treat on your channel that comes with finding the the idea that says to me that this is a good enough idea which hasn't been covered enough and it's I try to also find movies that everybody's seen and seen more than once I don't like I did a quiet place recently hasn't hasn't had the traction of the other videos I think it was a great film but I think most a lot of people just didn't see it they had no they had no curiosity about it either another film another idea is to I find that the movies that do the best are movies that people walk away from thinking what did I just watch I like no country for old men they walked away and like yeah yeah I had no idea what that was about and yeah and when you have and like castaway I love castaway people didn't walk away from that movie with a question about it they they walked away and they thought I saw what I needed to see and it was a survival film and they have no they have no desire to go back and or not desire but there's no nothing that says I got to do a search and find out what castaway meant because they think they know what it meant rather than saying no there's something more here but those films where you think you know that you know there's a question and you don't know what the answer is that's the kind of that's the kind of film I'm looking for popular films that lead to that kind of question I don't know if Arrival will do quite so well because it wasn't quite as popular and Interstellar that's the one I'm looking at doing next was popular I think that that's hands down people have said what did I just watch I have no idea what I just watched I've watched a great movie but there's something here that's deeper than just guys in space you know people in space so there is and there is so well that's that's really interesting and you know one of the things I think about a lot is how how we have this sense often of well there's something there and I don't know it but part of me knows it but you know there's the there's there's the conscious self that's you know that imagines it's somehow running the show when it really isn't but then there's the rest of us who know that know things that the conscious self doesn't know and this of course is where you know dreams come from and dream interpretations and paying attention to our dreams I mean Jung and Freud both paid a lot of attention to their dreams because they figured there's there's stuff in there that I want that I want to know but I don't have access to it so I'm going to watch the dreams now what what movies over the last couple of years have you seen that I mean is it the case that well let me ask you this question how how do you choose what movies you watch and how do you watch them oh I watch everything I mean how do I choose um just something that looks looks interesting remotely interesting I don't say I would watch everything I just watched Parasite the other night um watch you know popular films stuff that's out there I watched Lighthouse I think when it came out I thought that looked really interesting just I haven't seen it black and white done kind of in a 1920s 1930s style it's kind of a horror film but uh it's I wouldn't say it's horror it's very atmospheric it's really good um but uh interesting just one of those ones you scratch your head when you walk away from it um but uh how do I choose I think what happens is is that like for instance Mad Max when I watch Mad Max you know I wanted to see that because it just looked awesome it looked fun entertaining and I went more or less walking into a movie which I felt like I just wanted to be entertained and I I don't have any preconceived ideas that movies have to be meaningful they don't a lot of films are just yeah yeah like I would say that you know oftentimes I just look at Transformers and I'm going that's just guys you know with guns and explosions and uh there you go you know it's it needs to be known more difficult than that and uh you know you know Indiana Jones I love Indiana Jones uh is there any complexity to Indiana Jones well there's some things you probably could go into about how it was filmed you know you know Steven Spielberg being Jewish and his his uh is basically wanting to get even with the Nazis you know that kind of stuff but I mean is it deeply symbolic no I don't think it's deep I think it's it's fairly on the surface you know level stuff there's nothing that's going to surprise you about you know you're not going to walk away from Indiana Jones being very surprised by anything it is what it is uh so when I walk into Mad Max I just had that impression that it's going to be um just entertainment but I think I enjoyed that movie so much that I probably watched it like six or seven times I brought it home to my my family we watched it as a family my my daughter was seven years old at the time and she loved it she got a kick out of it I kept saying I don't know why this movie's rated R my own personal point of view but we watched it watched it I think it was probably the fifth or sixth time just watching it just having a fun time with it that those threads that start saying there's more here uh than than meets the eye and that usually comes that usually comes with seeing the whole like you'll get into a rival it comes with memorizing the pathway through a movie because when you watch it the first time a movie a first time you have no sense of the pathway how the movie gets from point a to point b you just you just follow the course and you're just going along and all the jumps in but when you watch a movie multiple times keep on going over and over and over it you start to realize the comparison and contrast being made the innuendo where where phrase or word shows up here and it shows up there and the context in which those things are made and when you can start piecing those puzzles that you see all the puzzles and how they I'm sorry all the pieces and how they fit together you start to realize that there's more meaning here than originally you saw for instance I saw that the first thing I saw was that Nux's chain of blood which was attached from Max to Nux on the and on the car the front of the car had a similarity to the the umbilical cord that connected Splendid with her baby and when Splendid dies that baby is cut from her womb and you only see the foot and then they cut out the umbilical cord the only thing they actually show you and the guy spins it in front of the camera and you realize well how often do you see that in a film where they just want to show you the umbilical cord and you're like well what what is an umbilical cord in its substance it's it's a chain of blood and you realize well okay then you have Max being tied to Nux and then you have when Nux when Max first meets Splendid and he comes across to these group of women who are you know drinking or washing themselves he comes up and he needs water well he's carrying Nux on his shoulder and a very pregnant Splendid walks towards him as he kind of stands there with his you know shotgun and tells him to give him water well these contrasting images are supposed to say what's happening to Max is what Splendid's doing so they're telling you what it's supposed to be in relationship to one another and that's where you start going and that's the only thing I saw had no intention I thought well that's kind of interesting it's kind of transgenderism I thought maybe they're trying to do something uniquely in with the culture and then I just started when I started pulling on more threads it just all came I was just like boy this is probably one of the most Christian movies too it's it's pretty phenomenal um how much George Miller hasn't George Miller is a from Greek uh he's a he's a Greek immigrant to to Australia his parents were Greek um so interesting enough he's he's Greek probably Greek Orthodox I imagine and so definitely has a a Christian upbringing of some sort historically not necessarily his own personal point of view but you can see the the clash of cultures the clash of worldviews on display in in Mad Max as you have the war boys who are blowing themselves up you screaming a slogan you know witness me and blowing themselves up and then you have a diametrically opposed religious worldview these are two religious worldviews that are going on here class of clash of cultures which I'm not just saying that the war boys represent Islam but they do but they also represent any type of militant aspect including the United States where you have this diametrically opposed point of view this worldview which is Christ and the martyrs and the ones who lay down their lives for others so those are the two things on display so it's very very interesting so that's how I I mean going long story short that's how I select the movie I watch a movie because I enjoy it I watch a movie because I'm gravitated towards it and if it's popular and I find something interesting to it I'll do a video on it so what's your take on you know in biblical studies it's authorial intent I suppose in movies is it's directorial directorial intent I mean because this is a this is a I mean we're not our own masters and we we're not fully masters of even the things that we produce right meaning that which we produce can say more than we know but it depends which we were talking about with we so what's how do you think about that with respect to the filmmakers and what you find I think that's probably the greatest objection that I get about what I do is to say that a screenwriter who writes a script does not have power over the finished product so if he has an intent in the script and it's not translated to the film or the film is mistranslate or mixes it up that basically because you have so much so many cooks in the kitchen making a soup that you really can't know what one cook had intentions of versus the other cook they just kind of all work together and it blends together and it is what it is so that I agree I think that can be a a real problem I think what we're looking at I think probably one of the things I gravitate to is to the art the films that are more done by art auteurs I think that's the word auteur somebody who has has more power access or at least some kind of domineering role in a way a film is produced like Christopher Nolan or M. Night Shyamalan or Steven Spielberg or whatever you know that these guys the studio will give them almost carte blanche rain and that they're deeply tied not just with the directing or producing the film they're also deeply tied with the script so in almost in every part of the process their hands are somewhere in in the pie making sure that the decisions that are made or the ultimate goal is realized so that's another thing so it's not just you know and I think that also I want to say that that those type of movies I think movies in general I don't think well let me go back here filmmakers think about their movies far more than we do that's just a given people say they think they most people think that they think about them as much as we do like we're watching we watch a movie we're like wow what I got out of that movie is exactly what they thought I should get out of that movie and I'm like going they spent thousands of hours and millions of dollars to make something and make something great and you think that they thought about it as much as you did I mean I just think that's the I mean I just think that's the phenomenal I think that when someone has like when I start to look at something I realize that the first view and the second view the third view I may not even pick it up I've been watching Hillary I think I watched it in her shell or probably I would say five times in the last couple weeks I just keep watching bits and pieces I've been going through and I watched the first time I thought okay the second time third I probably watched it 10 times in all over the course of the years and did not see the stuff that I eventually do come to realize that Christopher Nolan had far more meaning to it than I even could imagine and I think that most people can pick up on because it's such a so many different pieces going on in that film so yeah I think so authorial intent I think is significant I'm not doing films that I don't think are tied directly to the idea of the script that the script had an intent and and we're and I'm delving into what the scriptwriter had in mind and that the finished product realizes now I think that there can be accidents that something's realized in the process like when you're doing a film and an actor decides I'm going to do this and I'm going to make this person such in such a way well that's but I usually think that's under the advice and direction of what they already know to be true about the story itself that the scriptwriter or director is saying they're interpreting the film they know what they want to come across and therefore they add it Coen Brothers a good example of Coen Brothers is No Country for Old Men in the book because it's a it's a adaptation from a Cormac McCarthy book No Country for Old Men I've read the book I've seen the movie and most people want to say well you didn't give Cormac McCarthy any credit for the movie and I'm like going I'm not dealing with Cormac McCarthy I'm talking about a Coen Brothers film they chose the film because they're the Coen Brothers they liked it and they translated it in the way that they thought it should be translated because people don't realize even if it's faithful to the movie the book itself there's far there's a lot of things that the Coen Brothers add to the movies in the visuals that they present but one of the things they change one of the ways they did change the script from Cormac McCarthy's book is they add that part where where Ed Thom's cousin the one who's paralyzed he says you can't act like everything's waiting on you basically saying that death is inevitable blah blah blah and he says because that's vanity yeah and that word vanity is not in the book and I'm like so if you it's not just willy-nilly that the Coen Brothers put it in there yeah they put it in there because your your head starts going why have I heard vanity before it's not just the song you're so vain it's it's a biblical reference that's right vanity vanity says the preacher all is vanity even though we say we translate as meaningless it's the KGV version KJV version so yeah well and it's fun when they're taking I mean and we all do this I mean I've I mean I've sort of built my channel commenting on the comments of others and but that is I mean that is basically how culture how culture grows and and transforms it's you know here's a McCormick book and then a coen and then you know your video on top of it and yeah that's basically how how cultures grow and that's why words change their meaning yeah yeah where do you want where do you want to see your where do you want to see your channel are you all set mark did you get those checks I do and I'll get back to you okay great thanks mark where do you I mean what do you want from your channel if you know you're you're you're 90 years old and your children and your grandchildren your great-grandchildren are all around you and and someone says Papa tell me about that YouTube thing you did what what what what at that point do you want to look back and say you know this this is what it was for and this is this is this is why it mattered what do you what do you want from it you know that's it and that that's the that's a great question because I think that in many ways I have got out at what I wanted it to be initially like just that first video of the Shawshank Redemption and basically the first four videos that I did the first four videos I did came out and like they basically four months I did one video that I did the great groundhogs day no country for old man mad max and I'd done all those and they just boom they just went off and but but those two I think probably no country for old men and and the and Shawshank Redemption were probably the two ones that I love the most because they express something about the hope and the hopelessness in our world and that that you can have hope in the midst of hopelessness and that why not choose hope rather than hopelessness even if there is even if you think that there's no objection reason to hope still choose hope because hope is the means by which we continue and we exist and we and life can be good so I think that those I just just to have a conversation with people and how much people have come and gravitated those ideas I'm I'm I'm very grateful I'm grateful to God because he put me on the earth for something and I was always wondering what that thing is and if it's just that those two films I'm very happy so where do I want to go from now that's the thing is every time I'm thinking where do I take it now what what do I tell people because you can't keep finding you know these revolutionary things and movies that people have seen and yet I want to I want to find that thing and I don't have a backlog of or a giant backlog of things that people haven't seen and would go boy that's that's really exciting I don't want to just keep doing the same thing over and over again I don't want to just keep boring people like you know like like an M night M night was great you did the sixth sense and then he did it again and he did it again and he did it again and people are going yeah we've seen that before and we all know what you're gonna do so like for instance doing the Jesus thing people got to the impression that I just saw Jesus in every film like Mad Max and I saw him in Shawshank Redemption and of course you're just gonna do Jesus in every film and then I did the death of God and ex Machina and people are like are you a Christian and I'm like I want you to know that I don't just see things because I want to see them there I'm also wrestling with the things that I don't want to see the things that are there and we're exposed to and and that there this truly is I believe it Ex Machina is a fantastic film but I truly believe it's an anti-christian film yeah yeah yeah cool well I've you know I've pestered you probably long enough anything you want to pester me about or um or note or take this conversation someplace that I haven't anticipated well who's who's the most interesting person that you've talked to what do you think have you all your podcasts what do you uh oh that's that's risky because there's a lot of people out there surely it's me and other people think no it's not me you know I I I probably suffer from a certain conversational amnesia in that so often uh my favorite conversation is the one that I just had I find I find human beings to be you know absolutely amazing and that word is is threadbare right now it's just been way overused in the last 10-15 years but the the range of human beings again just now I coming in you know there's a guy who's there's a restraining order he's not allowed to be around here because this is a whole long story that some people um but he was here and so and we're on good terms I mean he attacked a member of the church oh wow jail for two years and it wasn't worth the county to prosecute him so they just let him out and it's like a very very very very very slapped him with a restraining order but you know and and his story you know if I were a movie maker or a better author or if that were my gift gift area of giftedness just this one homeless person story alone yeah is just you know he grew up in a mormon household was big into uh athletic skiing gymnastics um I don't know but but probably fairly early on wrestled with mood you know he's a disorder so um and I'm sure in jail you see folks yeah the mental illness rates in jail oh yeah so so but on one hand you know deeply steeped in the mormon faith as as mormon as as you can be but at the same time can't give up drugs and alcohol you know and and so I just look at this one life and it's just it's tragic and it's glorious and it's all right there and because he's homeless because he's a drug user because he's bigger than life um you know one of the things that he loves is drumming and so one of the things that he spends money on is drumsticks and one day I was driving in a road near here and there was a interstate overpass he was just drumming the heck out of that you know the the the rail there on the overpass and I wanted to stop and take some video of him but that just that one little life and there are billions of them and not all of them quite as interesting but what I've seen is that almost everyone is if you can start to you know scrape off yeah yeah the veneers that they've put on to hide themselves in this world yeah and so you know I you know I started I started well actually I started my YouTube channel first just a way to give people a chance to see sermons that they missed and then Freddy who's in my church if you haven't seen the Freddy and Paul show on my channel they're my shortest videos and you know Freddy is is lives on disability and he comes to he comes to me one day and says pastor you and I should do a tv show I'm thinking is he had been on public access tv with his raps because he likes to rap he's a white guy and I thought um number one no ABC is not going to pick us up number two no I am not going to go down to public access and do a tv show with you I said I'll tell you what I'll just take my phone and we'll make little video segments and I'll post them on YouTube and I'll send you the link and your mom the link and I'll put them on Facebook and yeah 10 or 15 people who know you and are interested might watch one or two of them so I started that and then I was watching Jordan Peterson thinking oh I want to process this but I had for years had a blog where I would just write ideas and process things and there were other listservs that I would process things and I couldn't really get any traction in my communities of conversation with Jordan Peterson because they weren't interested in him which is totally fine we're all we all live tiny little lives we can't be interested in everything and I thought there's something about YouTube and Jordan Peterson so I thought I've been playing with YouTube a little bit thought I'll make a video about Jordan Peterson because why not yeah and so I did and not a lot happened but then I made a second one and that one sort of took off and then it was like oh crap what have I started and my real crisis was what am I going to do with a Freddie and Paul show because Freddie had been on a shock jock radio program in Sacramento and he basically was one of these guys on the radio to be mocked by the shock jock so and I didn't want to set that up yeah yeah yeah and I didn't want people basically being ugly to Freddie and I but I thought maybe I'll leave it up and see what happens and the community for the most part around my YouTube channel has been an absolute delight and so I kept making commentary videos on Jordan Peterson and some commentaries on whatever I wanted to and started putting rough drafts of my sermon on the channel and then more and more people would want to talk to me and have a conversation and so I'm a pastor and so I have conversations with people like you and I are having now and I'm very curious about their lives because I want to kind of move move the stuff away and see the glory that's underneath because yeah in almost every case I will find it without too much work right and so so then I had conversations with people and it was like first of all there's a certain repetition in the conversation around Jordan Peterson so other people might want to notice that and I had started meetups and I noticed that there was kind of a pent-up demand for conversation people finding conversations about Jordan Peterson because people would come to the meetup and say things like I tried talking to my wife about Jordan Peterson but she didn't have anything to do with it so I got to talk to someone so then I started then people would after I'd have a conversation with people people would email me back and they'd say well you you said something and I can't remember what do you remember what you said like I don't remember what I said so I started zoom has a recording function so I started recording the conversation and then I thought you know I bet you could it be that maybe someone else one or two other people would be interested in this conversation so why don't I just post it on my channel I'll get permission and you know if they're cool and I'm cool I'll post it yeah I posted it and then that started then people started really getting into the conversations and there were too many people that I couldn't have conversations with everyone so I said if we've had two conversations you're cut off for now so then they started talking to each other channels started for right on and so you know it's been it's been magical and I was awesome and I you know I still make videos and I'm unlike like I said my video making is about opposite of yours because there's almost no video too crappy I won't put up and just think I'll put this up and I'll see what happens and if it's crap it's crap but and if the YouTube comments but people people are very forgiving and so I I've basically used my YouTube channel very selfishly as a place to post my very rough drafty thoughts but what's been wonderful about it is that other people share their rough drafty thoughts and I learned from them that's awesome yeah and they I guess they watch because they feel they're learning something from me and so the whole channel has sort of been a conversation and how cool is that yeah so you've almost enjoyed everyone or at least you're going to go on record to say you've almost enjoyed everyone yeah you know and and this is something that I learned as a pastor because so you'd have a bible study and you know there's always somebody who's going to come on there in the bible study and give the right answer and it's like okay congratulations you've learned the right answer and that's as a pastor I know that that's actually quite more exceptional than you would imagine but congratulations you've learned the right answer but I never found the right answer quite as interesting as the honest answer about okay so yeah so you know that this is what a certain group of people have thought is the meaning of this verse but I want to know what you heard from this verse and how that bounces off your life because that gives me a window into who you really are and it might be heretical it might be but but if you're if you're at least sharing it with me in good faith that you're not playing a game with me and you're and this is honestly what you're feeling and thinking about this yeah I don't believe that God is offended by this and the reason for that is I've read the Psalms and in the Psalms yeah yeah you know the psalmists are unvarnished and so are the prophets and and so this idea that I hear out there from people that the that the bible is this you know we're almost in a better position now that the bible is now politically incorrect and we were 50 years ago when the bible was politically correct and because at least now you can be politically incorrect talking about the bible that's right yeah yeah and so Jordan Peterson comes along and and you know it just I was just completely blown away that here this Canadian psychologist who doesn't go to church and you know doesn't doesn't profess allegiance to any Christian denomination and won't even straightforwardly say that he is a Christian is is is you know he's ambiguous on those points he starts giving lectures about the bible in a rented hall in Toronto for two plus hours of rambling can't get enough of it it's like that that's I I can't not pay attention to that that's a burning bush and I gotta go over there and I gotta watch this and I gotta figure this out and you know a lot of people will say well pastor you're a pastor and you're a you're a confessional pastor which means you sign certain doctrinal statements and so you know people can call you up on church charges yeah charges yeah yeah all of that is true but um something is happening here that when I watch it and think about it and reflect on it I say the word of God is alive and well in the world yeah and no amount of cynicism or um you know attempts to destroy it reputationally are going to keep it down because here's this Canadian psychologist talking about the bible and here are thousands of men and women who by watching his ramblings about the bible are less depressed and more motivated to actually make improvements in their lives and I think you know if if you're talking about movements of God I think this is one and I don't care if he's a heretic because we're all heretics I'm a Calvinist that's part of our doctrine we're all heretics we're all sinners we're all heretics we're all racists we're all bigots we're all a mess okay that's how all of us are and so I and so now you know I spend a certain number of hours a week making YouTube videos and talking to people on zoom like we're doing now so I don't know I just think God is good and yes he's wild and free and so he makes things happen that none of us could ever have imagined yeah how are you doing um how you doing with your church I know you uh you got a small church and it's kind of been in decline for a number of years because of the location you're at it's an ageing population aging church um what you what's going on there I don't mean to bring that up I'm just like it's something on your mind something on your heart you did share that it's always on my mind I've been you know I've been here 22 years and one of my one of my friends and colleagues recent you know over there he says yeah he rolls his eyes every time I talk about my church dying he's like you've been saying this for 22 years and it's not dead yet yeah but it's gonna die one of these days and I'm sure I'll be here to see it and I'm sure I'll be partially responsible for its death um but no it's you know so I came here and and the church you know with our classes they were doing a big willow creek thing and so this was all the ideas about how to save declining churches and right right that didn't work yeah our church was not about that but but what I you know what I what I came to embrace was the idea that uh this is the bride of christ not my bride and so god is going to do with this church what it wills what what god wills to happen in this church and so um there's your Calvinist right there coming up that's good that's good man so I need peace man we need to go to go to that lean on that well and the church I mean part of the reason that the church is as I often say so dramatically unsuccessful in terms of most the most common metrics of success is that it's just so doggone weird because I mean it's almost like I mean I'd laugh with some people because if someone made a reality show of this church nobody would ever believe it'd be like you know be like tiger king on netflix because you got the you've got the so you've got the schizophrenic you know sleeping standing up in the back row you've got the bipolar mormon who you know first day he gets out of jail he comes he knows there's a restraining order he comes he marches into church in the middle of the service and I have to stop and say first I didn't see him and then one of my elders was like Daniel what are you doing here there's a restraining order you can't be here so he gets up and walks out oh I mean and yeah and so the church is on one hand it's odd and quirky and unusual and on the other hand it's beautiful and blessed and beloved and what God does and then in the middle of this you know I have this YouTube eruption and then people start you know wandering in because it's yeah what's going on here yeah so then we have these meetups that and we know but nobody can meet up now but once once the restraining orders are off and that the stay-at-home places are done then you know whatever but so then we have these meetups where we've got you know mostly atheists and unchurched people who come in and want to talk about philosophy and all kind whatever we talk about in our meetups we talk about I just think you know again this is God's church he's he's gonna do what he wants with it right and you you go with him you go with him wherever he takes us and so that's whatever this is right now that's here and so now we're in a pandemic and of course other churches are doing zoom but it's like my people can't manage zoom you know those that have smartphones don't have any apps on them and don't even know how to zoom ain't gonna work so I make little videos and some can see on YouTube and some at Facebook and some I'm sure are watching Charles Stanley so you know I've given up trying to imagine what God is going to do and so we pray that he gives us this day our daily bread and so far he has yeah I don't know what else to say I tried managing it and scheming and planning and you know making things happen and I'm just a dramatic failure at all that so yeah do what I do you know I am I'm going to totally up overturn our our theology here but Matthew chapter 25 Jesus tells the parable the sheep and the goats and we typically have an explanation for that Jesus says that on the left and on the right he separates the sheep from the goats and on the left he looks at the sheep and says come for you inherit the kingdom which was prepared for you from the foundation of the world because I was hungry and you you fed me I was naked and you clothed me I was sick and in prison you came to visit me so on and so forth and he says and they say when Lord when did we see you and he says to the least I've done these to my brother you've done it to me and then he turns the goat he says the exact opposite you can't you're you know you're cast out because you didn't do it to the least of my brothers you didn't do it for me well we have such a tidy explanation of that parable I was reading it one day and I recognized that you know there's two parables that preceded and it talks about basically he brings I think I can't remember he brings before him but in that parable he brings the nations he brings the nations before him and he says it's like these are the leftovers it's not like they're this is the Christians and non-Christians these are everyone who's not part of this group in fact the brothers Jesus says Matthew the brothers are those who follow Jesus and do the will of God and keep it so the brothers are the church brothers are the Christians and here he brings everyone else everyone else who's not a believer and he says and this is how I interpret it I think it's based based in Matthew and he says he says if you did it to one of these my brothers you did it for me because I saw in that and and you think about the world in which Matthew wrote his gospel and took Jesus's parable and applied it to the sits in labor as you know biblical scholars like to say the life situation the life setting is you you wonder in a world where you're the minority such complete the complete minority and you look at the vast world out there and you say well is God going to save everyone I mean who's he going to save if if my family's going to be you know not going to be saved or whatever should I accept Christ is he going to be good to those people that have been good to me that I know and love and cherish and want to see saved and if they don't accept if they don't receive will the kingdom still be offered for them and I think the radical idea and this is something we've completely got away from because we live in a world that was completely Christian we lived in a world which was by and large 100 99 98 Christian and we thought everybody's just got to say the prayer there's no excuse you should just say the center's prayer but in a world where we have like Jordan Petersen's and we have atheists and we have everybody showing up I think we should remember I think the original meaning of Matthew 25 where God says if you did it for the least of these my brothers you did it for me and I think that a God that holds will not forget will not forget the good that is done even if it was done unknowing and I think the question is the answer is is that they did not know when they say when when they show up and they're like I don't even know who you are they're totally dumbstruck by this Lord that's now over them I don't even know who you are and he says you know that you knew me all along and it was in these people and when you love God's people God will not forget that he will love you and basically I think it's the promise extended to Abraham in you all the nations of the earth will be blessed those who bless you I will bless those who curse you I will curse basically if you bless the people of God God will not forget you and he will bless you the same anyway so I think that in that kind of world we need to start thinking about the world basically is in the Romans Roman world we're living in a pagan world a by and large pagan world and the idea that we're we're now the transcendent majority even though we are still somewhat in the majority there is a very strong opposition or counter you know belief system and to recognize where we exist and who we are and not just to depend I think it also in terms of evangelism we so much depend on the classic believe you're guilty in order to be saved so we have to preach guilt we have to preach condemnation we have to preach these things in order for you to turn around and the funny thing is is that that doesn't work in a world that doesn't feel guilty you you you keep saying you need to feel guilty and they're like I don't feel guilty I don't feel guilty so I mean the the means by which we preach to people need to change but we we keep playing out the same playbook and you know what somebody's somebody's drumming us they're beating us and we have not switched playbooks I think the biggest thing here is that we need to recognize that that when people ran from sin because sin was inconvenient it was uncomfortable and I can just do what I want so they got rid of this notion of anything being standard any objections it's not the reason they did there's lots of reasons why we ran from sin and we believe that there is no such thing as a standard no such thing as a right or wrong to by which we are it made it feel good because we're like I can breathe easy now I don't have to worry about you know you know a god who might punish me for the things that I've done but the problem is in doing that in denying a standard we've ran in the opposite direction which not having meaning means that if I can't do wrong then I can't do right either so nothing I do matters so I got rid of sin because it was easy can convince anything and I'm not being I'm not being my heart isn't being you know judged by anymore but now nothing I do really is worthwhile nothing is meaningful and I think that's who you have coming to your meanings those people who are coming your meanings are saying I don't have meaning I don't like sin I don't like the notion of sin I don't like the notion of hell but you're like if things are meaningful this is the thing if things are meaningful then it's possible that you can violate the meaning you were given that it's possible that you aren't living up to the standard by which you were created for that's uncomfortable it's inconvenient but what would you rather have no sin no meaning it's one or the other wow wow yeah yeah well that's that's really good that's really good and it's really true because that you know that has been so you know Jordan Jordan sort of sees meaning as an internal gyroscope to help people say okay this is the direction you should go in because you should go in a direction and you know another you know the meaning crisis another scholar vervecki that you know I've done some commenting on his work too the the craziest you know the craziest thing that that I that I saw was that people would call me and they would tell me I was depressed and then I watched these videos and I wasn't depressed anymore and I started doing things and it's like well that's interesting yeah and then and then the craziest thing was and this is part of the reason why I really wanted to study Jordan because he was doing something I wasn't doing was that people would say now I want to read the Bible now I want to go to church and it's like after watching this guy that's what you want that's interesting what's happening here so yeah it's and like I said they're wake people are waking up to go wait there's there's meaning out there objective meaning there's something out there that I that I've completely like they just shut themselves off and I think the connection between this idea between everyone gets a trophy you know everyone's getting a trophy and the idea that you don't have any meaning and that the connection between those things are the same thing even though they're like there's my lack of compartmentalization but the connection between those are one and the same so if I give everybody everybody gets an award then really there is no the reward is meaningless and the reward is meaningless you have no value or and then we look at groundhog's day and that's the yeah that's the world of Phil Phil waking up each day to the same day that doesn't mean a thing so he's going to live like he wants to but even that there's no fulfillment and really all he wants is to be fulfilled all he wants is to be happy and you can't have happiness without the feeling that something around there is wrong that you've got to get right yeah yeah yeah it's true it's true anyway I hope the best for you brother I you know what I feel for you we went to a small church for a long time and um and I feel the pain I feel the pain for you you know it's yeah I feel that pain sometimes but I also feel enormously blessed and at least so far you know God has um the lights are on um the church has never missed a paycheck which obviously is a good thing that's a plus man and um so what God does with his church that's God's business and I'm going to try to um you know do do what he calls me to do and we'll let we'll let God worry about what comes so that's right that's right yeah thank you I've become much more Calvinist in my later years and I was in my early ones Calvinist is the is the um is the tradition for for those who know they failed yeah yeah yeah because what that's what they got left well if it's up to me I know how that's gonna go so yeah yeah that's true it's so true it's so true but it's so good so I think of Calvinism I think at the end of Castaway and where um Tom Hanks arrives at all those those different uh the four crossroads the crossroads he looks down this road and this road this road well you know which road he's going to take he's not going to Canada right yeah but he stands out in the middle of after he saw the girl driving back the opposite way and you know he's going after her but I think I think what he's in his mind I think what is in his mind is how did every road I take lead me to this and I think that's the more safety and like going all of the bad things that happened to him all of the things that went wrong he now recognizes and stands right in the middle of where he knows he needs to be rather than saying which way should I go because that's the Arminius perspective I just I got to do something do something right he recognizes that every path that he would have walked would have led him to this yeah so yeah it's a comforting feeling yeah well thank you Matt this has been a delight yeah it's been good talking with you Paul I really did enjoy it I'm gonna yeah so appreciate you keep doing what you're doing because I am I'm not giving up I've got like I said I've got ideas I just got a I'm very what I should say I'm just thankful for where my channel's at and I'm so blessed and so richly blessed that's not that's not robbing me of wanting me to do more it's just it's just inspire me to man I gotta keep keep doing something even better because it's just it's been I'm very blessed very blessed all right so well you have a you have a wonderful day all right you too sir take care Matt you too bye bye