https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-E-3KXq9kJE

 Looks like we're on. So yeah, welcome to 2023. Might feel like 2021. But this is the this is a Friday, Bridges of Meaning Q&A. And I know I haven't done this for a while. Father Eric developed a pretty heartbreaking meme for me about my negligence. But here I am. And here we are. And I'm thinking about doing this once a month, probably unless I have a conflict, maybe the first Friday of the month, something like that. So I'm taking questions not from the live stream, but from the Bridges of Meaning short questions for PVK section and Friday live streams. And let's get after it. And as many have noted, you can just post questions there and they'll they'll sit there until I get to them. Sometimes I can't answer them. And I've got I see a question that I probably can't really get into just because if you leave a question that requires homework, it's probably not going to get an answer. So I'll just give you that warning right now. Father Big Mac asks, I recently finished Reformations, the early modern world by by Erie, a book that I believe you read recently. I did enjoy it. It was I thought it was quite a good book. Across the Domination of Lines, Hellfire and Brimstone was a standard tool for Christian preaching and instruction. In our time, many Christians don't lean into hellfire the way our forebearers did, even if they profess the traditional doctrine of hell. Do you have any insight as to why this may be? I think this is an enormous question that we are not talking about. Now, there's a lot of debate about eternal conscious torment, which I'd love for someone to do a study on that term itself. My suspicion is that the term the term itself is very recent and eternal conscious torment is as a as a renaming of hell is also quite interesting because notice where the consciousness focus is on. The so Father Eric is exactly right about the emphasis on hell in the medieval church, which was very much the foundation for the Protestant Reformation. And if you read Luther's biography, he's, you know, traveling very famous story. He's traveling through. He's studying to be a lawyer. He's traveling through the woods at night. There's a tremendous thunderstorm and he cries out to St. Anne to be saved. He was in existential terror of hell for his soul. Practices of indulgences. I mean, all of this stuff can be very much tied to anxiety about about hell and afterlife punishment. Part of the recession of modernity is the is the rise of phenomenology. I think that's pretty clear from what we're talking about in this little corner. Phenomenology is at the center of the symbolic world by the Peugeot brothers. Phenomenology is behind a lot of what Jordan Peterson and when anybody starts talking about being a sort of riffing from Heidegger. Phenomenology Dallas Willard, who I mentioned in my conversation with John Vervecki recently, Dallas Willard, his PhD dissertation was on Husserl. Again, one of the early phenomenologists. The takedown of modernism is definitely coming by way of phenomenology. So when you look at even if you just sort of study the evolution of the language and concept of hell, it gets interesting. And scholars have known this, but part of how part of what institutions do is slow down change and doctrine and dogma definitely are part of that function. Now, I will sometimes play a little party trick on people and I'll say something like hell isn't in the Bible. Or the word hell isn't in the Bible. That's what I say. It's an important distinction. Why do I say the word hell isn't in the Bible? Then they open up their English Bible and say, no, look right here, it's hell. Well, hell is found in the Latin Bible as such. If you read in Greek, you have either Hades or Gehenna. Gehenna, the valley of Henan next to Jerusalem where there's a history of child sacrifice and burning dump. Jesus used that. Jesus also used Hades. And Hades, of course, borrows on the whole Greek notion. And someone really smart might probably make the connection between Hades and Sheol because at least there's some similarity between Hades and Sheol. Sheol being the Old Testament place of the dead. So, obvious. But then, of course, you also have in the New Testament all sorts of, Jesus has all sorts of descriptions of what we call hell, where there's weeping and gnashing of teeth, there's out of outer darkness, there's in the Book of Revelation, the great sea of fire for the angels, the devil and his angels, and all of this stuff. And so there's real reason, there's real scriptural reason for the idea of hell as basically Protestants and Catholics. The Orthodox, I'm not going to go into them because I don't know enough about them, but yeah, it's there. And so it stays there because it's there. Now, when you get something to something like eternal conscious torment, what you've basically done is taken this word from dogma and doctrine of hell in the Western tradition and reframed it in a phenomenological category, eternal conscious torment. I was actually reading in preparation for my Sunday school class this Sunday on Romans some of the different approaches to the question of perdition. I'll call it that. Let's see. Four views of eternal salvation and punishment. Universal salvation, Origen, J.W., Colenso, F.D., Scheirmacher, and J.T. Robinson. Reverent agnosticism, that's basically saying, well, there's, we certainly have some idea of eternal reward, eternal salvation and punishment. And these people within the tradition sort of take a step back and say, and acknowledge that, you know, what we don't know. Clement of Alexander and the first guy I don't recognize and the second one is John Stott. Eternal punishment of the unrepentant, Augustine Luther Calvin. Eternal punishment of the unrepentant, Augustine Luther Calvin. So, this conversation has been around a long time. People, Eric, like you and I, who have commitments, who have committed to the good of the world, who have committed to the good of the world, people like you and I who have commitments to doctrinal systems, who have confessional commitments, obviously have to be careful with our language around subscription to these doctrinal statements. I don't say that as an evasion, I just say that as, that's just a reality in terms of your question, why these things stick around. Institutions keep things sticky. And again, there's biblical foundation for this. It's hard not to, Jesus talks about eternal punishment more than anybody else in the Bible. I know Luke gets upset when I say that, but, and then how that is framed. I mean, this is the ongoing conversation that happens in theology, but those four categories that I read, they're fairly persistent because you can see people holding to those four categories for, you know, yeah, pretty much the entire history of Christian theology. So, and I also think that these categories are existential. One of the most interesting things, one of the most interesting areas that Peterson talks about is how he frames hell in very existential terms and very phenomenological terms. Peterson isn't new with that. People have been doing, making similar observations as Peterson for a very long time. But when Peterson does it, obviously in this strange Christian adjacent frame that he's been operating in, people listen to it in different ways. So, insights, number one, hell isn't going away. I think the, how it functions is changing. It clearly no longer has the impact it once did in terms of motivation for pursuing Christ. I don't know, however, that the way it functions psychologically was ever quite as helpful as we imagine it might be. I think we give our heart to Christ not out of fear, but out of love. And for that reason, even though I told a story recently in my adult Sunday school class where some old sinner decides to go to church because he's got anxiety about hell and he keeps going to church, not because he keeps having anxiety about hell, but because he begins to fall in love with Jesus. I can use that language. He begins to find a transformation is undergoing in his soul. He begins to be attracted by beauty and goodness that he finds beginning to be evident in his heart and life, which is encouraged by the community of the saints, et cetera, et cetera. In other words, yes, hell avoidance, fear of hell was definitely a motivating factor and continues to be. I, so as you probably have the same experience, father, I, there are times when I am sitting with people who are dying and they have a lot of anxiety about facing their judgment. Now, when I say judgment, I don't necessarily mean their condemnation, but their evaluation. And it is not, and of course, this is instantiated in Catholic practice to make confessions on your deathbed. To make confessions on your deathbed, you're going to meet your maker. It's a good time to do some evaluating. It's a good time to make confessions of the ways that you have failed to love God and love your neighbor. So I don't think any of this is going away. I think there are deep roots for all of this and all of us, or at least most of us. And I think this idea of eternal reward and punishment will continue to be, it's a biblical theme, will continue to be also an existential and experiential reality in the church and beyond it. So I also have thoughts on why life in as brutal a world as the world has been for much of humanity would support ideas about judgment and damnation in the afterlife. These ideas are not unique to Christianity by any means. Could it also be that for wealthy, comfortable, affluent people who are living in societies where they enjoy the kind of stability that has been seldom produced at the kind of scale that we enjoy it in Western affluent society that the imagination of afterlife perdition would wither? Miroslav Volf in a quote that I often use on on the Western imagination of a very non-judgmental God points to this and suggests as someone who grew up in war-torn Yugoslavia that the lack of understanding of a God of judgment is to one degree or another perhaps the product of people who live secure, happy, people who feel like they don't have a lot to have to forgive others for. It's interesting as I watch conflicts grow in Christian communities where where let's say I don't think it would be unusual to have people wish hell upon slave owners or child molesters or in other words when people have received a deep wound and they have a very existential sense that something deeply good and right in the universe has been violated and they wish there to be a God in heaven that will bring justice and punishment upon those who have perpetrated these evils. That's why I've often said that for many people in the West hell isn't completely banished. You just find Stalin and Mao and Hitler and Pol Pot and Idi Amin and Papa Doc and you know you just find genocidal dictators in it and perhaps their neighbor who was a who's an enemy of theirs. In other words people populate hell with their enemies so I don't think it's going away but I think we will continue to chew on it in the ways that Christian theology has always chewed on it all the way back to you know Clement of Alexandria, Maximus the confessor and I think in many ways the conversations around how exactly this God who exhibited the generosity that he does by the gift of his son would actually bring punishment on the perpetrators of the world. So yeah yeah I think I think it's going to continue to royal so all right y'all in the PVK Q&A recorded voice chat I'm going to get my water bottle and take a drink of water. I see some people in here who definitely going to have to want have something to say about this so go ahead. Luke must be busy he can't he can't do it go ahead. Yeah I was about to say where's Luke the mute button is not going off. He must be busy. I mean Paul a question we're having a conversation on a related topic yesterday and I'm sure you've heard this before but I'm sure you have heard this before. I mean Paul a question we're having a conversation on a related topic yesterday on Jacob's server but um your thoughts on CS Lewis's great divorce? I think Lewis tries to hold as Lewis usually does hold all the sides together in tension. Hell is locked from the inside. Now there's in a lot of let's call them eventual universalists the idea that basically in the afterlife there will be an arena where the love of God will continually wear down the rebellion of even the most calcitrant center and this goes all the way up to and including in some the conversion of the devil and his angels so there's this you know there's a lot of conversation as to whether or not the devil and his angels can be saved and I think the majority of the tradition Christian tradition has said no. Well this stuff gets obviously speculative. Lewis didn't go there. Lewis Lewis also had so on one hand you've got the idea of perhaps in the afterlife there is an arena where even those who have rejected God consistently in this lifetime will continue to be subjugated to the love and influence of God. Lewis sort of keeps that open in the great divorce where there is a bus that can go from the gray city and people can decide whether or not they wish to tolerate the reality of heaven let's call it and Lewis goes into all of these ideas. It's a very you know clever imaginative story and Lewis plays with the ideas with archetypal characters from his world which is part of the reason that the book is the book is getting dated quickly. But Lewis also has in that book the idea that rebellion against God is also a progressive disease and there's experiential there's experiential verification for that. There's experiential verification for that. If left in our rebellion often people we can look at it let's say addictions often go terminal. Sometimes they don't and that's interesting so why do we turn and that's the great question of the mystery of salvation which is why do some turn and some don't turn and again we're just seeing within the framing of a human life. And so I think part of the eventual universalists what they do is they say that in some ways this frame will continue and people will get second chances. A lot of Catholic and Protestant thought is that no this is the forum and everyone who is in purgatory let's say in the Catholic tradition will eventually get to paradise. There's no leaving the inferno to go somewhere else. So but then Lewis also has this idea that people who all they do is complain eventually continue in their complaint until all that remains is the complaint. In other words there's a progressive aspect to perdition that people even lose their their ontology in it and the ontology of complaint consumes them. And so Lewis isn't finally an eventual universalist. Lewis sort of stays in the middle and says no maybe there'll be a second chance for some but it's probably still the case that the harvest of that second chance will be minimal because many sinners for many sin is a terminal condition. Now is Lewis at the end an annihilationist? Hard to say. He doesn't really say that in his book and if you read something like mere Christianity there's nothing there to imagine that he is an annihilationist. But again with all of these questions I think part of what is playing out in people's theologies are a lot of what builds our theologies below the conscious level. You've got temperament, you've got experience, you've got formation in the Christian church and particular traditions, you've got all of these elements that go into making us who we are. So yeah I think Lewis in some ways tries to not offend his master George McDonald who was obviously the guide through the far country that the ghosts on the bus travel to while at the same time also keeping the door open to ideas that for some perdition is final. And again if a lot of this is sort of extrapolation on what we see within this dispensation and within individual people's lives some people at some point turn in the end and repent and embrace you know like the thief on the cross and the word in Christianity is there's hope, there's promise. Surely you'll be with me in paradise. So at the same time there are others who are seen as finally lost and what that looks like phenomenologically well Christians have been sort of all over the map on that too. Even someone as conservative as Tim Keller, I know some of you will debate his conservatism, but we'll make the comment that which I think is correct that all of these images from scripture are evocative rather than descriptive. They're evocative rather than phenomenological. They're symbolic in that they give a sense of what they're pointing to but just as gold is probably a really lousy paving media, the kinds of conflicts that people have talked about with respect to hell, how can you have fire that is also darkness? The point isn't dark fire but if you say dark fire you begin to evoke the imaginative horror that two discordant symbolic images that can't be put together are intended to evoke. Hi Paul, this is Chad the alcoholic. I'm not sure if we've met but a long time listener, first time caller. Sure. This question has been one that was this theological kind of wrestling has been one where it's like because I was introduced to this idea of I think apocatastasis or something. I can't say it right because whatever but I've had where I felt like I'm being shredded to pieces wrestling with the validity of either side of this and I think like the idea of all shall be saved is grotesque and offensive. It's also something that I have deep hope about that that is true because I think of my of my intimacy with resentment and pain and like my inability to just change my mind about those things so there's a deep hope but it is a strange thing. This is the one thing that's always made me feel like I'm being torn to pieces when I get to try to figure it out and one thing I've discovered really at the end of the day is this question is perhaps very important for some. For me this is like a way above my pay grade deal. And so I'm just grateful that I was introduced to these ideas. And so but yeah anyways great to I love this old school Q&A by the way. We'll keep it going. We won't do it every week but we'll keep it going. But you're right and I think that's the reason again if you look at these four views of eternal salvation and punishment it's in this book. Universal salvation, reverent agnosticism, annihilationism of the unrepentant, eternal punishment of the unrepentant. There's a reason that these four ideas have endured and you know you've got along you know you've got origin Clement of Alexandria and Augustine a split on it. You've got Maximus the confessor, John Stott, Martin Luther, John Calvin, Karl Barth, Van Balthasar, Richard John Newhouse. I mean these aren't putzes. In some ways one way to think about this is that Chad your consciousness congress has representatives bigger very articulate representatives spanned across the Christian conversation and I think also your instinct that this is above your above your pay grade is right and true for all of us. We we can't help but come to our own ideas about these things but finally this is God's this is God's job to figure out what to how to finally resolve the question of rebellion against God in his creation and God will do what's right. And so when people come to me with either I don't believe I don't believe God would allow eternal conscious torment or you know people come to me with all sorts of ideas. Okay I understand I understand your ideas but what must you do to be saved and when we talk about to be saved you're really looking at the whole stack because you don't want just to be saved from let's say maybe alcoholism now you don't want to just be saved from hell in the future you want to be saved in the whole stack and so the answer to that remains the same and again my answer to people again my answer to people is trust in Jesus more than you trust yourself and begin there and in the end God will do what is right and we we have to trust him on it and there the reason that these four views remain is because there's a lot of reasons for it so yeah it's it's a good question it's part of the ongoing Christian conversation and I personally I think it's unwise to dismiss hell because it's been so well attested but as you said Chad to have the hope that God would find a way to to rescue um and is is also sort of an something that is buoyed by what we see revealed in Jesus Christ as the heart of God so but in terms of how all that works we have that's that's God's business so let's stick to our knitting so that's my answer all right moving on now the second question from Peter P is an excellent question dear Paul on many of your videos I came across one video in particular which is about firebark which is about firebark and his relation with Peterson and I remember making that video and I remember some of it but I don't remember details about it and I would have to go back and review the video because many of the ideas that I have in my videos are ideas that I'm having at the moment and my videos are sort of like the scratch paper that I work through things and just as if you take a lot of notes and have a lot of scratch paper and you're doodling and working through things you don't remember all of the notes and all of the scratch paper that you made and that's part of the reason that you wrote it down so that you can bring it back and recall and so I haven't in anticipation of this made the recollection and if you just saw the video it's fresher in your mind than it is in my mind if you could revisit the video well I'll have to take a look at this after we'll see if it sticks in my um in my mental to-do list but they're they're you know part of the point here is that um part part of the point here is that downstream from a lot of these thinkers stuff gets into us and um after Marxism you're never completely free of it it's sort of these retcon ideas that are in history it's very difficult to find someone who has not been in any way impacted by post-modernity it's hard to find Christians that have not in any way imbibed of the spirit of small p Protestantism it's just the way history works and our formation works so what story about Jesus what story about Jesus haunts you the most why well I you know to get back to the first question um there's no question Jesus frames himself as ultimate which is part of Luther's trilemma Muslims frame Muhammad not quite as ultimate Buddhists frame the Buddha not as ultimate even Judaism doesn't necessarily frame Moses as ultimate part of the divinity of Christ in Christian doctrine is that Jesus is framed as ultimate that's basically that's one way of understanding what that's one way of understanding what saying Jesus is God means that if you're if the prophet or guru or sage or founder of your religion is not God then they're not ultimate and so Jesus manages and I think this is part of the reason for Tom Holland's observation about the Gospels Jesus manages to both be more generous than we imagine responsible and more demanding than we dare to accept the same the same guy who tells the woman caught in adultery go and send no more the same guy who um will just use sexual sin for now because that's such a big topic of conversation these days the same guy who let the sinful woman at the part at the house of the Pharisees let down her hair and and and wash his feet is the same guy who preaches the sermon on the mount Jesus is so demanding and so forgiving that we look at this because usually we either err on the side of forgiving or err on the side of demanding and it's you know the whole winsome war winsome versus antithesis that's all a function of that Jesus manages to hold the two sides together and and again that's part of the reason that this question about hell continues to endure because in Jesus demands you get eternal punishment in Jesus' invitation you seem to get eternal opportunity and Jesus holds these things together and we struggle with that so that it's that dynamic that haunts me because you know so this morning I you know I released this video on the christian reform church and what's happening in it with respect to the the division that's coming and there's no question that it's coming in my opinion Grand Rapids can't back down Grimm's comment was just genius Grand Rapids can't back down the rest of the church can't back down there's going to be a division and if it isn't it if it isn't the left sort of deciding to to take up their mission and pursue it if they decide that they're going to sort of block the rest of the denomination then you'll see a fracturing then you'll see a train wreck and I don't want any of this to happen but I fear the train wreck more than you know my admonition to the progressives and the CRC is okay you've got a vision for inclusion stop wasting your time trying to argue with those who disagree with you and build your vision see if it'll work because part of me would love to see it work but another part of me says I don't think it's going to work I I if it would work I suspect the main line would have done it and there certainly aren't and unless the really smart people in Grand Rapids East um figure out how to do it differently from the main line I think they'll probably wind up with the same results that we've seen in the main line so what haunts me about Jesus is the fact that Jesus is not just a prophet Jesus is not just a wise teacher a wise teacher that Jesus is the maker and judge of all creation and so what encourages me is his love and generosity and what terrifies me is his ability to demand you know the two groups that he's hard I mean he's the two groups that the groups that he's hardest on in the gospels are the strongly religious and his disciples I mean when you read the gospels you very much get the sense that his disciples loved him but they're also a little afraid of him and and you all know that that dynamic you probably experienced it with your parents to a degree when you were small you love I mean it's the it's the it's it's sort of the duality of the love and terror of worship you both love your desire your desire ramps up the fear that somehow you'll be rejected and Louis writes about this with the the you know the specific pleasure of the inferior so that's that's I think and that's part of why Jesus always stays fresh and never stays dead and a bee the silicone or seems to be obsessed with free speech but how about taboo taboo is there any I think any use and space for taboos as part of the solution to the meaning crisis yes taboos are evils that often we need not speak of and sometimes we dare not speak of some part of the meaning crisis is always a no and part of the meaning crisis if there's I forget which author this was was it was it was it Philip Reif basically if there is no no in your system your system will break down and I think part of what has fueled the meaning crisis is the desire of the West to remove all knows but so I've been reading um I think it's it's titled wanting Luke Burgess's book Luke did an outstanding conversation with Jonathan Peugeot recently and he said he tells the story of Zappos which is which was an internet startup selling shoes which just skyrocketed got bought by Amazon and then the the company sort of devolved because basically the the founder of the company wanted to instill a culture of no no that the company wanted to the founder of the company wanted to instill a culture of no no that this was just going to be about happiness and the difficulty with um this sort of wide open pursuit of happiness is that in Luke Burgess's point of it was that you just sort of trigger all this memetic rivalry among the employees and um you basically just bred chaos there's a reality that for people need order for there to be happiness and you can't have order without a no now you can have too much order and then it becomes tyrannical but any viable long-term system will have taboo it just it's it's part of the realities of structure structures are impositions and limitations against our will and so you know taboo is a part of that taboo tends to be something so you know the reality between the sacred and the prohibited is a really tricky one but a very real one but a very real one and as we've talked about i've talked about a couple of years ago in some ways the frame problem is deeply connected to the question of the sacred in many ways that which is sacred is your frame and we know because of our limitations you cannot productively know or engage with reality without a frame because reality is too large therefore for any productive system there must be the sacred and if you have the sacred there will be the taboo the taboo which is something that is both so sacred and profane that the whole entire system without a whole lot of effort knows to avoid it and you know a lot of the traditional taboos such as incest incest is one of the deepest taboos it exists because the the violation the sexual violation of the family is so utterly destructive that nothing you know you cannot have a productive a productive system or society unless you observe some of the say these sacred things so now we haven't talked a lot about taboo but there are plenty of disagreeable people in this little corner of the internet and there are many who are um yeah there are plenty of disagreeable people and plenty of people who have are fairly high in conscientiousness that there's still plenty of taboo around in this little corner of the internet van goes here paul does the rule of chastity before marriage also encompass kissing and cuddling what do you think do you kiss and cuddle your mom does that violate the rule of incest we always struggle with boundaries and borders and this is again part of the reality between the the antithesis which is binary black and white and the analog which is degree i mean you can go all the way you can go all the way to one side and put someone in a burko which has just eye slats and you never touch them but part of what that does is it the you also at the same time in order to reduce questions of desire prohibition creates desire that's the whole dynamic of forbidden fruit so we cuddle and kiss children we cuddle and kiss moms we hug friends and in many cultures there's a there's a friendly kiss you know there's the there's the kiss of greeting that is talked about in the new testament cultures have lots of things around this and so cultures work out questions of boundaries obviously for obvious reasons different different areas of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the are more sacred and more covered than other areas of the body so it's always a practical question for younger people who are trying to figure out where the boundary line should be and i think as a society which um on one hand decided to sort of go all the way and demystify sex or de um yeah to demystify sex or disenchant sex actually in louise perry's book if you read especially richard beck's take on her book um the other areas of the body well somebody needs to be muted thanks rick um the disenchantment of sex didn't work because the system just falls apart so if you disenchant sex you then no longer have a me too movement which was louise perry's point because if there is no functional difference between having sex with your administrative assistant and asking your administrative assistant to do the filing in other words if sex and filing are on the same level in terms of sacredness and holiness well then why not have your administrative assistant have sex with you as part of um his or her job description just like the filing is involved and she just louise perry just basically calls the bluff on this whole thing and says it's a load of crap sex is different men and women are different you can't on one hand create these enormous procedural and administrative rules and regulations to protect women from their male bosses and at the same time de-enchant disenchant sex because the entire machinery of me too screams to the world that men and women are different women are vulnerable um there should be protections you're you're you're you're enchanting sex all over the place in that practice and then you could you turn around and say no having sex with someone is no different from making them coffee in the morning it just doesn't work and people might not have the will or the will to articulate that right away but they feel it down in their axioms and then you hear their axioms expressed usually on social media and in anger and in disgust and in all the other ways we express our axioms so all right this may be the wrong place what's pvk's recommendation to men and women all right this may be the wrong place what's pvk's recommendations for mic and camera this is a blue yeti it works pretty well a lot of those sure mics that are a lot more expensive that you see on almost all the podcasts if the money you can buy one of those i haven't found a reason to spend the extra money and get more get something more than this blue yeti it seems to work just fine they're about 100 bucks the camera i'm using right now is a sony a6400 with a sigma 16 lens on it and it's 16 lens on it sony sony and cannons have the best most reliable face focusing and so for this kind of work for good focusing sony and cannons do the best this is a this is a this lens is you know gives you the depth of field that allows the background of me to be out of focus and my face in focus which basically draws attention to my face but gives a sense of suchness and moreness now sony has a new camera out that i think they've misnamed because they've sort of put it in the zx line they have the zx1 which is another sony camera that i have which i took to europe because it's really small and portable and it still has the great focus but this new camera i think it's like the the ze the ze10 something like that you can find lots of videos about it it's an upgrade to the a6400 basically for basically a little bit less money than the a6400 and so i would imagine that the a6400 will probably get discontinued at some point because the new camera has eyeball focusing and not just face focusing so it doesn't even better job with focusing so i recently dropped my zx1 so i might uh i might be at some point buying that new camera so but yeah that's this will get you this camera you can get a uh basically a dummy battery for it so you can keep it plugged into ac power um you can you can either run a video line out the usb or like i'm doing it just use a um use the hdmi converter to usb which gives good results and yeah basically it costs more money you can use cheaper stuff i also have a um elgato face cam which actually does quite well it's a lot cheaper but if you're if this is something you're going to be using every day this camera is probably the most used piece of equipment at church because i use it every day for my videos i use it for my zoom calls on sunday i take it out of my office and we put it on the cart and we use it for sunday services the camera's a workhorse it does a great job and um um you know a few hundred dollars more if you've got something that you use for hours every day and it doesn't work well and it's annoying and it's sort of mission critical to what you're doing makes a little bit of sense to spend a few extra hundred dollars if it's just kind of a little hobby you can get by on spending a lot less so that the camera will cost maybe eight hundred dollars and the lens will cost a few hundred dollars more but i bought this a few years ago and haven't regretted the purchases so all right methaniel which things or topics do you find yourself retconning the most oh boy you know this whole dynamic of what do i mean by retconning it's it's basically it's basically the idea of we don't even have great metaphors for it it's basically the it's basically the idea that once you're no longer a virgin you're no longer a virgin and there are ideas out there in the world that are so powerful once you see them you can't unsee them i was i was i've been watching this this show on hulu ramy i've given some of the warnings about it before it's a it's not for the squeamish but i find the show fascinating because it's a very honest look at the life of a muslim family in north jersey as they're dealing with all of the dislocations of contemporary life that they are dealing with with respect to immigration and there's this one episode where ramy basically talks about the fact that he was happy before he had sex you know um and it's basically innocence and and so sex for ramy is obviously a real crisis because he's a young man who on one hand wants to live an upright pure muslim life and on the other hand just you know can't or doesn't really want to get a handle on his sex life you know he at this at this one episode he's you know first he decides he's just going to date muslim girls and that doesn't work out well and then he meets this daughter of a conservative jewish granddaughter of a conservative jewish diamond dealer and jewish diamond dealer and um you know he's he's about to he's with this girl and he's about to have sex with her and basically his cell phone goes off because that's the that's the warning that ramadan is happening and so he tells his his jewish girlfriend oh i can't have sex with you right now because ramadan is starting and she's like oh i didn't know you were that muslim oh that's really cool and you get this weird dynamic in our culture where you know somehow advocating chastity is oppressive but practicing chastity is aspirational weird dynamic we've got going on in our culture well you just there are things that you see that you don't unsee and and that goes with you know i think for some people and this is sort of what a lot of the the culture war over lgbtq has um people who had never met um someone let's say never never had seen a gay marriage that seemed to be working in some way they meet a nice gay couple who are married and they seem to love each other and everything's cool and they're like huh well maybe gay marriage isn't so bad bang they're sort of retconned um and then suddenly you see this whole struggle and people are arguing about the bible but a lot of what's functioning is oh i know that couple over there and they seem sane and happy and what's so bad about gay marriage um bang and the world changes we have those kinds or maybe you were taught that um a particular religious or ethnic group is horrible and evil and then you meet someone from it and you realize they don't seem so horrible and evil they seem a lot like me and suddenly it's changed you know you you realize that the catholics don't eat babies and um or maybe that the calvinists aren't as quite as predestinarian as everybody said they were um i haven't answered your question i think tom holland's thesis in some ways you know really dug deep into me and partly because i had suspected a lot of truth of it and he just sort of brought it to the surface you know jordan peterson did that with a lot of things with a lot of people too so and then figuring out the implications of that you know it was always sort of easy to say secular versus christian and then i learn and figure out that basically wait a minute secular is sort of a watered down version of watered down version of christian and if you if the secular goes we sort of step back 700 years and all we're having are sort of presuppositional wars but not really because so many of the ideas that have come down the stream are built into all of us so and the right now the idea of retconning and the dynamic of that is can be deeply troubling but also something i can't quite escape and that's perhaps the nature of what i'm talking about with the these type of powerful retconning ideas let's see how we do it on time uh i am a reformed protestant as you are and i was all and i was curious if hearing pageau over the years has impacted your views of ritual liturgy and architecture in a way that scales fractally through the whole church body and as a pastor if these insights have actually made changes to the service held at your church be more reflective of any of these patterns this is a great question do i know hebrew i knew it a lot better when i was in seminary i'll tell you that um so i'd have to say no to knowing hebrew especially hanging around with all these um all the all my jewish friends who can just recite um recite from the old testament verbatim yeah i don't know it like they know it your first question is a great one understanding admiring learning from enjoying befriending jonathan pageau didn't really make me want to plaster the inside of my church with icons and i think that's the most important thing to do to plaster the inside of my church with icons it made me understand them a lot better what it did was open my eyes to the power of the symbolism that is built into my own tradition i don't i have a better appreciation for the psycho technology of praise and worship music it's upsides and downsides a lot of the critique of iconography i had before i still maintain i'm just a little less dogmatic about it because my eyes are open and i'm not i'm just a little less dogmatic about it because my eyes are open to the iconography that are built that is built into spartan low church protestantism and i have my eyes are open to its icons and saints and liturgies and practices so in some ways jamie smith sort of put me on this road before i found pageau i you know i was talking to someone about this yesterday i have no desire to join the orthodox church i'm fascinated by what i see them do i'm not moved by it i still like my tradition i'm i'm probably not as judgmental about other traditions i'm not as spooked by them i understand them better i understand the statuary i understand the iconography and i appreciate it but it also helped me understand and appreciate the iconoclastic traditions as well there's this great line in luke burges's book which basically says that mimetic rivalry makes basically makes the the people who are engaging in it duplicate each other and and i watched this with the woke wars the anti-wokesters very quickly become like the wokesters you can't engage in you can't engage in these mimetic rivalries and not sort of be locked into the same thing and i think this is this is the power of having your eyes open to a lot of those conflict dynamics and to i think actually to actually do better with people instead of just you know for example let's let's talk about the there will be plenty of people who see so i have a lot of people who are in the church so i have probably one of the largest twitter followings in the christian reform church kristin cobes du maine jamey smith probably have larger but i have one of the biggest if not the largest i certainly have the largest youtube following of any clergy in the christian reform church i believe and so making a video about what's going on politically in the christian reform church right now that a lot of people who are on both sides of that will jump into that video and i know because i get emails from them some people are really angry with me for not basically using my youtube channel to advocate for lgbt plus inclusion in the christian reform church some people are probably on the other side just more annoyed that i don't seem to be advocating for the other side in the fight and people will look at what i did and they'll say you're not really taking a side in the fight and i'm saying no i there's plenty of people taking sides in the fight but that fight is not the only dynamic and in fact i think a lot of the other things that have been happening in the christian reform church have led to the way this fight is going to play out and the way this fight is going to end more than the arguments about the fight that's part of conflict and um i'm not going to condemn the catholics for their statuary when you can go to geneva and see the histories of the reformation all the reformers all in statues in geneva you know when when richard roland makes the point that now when he looks back at his baptist church if you go to the christian reform church if you go to i don't know if they still have them up at calvin seminary but you had pictures of all the old professors that were at calvin seminary used to spook out the security guards who had to walk through there at night because he had all these hoary eyes with gray beards looking at them um you go to any christian reform church into the council room or many christian reform churches in the council room and you see portraits of all the former pastors there we practice these we have these practices but we just embed them differently and so when you have spare church traditions they do other things with them but the practices are still there so i i i you know i can go into a an orthodox church and now that i've learned from pageau i can notice the right hand and the left hand and i'm i'm better in tune with the with the language of of iconography and i'm fascinated by how imagistic languages arise and how that whole thing works i was fascinated by jonathan's introduction to iconography i was fascinated by that but it doesn't make me want to put images up at living stones it's a it's a different tradition and they both have their place so yeah none of what i've done has made me you know i've been on this journey for the last five years and sometimes i worry about journeys because journeys can be transformative and there are some ways i don't want to change and there are ways in which i think i should not change and but when i think about the main convictions of my faith including my reformed faith i think that everything i've learned and the new relationships that i've made have for the most part strengthened all of that so i know that there are people that think that you know all this openness and all this conversation if you only lock down people and keep them in a keep them in their bubble then you can yeah but there's a fragility that there's a fragility that goes on in that greenhouse too so i'd i'd rather go on the adventure and um and then i think that's the only way to do it and do so prayerfully and trust that through this adventure jesus is going to make me more like himself and i don't think i will be less reformed or less christian but maybe i'll have a better understanding of the rest of the world too so hope that answers your question David Walker is our current cultural laxness on death due to thousands of years of misinformation about christianity the hillbilly heaven wings and the halos of the clouds for everything or more because of christianity's success i don't know that we have a laxness on death so on one it just gets strange because on one hand you can have like the canadian maid system where not only have doctor assisted suicide but you have government doctors assisting with suicide i it just it just blew my mind when i i'd read some of this stuff because again i quite regularly bring people into the psych hospital and the way to get into the psych hospital is to say yeah i'm a danger to myself or others i mean you know i'm suicidal and to have them come and say okay we can help you with that by helping you commit you know the whole purpose of the psych hospital here is to keep you from killing yourself so i i would say that i don't think we have a laxness on death i think we have a lot of things that we haven't thought through with respect to death on one hand we have a culture that i mean the safetyism is all about avoiding death i mean the safetyism is all about avoiding death on the other hand this culture of death that you get with abortion and euthanasia and all of this and war it's just the classic inconsistencies of humanity do you have any personal stories that you could share where your intentions were good but harm might have been done in your attempts to be of love and service i have an easy one it was in the dominican republic it was tradition in our zone at least they told me it was they might have fooled me completely that every year we'd have a christmas party at the at the at the sort of class that we were giving all the pastors and preachers and that the missionary would buy the meat because meat was expensive and you know the missionary would buy the meat and all every time everywhere we went for church or classes or anything we'd have a meal it would be chicken and rice and beans it would often be delicious sometimes it would be fish and rice and beans but it would always be chicken and rice and beans chicken and rice and beans chicken and rice and beans and so i said one year i said hey why don't we do something different you know why don't we instead of doing chicken rice and beans and i'm gonna pay for the chicken why don't we do a roast pig wouldn't that be fun because then i mean a roast pig is fun you have a lot of people and you have the pig and they usually don't get a chance to eat pork and yada yada yada that'll that'll make the party better so they didn't want to say no to the missionary even on this you know 20 28 year old kid so okay we'll do the pig so we do the pig a couple weeks later we're having the the the mesa meeting the board meeting basically and motion comes out of the blue i didn't see it coming vote to go back to chicken for the christmas party like why i thought the pig was a great idea now we we all ate a whole bunch of that pork and we all got sick they weren't used to eating pork they weren't used to eating that much meat you gotta go back to the chicken all right we'll go back to the chicken i thought it was a way to that's that's an easy story to tell i have dozens of other stories in my life of when i thought i was doing a really good thing when it just whipped around and i found that instead of blessing people i was hurting people i won't tell you those stories because on one hand they're too painful on the other hand they expose too much of other people's lives and what was going on in their lives so chad it happens all the time as gandalf says defrodo even the wise can't see all ends and a deep part of that story and you know especially told via the movie but also in the book is we don't know a lot we think we know and and this is this is something this is the humility that we should have with our fights we're we're just little we're just small creatures who see from perspectives and only know so much and we have to have convictions because you can't live without them but sometimes our convictions are mostly right in the little bit of ways that they're not right they wind up hurting people this is this is the this is the nature of our world and also how do you keep a level head in such public arena well there are plenty of times you can find them on my videos where i haven't i think um part of the reason humility is important is because you need to be able to admit when you're wrong and confess that you're wrong and you need to remember those moments when you're all full of yourself so i was again talking to someone yesterday and he knows who this is about the the antithesis and the winsome okay it's very easy to get triggered and if you're articulate and verbal and if you have a platform go off and sort of smash somebody and you know we're gonna we're gonna we're gonna beat up on the protestants we're gonna beat up on the orthodox we're gonna beat up on the catholics we're gonna beat up on the atheists we're gonna beat up on the republicans or the democrats or the abortionists or the uh or canada or you know we we get triggered and someone kicked us in our axioms that we kick back and there's a huge appetite for that on youtube and the internet because we're going to be able to get rid of that appetite for that on youtube and the internet because we love seeing you know we we're little and we got kicked and we didn't have any voice to kick back and so then jordan peterson or joe rogan or president trump or president biden kicks back for you and we cheer yeah yeah sometimes that kicking back is just the fact that hurt people hurt people and that isn't to say that there aren't times and places for absolute screeds that there aren't times and places to denounce evil but in terms of my own self figuring out when i'm actually denouncing evil and when i've just been kicked and triggered and decided i'm gonna hit back i might not be too good at telling the difference and sometimes it might be both but a lot of times it's just me being a small person and wanting to get back and be an ankle biter because that's all the status i have i can't actually knock down my opponent so i'm just gonna bite their ankle i'm just gonna be a troll or a jerk because i'm hurt and i'm angry i'm gonna hit back you gotta watch that in yourself i don't mean that you chad because chad you're um you're about as honest and transparent and a delightful cat as we have in this little corner and that's why that's why you're so loved and part of what we're doing you know i too um i had issues with with jacob and father de jonge's little uh second meeting there and um you know i talked about that with jacob a little bit yesterday on his live stream i think part of the value we give to the world is showing how it's it's easy to be nice and play nice when everything is good but figuring out how to talk to one another when we've been hurt or when we're scared that's really hard and so doing that in public i remember reading we've talked about john gotman a little bit in the marriage crisis book but uh in the marriage crisis videos but and his books i've read plenty of marriage books one of the keys the the key to a good marriage and not just marriage but a good relationship a key to a good marriage a relationship is not that you don't fight it's awfully nice to have relationships in which you don't fight yes because fighting fighting is hard on us conflict is hard on us because it you know our systems ramp up and some people by virtue of really horrible upbringing or temperament or whatever some people are always angry and always fighting and um pity those people and maybe steer clear of them as much as they maybe steer clear of them as much as you can but the key to a mare a good marriage is actually being able to have reparative conversations one of the when i was in the premarital counseling done for me by my pastor dave bieland at madison square he had us read water walter wangerin who's a lutheran um um you know for me and my house i believe that's the title of the book i don't know if i probably have a copy of it somewhere the book the book was 150 200 pages or something but it could be summarized very easily if you want to stay married don't leave and learn to forgive it's devastating advice because when you get hurt in a relationship what you want to do is leave leave yeah you want to leave i get it you're hurting you want to get away from the source of your hurt also you begin to realize that some of that source of the hurt is inside you and you can't get away from it so maybe you have to stop the fight and walk away from it a little bit maybe maybe you have to um um maybe you have to go sleep on the couch or turn off the internet or take down all of your videos or something like that maybe you have to take a step back um the rick the rick uh the rick exercise plan is back thank you um uh fleabas taco fund but if you don't leave the relationship and if you you have you have the reparative conversation and if you learn to forgive that's that's what marriage is made of because we we do wrong things we say bad things we hurt each other and learning to learning to heal learning to forgive that's basic so there's nothing new here chad it's all the same stuff that we all need to learn be humble learn to forgive learn to love don't lose yourself either stick to your guns that's okay it's okay to have an idea it's also okay to revise an idea so oh boy let's see questions from today does jordan peterson have value even if he can't change people's minds sure he has value i recently witnessed a discussion on a facebook group primarily focused on movies where he was brought up and the conversation quickly devolved around how terrible he is yes that's right um all right thank you thank you lance for the um for the parking lot support we had we had someone we had someone from this little corner um offer because we we pretty much burned through our first ten thousand dollars of matching funds so someone from this little corner offered another ten thousand dollars on another um on the next ten thousand dollars of gifts that come in from the internet for the for the parking lot and um yeah it's it's coming together i hope we don't have to spend too much on the roof but uh we'll um we'll see how that goes i realize i realize controversy can be a form of currency online yes but i do wonder if we maybe if if he maybe repels as many as he attracts yes ps not available for coming on voice chat okay thanks michigan man sam yeah absolutely and this so there was that moment i did a video when rebel wisdom when when david fuller kind of came out with his critiques of jordan peterson and micaela got offended and you know that whole spat and and the same with um oh um why can't i remember his name his his he was in the exodus series too um the author the writer the the democrat basically same video he did with peugeot a little bubble up in a few minutes same video he did with peugeot and peterson where they talked about that and and this is her word of this is what's that her wits yeah right her wits that's it yeah thank you um thank you richard so the difficulty with peterson this is a resolution problem partly peterson is known for being obstinate and and right now the whole controversy with the um the canadian licensing psychological licensing board classic example and i i loved the first line of that washington post piece where you would think people by now would have known that if you really want to get somewhere with jordan peterson don't tell him what to say we haven't learned that from c16 um after you know part of what happened in that first wave is that the blue church antibodies very quickly recognized that jordan peterson was a rising threat to their hegemony and they framed him this is classic political maneuvering if you're in a presidential campaign frame your adversary in a low resolution reactive way donald trump was the master of this um you know what he did to his first his republican opponents for the 2016 nomination and then what he did to hillary clinton trump is as a trump as a salesman is a master at very deep um very deep framing of people and he does it you know marco rubio little marco i mean he he does that you know lying hillary clinton i mean he does that so well just bang bang bang bang bang and that's so effective and so peterson in many ways that was done to to peterson now myself would i um part of peterson's power was that he was contra narrative and he was blunt and he was very clever and effective and skillful in his takedowns i mean in many ways what happened at in cathy newman was peak peterson but sometimes and and he admits this he admits it on the hurwitz conversation he he admits it on the hurwitz conversation he and twitter for him is a weakness he you know and he and he he's walked through i mean peterson is so darn transparent he really is in many ways um and he he admits that you know it's the end of the day he's been talking forever he keeps a work schedule that would kill a horse it's at the end of the day he's feeling tired and grumpy and it's just easy and those quiet hours of the day maybe his wife has already gone to bed you pull out your phone and there's twitter and you've got two to three million followers and here's all these issues you're you're angry about i mean just look at my little visit video i did with cosmic skeptic you know you get triggered and bang and if you're really articulate and sharp with your words and really smart boy you can and the internet just loves it now as greg urwitz who remains his friend and i think urwitz is right peterson is way more than that he really is and and that's why when i look at this licensing thing i think yeah if all you know of jordan peterson is what you see of him on twitter i can understand why you might think of him that way but if you actually listen to enough of him listen to his conversations he's way deeper than that now if if he were in my church and i were his pastor i would in fact admonish him and say i'm not going to tell you what to do with your twitter account jordan but you yourself have said on many occasions sometimes you just you just go off and do these things and sometimes it's genius but sometimes it bites you in the butt i think urwitz was right um you know they're really and i see this often on twitter some people are pointing out hugely important issues but is twitter really the place where you can what what can you actually accomplish on twitter because if all you're doing is sort of motivating and mobilizing the mooks that's your you can't both complain about mob action on the left and just decide you're going to facilitate mob action on the right that's not the way to go about it and so i you know i'm really sympathetic to her wits and david fuller that peterson could be more effective and i think he has been i think there was a period there when he first started with daily wire where a bunch of things were popping off i think he's so much better in long form when you when you get a chance to when he gets a chance to sit down and talk and and unfortunately in wave one he was he had the opportunity to do a lot more you know things like the kathy newman interview where he was absolutely masterful because of his illness you know he didn't handle the um the g-jec debate that didn't really go as well as it could have it didn't go as poorly as it could have either um i think i think long form i think long form i think i think long form is really good with jordan because then all of the nuance that is in him can come out and twitter i i think it just i think he i think he gets sucked in by his demons so yeah but at the same time um i don't think i i i'm not a year ago i might have had more doubts about this but what i've seen the work that i've seen him do lately i think he's doing some great work out there and i think he's able to make a contribution it's just a lot more difficult that he's sort of been pigeonholed as something that he really isn't and herwood sees that um and i see it too i've watched plenty of him that there's a lot more to him but but we're all we're all these bundles of complexity and we're all judging each other through our own filters i don't have six million youtube subscribers subscribers jordan peterson is way better at a whole bunch of things than i am i don't know if i want to have six million youtube subscribers i so who am i to judge him god is our judge i'm not going to judge someday jesus will sit down with jordan and have a conversation and if there's anybody that you should both be really wanting to have a conversation and terrified to have a conversation with it's jesus i i i still i still really appreciate jordan he he he makes me laugh i enjoy him he could frustrate me sometimes but you know you've seen all that if you've watched my videos i'm that's that's just how i feel about him i think i think i think he's i think he's made and continues to make really important contributions in a lot of areas i just do and people that want to write them off because their political reasons you know i i watch people across the political aisle you know there's a lot i don't like about donald trump but there's other things that i see him do that i think wow that's masterful that's a masterful um i i don't think he's the best guy to run a government i don't think frankly has a lot of interest in running a government i think he likes doing what he does i i like a lot about um you know i really like uh scott adams um i i there's a lot that's that i don't trust about him but he he does have insights and i enjoy watching him in in amounts i'd love to have a conversation with scott adams um i i'm a very open person and i you know i love nate heil and i love jacob and those two aren't going to get along anytime soon i love anselman and i love jacob and i love me and those three aren't going to get along anytime soon and i'm glad they're all in the world and you know just looking at you know i you know mark and and manuel and i mean i love all you guys in this little corner every now and then you'll tweak me and annoy me but uh no you've all got your you've all adding who you are and what you do so and jordan jordan's there too master paul would you would you remind me why wokeism isn't the inevitable inheritor of christianity it's because wokeism is way too incoherent you can't both say um let women speak and not know what a woman is wokeism you can't both say everything is a social construct therefore um we can't deconstruct race gender and all this other stuff it's just it's just too incoherent it's it's shallow and it's shallow and it's already breaking down it's it's not going to last it doesn't mean that there isn't damage that it's going to do but it's it's not the beast it's it's a it's it's an example of the fact that almost everything that we develop and instantiate we push to the limit and it overreaches and you know it's the same with communism you know communism couldn't last it overreached there's there's too much structure built into reality so wokeism you know you've already seen that disney you know there's a reason to if you go woke you'll go broke um you can't you can't be a mother and and think that all boys are rapists can't do it so it's it's not the it's it's a it's a threat for now but it's it's not going to be an enduring threat and these things keep coming back in other forms but it's not i'm not going to spend my life just dealing with wokeism because it won't be around that long wokeism is the glorified body and death of the resurrection yeah popes often take a name for a specific reason as a signal of where they want their pontificate to go in your opinion what should what name should the next pope take and why i have no idea i have no idea at all um you know i i make a little video on the inside misery of the christian reform church and most of you will sort of watch it through the lenses of whatever this broader fight about lgbtq stuff is um the roman catholic church is massive and and for their and therefore is deeply political and i don't have any clue you know part of the reason why this little corner is so fun is i get to learn from father eric and kale about the catholics i get to learn from from jacob and jesse about the jews and we don't really have a lot of muslim contingents in this little corner but but y'all have your own politics and i can't begin to understand them i just sort of listen and watch with fascination sacramento paul do you think some people on earth are irredeemably evil if not what does christ mean when he talks tells us to love our enemies uh i think i don't think the irredeemability of someone as an enemy are is basically the same thing um sometimes your biggest enemies are the people closest to you maybe they're your parents maybe there's your they're your spouse maybe they're your kids maybe they're your co-workers they're friends and enemies together that's part of the genius of this whole idea of memetic rivalry that it's often the people's people closest to you that that you're actually there's a reason there's a reason if a woman winds up dead the husband or the boyfriend is suspect number one that's that's how we are um irredeemably evil possibly but number one we can't be the judge of that i think we have to go through this world to a degree believing that even the worst among us can be redeemed now in all likelihood many of the worst among us won't be won't be transformed or changed in this world and they'll go to the grave with their sin and misery that we see in them yeah but um you know if jesus had looked over to the other thief on the cross and said no you're here for a reason you know burn in hell no you know today you'll be with me in paradise so we always hold out hope daniel r christ says in the sermon of the mount blessed are the merciful for they shall receive mercy where does that leave a non-believer who is merciful is a merciful person to others i think that's the grace of god working through them in their mercy c.s lewis makes this point in mere christianity quotes like this that raise the universalist hairs i don't have that many hairs left on my arm in angst i'm not really universalist but things like this make me raise my hands in confusion and that's right and there are lots of passages in the bible that have universalist inklings and that's again why those four categories that i read earlier still remain in the christian conversation and i don't think they're going away um i don't think you're going to get rid of the idea of eternal punishment and i don't think you're going to get rid of the idea of a universal salvation and then the other places in the middle are sort of attempts to square that those ideas persist and um we'll know someday because we'll see what god does hey paul do you think the spirit of socrates and the spirit of jesus are in perfect harmony no would there be conflicts between these spirits if we internalize and prioritize them both sure as i don't worship socrates as lord it doesn't mean i can't learn from him i don't worship any other human being as lord that doesn't mean i can't learn from them i didn't worship my father as lord that didn't mean that i didn't learn tremendous things from him but the spirit of socrates and the spirit of jesus won't be the same it'll just be different but the spirit of jesus and the spirit of augustin aren't the same the spirit of jesus and the spirit of maximus the confessor aren't the same it's it's basically a categorical question um but that doesn't mean that we can't learn a lot from socrates and that there isn't virtue and value there and i'm curious how much pagan wisdom a person can participate in and internalize but still remain a christian well you know peugeot comments on this i forget what video a recent verveki video but i mean a lot of ways church fathers went through a lot of this and and we we tend to sort of limit the conflicts to let's say philosophical or religious planes but um you know can you learn a lot about physics from newton yes is that in conflict with christ and you might say well non-overlapping non-overlapping magisteria really so there's there's lots of overlapping magisteria but overlap again is sort of like this so you know ideally all truth is god's truth yep uh i can't see all truth because i'm small so i there's anxiety about that you know does does marx not say true things does marx not have insight um these are all the things we work through with with others i'm not going to work on that hebrew right now it takes too much brain power i think the biggest struggle i have with learning about stuff from john vervek and other academic material is that for regular people there's a big gap yep yep that's exactly it so no one else i i um so no one else i show it is interested or cares yep it seems to like most people don't think about meaning that much and don't need it i myself have watched hundreds of hours and still don't feel like it's helped very much yeah and so probably it's not something that's terribly fruitful for you and i say just ignore it um i feel i there's sometimes i watch videos that i think yeah you know if i spent a lot of time reading and devoting myself to really understanding what this person says i could really get this but i don't have that time and vervek in fact talks about this which video conversation was that you know it's basically the scalability issue that that john has really taken to heart that um you know who asked him that i don't remember but someone basically it was wal- it was grim grizz it was grim grizz the walmart question and john's answer was quite clear people at walmart should go to church basically it's not exactly what he said but go go to the church that fits you um you know i made a video a while ago how you know how often i find unsophisticated unsophisticated christians being better christians than i am they they don't know anything about socrates or play it or the meaning crisis or or philosophy or politics or they don't know anything about any of this stuff you know what they are good at sometimes loving their neighbor as themselves they are better christians than i am that's their lot they have their own struggles um sometimes they can get caught by a trap that i see coming a mile away because i've got some of this knowledge about history and philosophy and theology and all those things and so i can sort of duck that trap but there are other traps i fall into that they don't so that's we we tend to like to imagine and this is part of the deception of our current world we tend to like to imagine this this hierarchy of knowledge that well if you know a lot if you've if you're very well read if you're very well educated and you know if you got a degree from the right university you got all this stuff yada yada yada yeah you might still be a really lousy christian knowledge puffs up love builds up i'll take a church full of people who know how to love any day before i take a church over people who are just full of thinky talkiness that doesn't mean i don't love thinky talkiness i got a whole channel about it i love thinky talky yeah it's great i love it can't live without it that's just me but if you ask me about a church i want to be around saints who know how to love and to actually spend the time in the thinky talky it can be a way to love those others who like me you know questions of philosophy and retcon and keep them up at night so for them i'll do the thinky talky stuff with you but the goal of this is that you learn to love because you can't thinky talky your way into impressing a baby that baby knows love same with your dog same with your neighbor same with your dog same with your neighbor same with the college professor you know it's um i haven't done anything with it with it but i want to i haven't even watched it but the the beckett cook rosario butter rosaria butterfield conversation on beckett cook's channel i mean rosaria butterfield story is just an amazing story she was you know lesbian living in a relationship um teaching i think at syracuse teaching english lit she was gonna do some writing on like these dread christian nationalists you know these conservative christians and so she thought well i should actually do some primary research and so she went out and met a pastor and her relationship with that pastor brought her to the point of becoming a very conservative reformed christian woman who married a man and has children with him that's the power of love and it doesn't mean there are there aren't arguments about it that go on one way or another that's the power of love that's love is greater the greatest of these is love you thinky talky all over the place you know that's that's the point of first corinthians 13 so it doesn't mean that playdo and sacrates and ariestotle and all of this stuff isn't important it is important it's important because we love but as and i think you know as john said in his video with with jonathan you know playdo understood that all of what they were doing was to make people better people well that's all about love so ethan okay no more questions for today we're out of time hopefully next month we'll do it probably i have to figure out a way i should just i'm just i'm such a i'm such a you know jacob wants to hire me i'm a crappy person to lead these things um you know i don't if you think i'm a person to run an organization just look at the crap job i've done in my church i'm a terrible i'm a terrible leader of an organization please don't ask me to do that um will there be a point where we will need to distance ourselves from this new movement of neo-platinism i don't know i by i am by no means an expert on neo-platinism i'm really looking forward to john's new project i suspect however it's sort of like the whole stoicism conversation and peugeot i thought nailed that when peugeot said yeah you know what you know why you know why the stoics disappeared they became christians you know why neo-platinism disappeared they became christians now maybe some of them became muslims i don't know maybe some of them went over to buddhism i don't know but there's a reason that these big religions endure it's because they're they work they scale now that doesn't mean that it isn't really helpful and important to step back and say wow neo-platinism let's look at that scott that's exactly what scholars do you can go to you can watch um what's the name of the dude from wheaton who has they videotaped all of his lectures and you can find him on the wheaten website they're really good philosophical lectures and he's he's fun to watch he's a great teacher and you know i've reposted his stuff on neo-platinism augustin was deeply you know he was a manichaean and then he was a neo-platin he was into neo-platinism and in many ways it's difficult to understand augustin without understanding neo-platinism and i was talking to i'll drop a name here i was talking to al walters who if you're in the christian reform community is a big name he's i've wanted to get him on the channel but he says no he's you know he's got parkinson's and he'd rather not be on video and totally cool um wrote a really important book uh that i can't remember right now in our little tradition al walters great scholar um you know did a lot of in-depth study on neo-platinism it's incredibly important philosophical tradition and have john vervecky say i want to revive the fruits of this that's what academics and scholars do creation regained yep yep there it is um did augustin ever i can't read the comments while i do this because i get distracted um oh gosh that's a that's a that's a subtle question did gustin ever reject manichaeanism if you read manichaea's thought it's pretty weird so so john is doing what scholars have done all along and and it very much fits into john's story and and i understand i mean now part if john were doing this within the walls of a university none of us would know about it none of us would care about it John is um you know i got a chance to spend a little bit of time with john when we were in thunder bay and um you know john's a lovely lovely man he really is and you know i i began to get senses of that as you know we began to meet online and have conversations and to get to know each other better and then getting a chance to know each other a little bit better at thunder bay he's a lovely lovely man who really cares about people well um you know he's he he is on a mission to help people in the ways that he feels himself ready and equipped to do so this this project is coming from a good place now he he fully expects and you know and he said it to jonathan peugeot and he said it to me that he'll get pushback from us on this but he also understands that that's part of the process and he'll push back on us and you know this is if if there's something worth building in this little corner it's exactly that kind of space where we can build the relational platform by which we can have productive helpful conversations across boundary lines that have tripped us up in the past if you had asked me 10 years ago if i would be befriending an icon carver and a cognitive scientist from the university of toronto so i you know i sure of course i can be their friend but would i be having substantive conversations on the internet about these kinds of important things no idea but here we are and so you know that's part of and in order to do that i think what part of what we've established is a degree of trust so that we can we can bring our disagreements together and work on them and that's the whole idea of dia logos and to have a space that can hold people with deeply conservative christian ideas along with academics of deeply cutting-edge scientific ideas boy that just excites me i i i i love the fact that we are able to have the conversations we can have here um yesterday on jacob's just streaming um we're talking jacob and i were talking with nekema and and you know she was sharing some of the things that we've been doing and you know some of her story and there's so much going on right now in the world religion is being disrupted because of technology because of globalization because of just the rapid pace of change all of this is happening right now this is a big part of the meaning crisis but people can't live on nihilism and part of what we're doing and this is i think this is also key to jordan's mission part of what he's doing is combating nihilism and part of the reason that the new atheists sort of you know wind up in the crosshairs is that they were pretty much gateway drugs into a lot of nihilism for people and it just doesn't work early on somebody started watching my videos from this area and he contacted me and you know maybe 300 subscribers contacted me wanted to go out to lunch and we went out to lunch together and he told me he said yeah i was deep into i he was he had he had gone to seminary he grew up in a christian home he was a deeply committed christian and sam harris just did a number on him and he became a new atheist and he gave up all that belief and he gave up that practices and so on and so forth and at some point he got married and he had a child had a little daughter who was you know a young girl and he looked at that young girl one day and says i cannot believe that she is of no ontological greater quality than any other mammal i would die for that little girl there's something wrong with this picture of the universe from from new atheism it doesn't work there must be something more going on and he found peterson he found me and of course where he's at right now i don't know i've been talking to him i've been spoken with him for years but we're working on this stuff and i believe jesus is in the conversations i wouldn't be doing this if you know i had a council meeting last night you know there are sundays when there are sundays when i just think what on earth am i doing here and it's not that i think i should go off and spend all my time here in internet land because this is just as nuts jesus calls us on to strange places sometimes and where he goes we must follow and we do so with fear and trembling you know it's story of peter's peter walking on the water we look out and see jesus walking on the water it's like wow he can walk on water peter says jesus bid me come jesus says all right come on peter come on you can walk on water and he starts and he's probably thinking in his head i'm doing it i'm doing it and he looks down he sees the wind and the waves he's like he starts to sink jesus grabs him peter why did you look down so i i there are times here that it's like i'm peter outside of the boat and i gotta listen to jesus and say don't look at the wind and the waves keep your eye on me okay jesus i'll keep my eye on you but i hear the wind and i feel the waves so that's the christian life that's the christian life and you can't ask for anything better you know you want to be with frodo and leave the hobbit hole and go out for an adventure you'll want to you should everything inside of you is calling you to do it you're going to face trolls you're going to face dragons but do it you know marry that girl don't just sleep with her make that commitment join that church be there when the wind and the waves get tough and keep your eyes on jesus that's the point of that story um because if you take your eyes off him he'll sink all right poking around jacob's conversation with father de jonge and others had has had me looking way more into theology but i wonder about the merge of dragging my protestant friends into that conversation just because it's salient to me what is the point of theology anyway theology is a super useful tool can be ideally it helps the church stay out of holes usually what happens with theology is not that it prevents us from getting into holes but it's what we do after we fall in one theology and orthodoxy and heterodoxy co-evolve so theology is really the record of the holes we followed in we've fallen into and what we try to learn from them that's really what theology is and part of what we've got going on right now is that via globalization we are more aware now you know this is this has actually been a pattern because if you read molly worthens apostles of reason in the 70s there was a that the the orthodox church has sort of been on the fringe in north america and they've kind of been the hot girl that every now and then somebody sort of gets news of her and goes over there and you know gets fascinated by the icons and the theology and the riches and the blessings of that whole tradition of christianity they never had any idea of how to get to that point and so that's the christianity they never had any idea of fine that's great i've you know i'm i'm richly blessed by jonathan peugeot and and many of you who have gone over to orthodoxy and i have um i want to cheer you on and um and i really pray that your life in that church becomes a blessing but again the goal of all of this is to love god and love your neighbor as yourself and peugeot and vervecky talked about this in their last video too if your christian practice is not yielding the fruits of christ then what value is your practice that's first corinthians 13 your christian practice your church your theology all of this should make you more like christ and that is you know i know in some the way some of us hear it that sounds sort of namby pamby jesus is my buddy or jesus is a squish or something like that jesus you can't you can't read the gospels and think jesus is a squish maybe that'll be the title of this jesus is not a squish but jesus is also not a a a moralist castigator he can do moralism but jesus jesus is way beyond that again he is he is the kind he he is so merciful and generous that when we look at him with his mercy and generosity it we it takes our breath away and we think that's that's irresponsible and then when he draws a hard line he draws it so hard we think who can stand that's who jesus is now i don't think any of us will be able to embody the breadth of that being that jesus shows that's because we're small but we grow up into that as much as we can with the grace that he's provided in the context that he's given us and how we're living and moving and working today there's the christian life theology your theology won't save you we look to jesus for salvation not to theology theology is a good thing theology is an important thing for the church but your theology didn't die in a cross for you your theology didn't walk out of that grave for you that's just remember that about your theology so you can get a lot of theology wrong that's the whole point about the sophisticated and unsophisticated christians unsophisticated christians might not know a lot of theology but they do know how to love the greatest of these is love lance made pvk say something i can't read you guys in the um peterson is like the poly pockets oh my goodness that's it for today thank you all um we'll have to figure out a way it'll probably be the first let me look at my calendar here um got it um probably the first friday of february that'll be the third that will do this again so thank you for joining me um yeah bridges of meaning i part part of the bridge of meaning is the bridge of meaning is the bridge of meaning is the bridge of meaning is the bridge of meaning yeah bridges of meaning i part part of the reason i'm not on the bridges of meaning discord server very often is i've just developed a distaste for discord i just don't like the platform um i i find it it's it's just like a lot of other of you who have gone to discord and said i can't do discord it's hard to keep up and i can't keep up with it um and it's it's all the text i can't even keep up with all of the video that this little corner is producing and so i tend to pop around sort of like a hopefully like a bee that sort of helps pollinate different flowers in this little corner and that's that's what i intend to do i don't intend to run it i don't intend to manage it i'm happy to let god and his spirit grow this thing the way he wants it so that's it be careful like it fires i've been fired many times so all right rick and the transmission