https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WbioGi86VoM

 Good morning. This is the normal first Friday of the month, Bridges of Meeting, Question and Answer. I dropped a link in there if people would like to ask questions. We already have a real good collection of questions for this week. This is, we've been doing this for a while. We used to do it every week, but that was a little much. So once a month is sort of the right pacing for it. It's interesting just reading the, Grimgriffs gives saving throws for mind control, but he is the most mind-controlly thing out there, and all of his branding is the most mind-controlly thing. Just pay attention to Remember and Body. We best for you. The assassins have failed. So yes, yeah, Jacob, I still haven't spent the time to put in a countdown, so there isn't one. Grimgriffs has colonized a small number of us to a disproportionate degree, and if you want to learn about colonization, pay some attention to Grimgriffs because he's certainly got the mind control going. But we are not here this morning to just talk about Grimgriffs. We are here to answer questions in the Bridges of Meeting Discord, and I didn't start early because I know that last time I started out of touch. It's not Thursday after all. So many inside jokes, so many inside jokes. But it is Friday, and it is Friday, and we're going to talk about some of these questions. The questions are helpful for me because it does, along with many of the other input signals, gives me a sense of what's going on. Now, there's a bullet to say, yeah, there's a built-in 30, yeah, I know there is. I know it is. All right, well, let's stop with, let's start with Johnny Crackpipe. That's quite a name there, Johnny. Do you see the corner as a potential precursor to major change, similar to how the Republic of Letters was spreading new ideas prior to the French Revolution? I see the corner as a group of people who have found something together that they very much, I'm using this other camera. I have my garbage picker that I use here to adjust the camera. If I need to adjust it, there we go. This is the height of high technology here. I got this because I was always picking up garbage from the homeless people. I'm not going to do that. I'm going to do this because I was picking up garbage from the homeless people. I've been through a few of them, but this one remains. When I had to move my camera in the middle of a thing, I thought, oh, this will work. This is such a good question because we sort of want to pick winners. The question is, will this little labor of love and fascination occupying a few hundred to a few thousand people, depending on how you make your definition? One of the videos that I haven't made is sort of the concentric circles of the corner because obviously, the corner is a very small circle, and I don't know if you can see this, but it's a very small circle that I've made. It's sort of the concentric circles of the corner because obviously, in terms of looking out, Emily, Food Truck Emily, had a great little gif on Twitter about Baby in the Corner, and So that just shows if you're in the corner looking out, the corner is large. I, because of my weird place in this, see both looking out through the corner and looking in at the corner. And depending on your definitions, it's large and small. Then the question is influence. And one of the ways that we sort of measure influence through all of these analytics that we have. So Jordan Peterson, let's say the biggest property in the corner, even though Jordan Peterson is by no means exclusive of the corner. And that's some of the relationships here. You know, the seven and a half million YouTube subscribers, two to three million Twitter subscribers. I was watching this morning, I was watching a little, if you look at channels, even with over a million subscribers that have videos that just have a few hundred or a few thousand views, you get a sense of the realities around these YouTube analytics. They don't say what people sort of immediately think they say. It's sort of like, and you get used to this by church numbers, because you might have a Roman Catholic church or a mainline church with thousands of members on their roles and only a few hundred show up weekly for worship. Now you might look at the attendance numbers and say, oh, that's how you impact the church. Or you might look at the membership numbers and say, that's how you impact the church. But in my experience, both numbers tell you different things and putting the numbers together tells you something. But even none of those things can necessarily impact, give you a sense of the impact of the person. Someone this morning just sent me the news release that Joe Rogan has just signed a new deal with Spotify. And that deal with Spotify now is up to $250 million. That's not guaranteed money. And again, you see that number and you think, oh, 250 million, that's more than the 100 million he was getting before. It's so funny because Joe Rogan can get a contract for $250 million and he's not a sellout, but Grim Grizz sells a sports bra, which is the most hilarious merchandising thing for Grim Grizz's channel. And he's a grifter. So these things are really weird. But Spotify is now changing. The Joe Rogan experience is coming back to YouTube. And well, how does that make sense for Spotify? Well, it sort of makes sense in the way that you look at Jordan Peterson and Daily Wire and this little dance that I did with Daily Wire with respect to the Exodus series where, I was permitted 10 minutes per episode to use on my channel. They never really enforced that. I had a video or two out there that used a little bit more. But, so the Daily Wire model is sort of a freemium model. We're gonna put 80% of this Jordan Peterson thing on YouTube and then reserve 20% for Daily Wire. But the Exodus series will release for a limited time only, then we'll pull it back. That's sort of the freemium paywall way. And of course, YouTube. Jordan was much more sort of use my stuff. That surely helped Jordan Peterson. All of the, basically all of the, everybody repackaging his stuff. And then there's the, so now Spotify is going to, I'm sure they're gonna harvest all the ad revenue from, or at least share the ad revenue from YouTube. So it's tremendously complicated how these things work. This does deal with the question in terms of the question of influence and precursor. I think the best way to talk about this stuff is spirit. Because you can look at the Republic of Letters, you can look at in the Protestant Reformation, part of what, even the, this gets into the video I made about the idea of deconstruction that glorifies, we could say deconstruction that edifies and deconstruction that desecrates. Think about reverse engineering. What is reverse engineering? Reverse engineering is looking at something at a certain level of existence, taking it down into its component parts so that you can approximate the component parts and put it together an approximation of what's on top. We are always going up and down this level of analysis. You can think about it as level of analysis. Before the Protestant Reformation and Carlos Iri's book on reformations brings this out beautifully that there were many reformations going on in the 15th century. A lot of those provoked by in many ways the Colombian exchange. When Columbus, we know that Europeans had been to the Americas a number of times before, but something happened, something happened with Columbus. The technology, you could get back and forth over the ocean easy enough. The relationship with China, all of those things comes to the fore and suddenly you get this whoosh that you didn't have before. The discovery of the new world and all of what that meant contributes then of course to 1492, Columbus sails the ocean blue. Beginning of the 16th century, the 15 teens, Martin Luther, the printing press, Erasmus, sale of indulgences to build St. Peter's Cathedral. All of these things are contributing and then of course the structure of the Holy Roman Empire, the power that certain electors had in the Holy Roman Empire, the decision to not let Luther be burned at the stake but to kidnap him and put him in a castle. The fact that Luther now pent up with his, when I had that early conversation with Ron Dart with respect to Luther and Erasmus, he was sort of liking Jordan Peterson to Erasmus. I said, no, Jordan Peterson's a lot more like Luther because Peterson's the kind of personality that if you sort of push on him, he digs in, he's kind of like a badger. And so, okay, Jordan, shut up about these pronouns. No, he sees this as compelled speech and that triggers a whole bunch of things in him. And so Jordan Peterson initiates something that goes through Western civilization. But of course that timing, my talk with Elizabeth Oldfield, I mean, Brexit was happening at about the same time and Trump was about the same time. And there's just a thousand different things. And so the best, sort of the best imaginal, I think the best imaginal framework we have for thinking through these things are the movement of spirits. And the Protestant Reformation generated a powerful spirit, but it was also other spirits were at work. And so of course, Christians are called to discern the spirits. So there's a lot going on here. Now, will this little corner ever be anything more than, we don't even know what it is. My guess, just based on probability, the way history works, probability, the way history works, no, no. We will likely remain a small group of interested people who have actually lasted abnormally long. I again, go back to my first conversation with Ron Dart. Ron Dart basically said, yeah, we have these Jungians who pop up sometimes in sort of the fringes of Christianity and they make a big splash and you can point to their books and then they sort of go away. Richard Rohr could be in that category. Richard Rohr certainly has had some impact, but Richard Rohr didn't have 12 rules for life. Richard Rohr doesn't have a YouTube channel. Richard Rohr doesn't have millions of followers on Twitter. Richard Rohr is sort of in a soft retirement. And so Ron Dart pretty much thought, yeah, two, three years from now, nobody will be talking about Jordan Peterson anymore. Okay, well, Jordan Peterson's still around. Are people talking about him? Go back to the video that I did responding to David Fuller's sort of complaining that he had been blocked by Jordan Peterson, but David Fuller made some important points in that video that part of what happened to the Jordan Peterson movement, those early days, 2016 to 2018, sort of ending with Jordan's illness and especially around January, 2018, the Kathy Newman interview and pretty soon the Helen Lewis interview, that sort of, and then the New York Times and sort of the revenge of the blue church in terms of framing Jordan. They framed Jordan fairly successfully to the degree that you can't really say Jordan Peterson and company. I did a Rando's talk, which I don't know if it'll ever be released, it's up to her. But she's a very interesting member of this little corner. Members of this little corner have varying degrees of visibility to the rest of the people in the corner. Some of them come through me. I know people that are following the corner carefully that most of whose name most of you don't know, they have a degree of status, they have something to lose. So they keep their visibility low. And see now I just triggered conspiracy theories among many of you. And some of you will know that I'm talking about you. And some of you are right. And because there are a whole group of people, not a large group of people, a group of people that sort of fit into that category. Some of whom have been on the channel, some of whom aren't, some of whom you might bump into in a live event, some of whom will never show up on video. I was just watching Chad sent me Gavin and his wife's lives as stream this morning. I thought it was just absolutely adorable, absolutely adorable in a good way. But the odds of this little corner ever being bigger than it is are pretty small. It might continue to grow. But if you look at the pace that we've grown over the last five years, it might continue to grow. Something might happen that sort of changes things. This is why the conversion of Jordan Hall is such an interesting moment. And I think Justin Briarly is right that Christianity is going to have another surge. Now, if you look at the history of the church, there are surges and there are retreats and there's surges and there are retreats and these things are so complicated. So I don't think it's terribly smart of people to say, I wanna get really involved in the corner because I wanna get at the ground, I don't wanna get the ground floor of something that's gonna be really huge. Think about the mother of James and John in the gospels. And the mother of James and John comes to Jesus and says, I want my two boys to be on your right hand on your left hand when you inherit the kingdom. And well, what is she thinking about? She is thinking that Jesus is going to act as a Messiah in the conventional ways that Messiah had acted. Simon Bar Kukba, the Maccabees, there are many, many more who sort of acted in that way. And they imagined that Jesus was one way or another going to devise a plot and he was going to dislocate the Romans and Jesus would establish a kingdom probably out of Jerusalem with a power center in the Galilee probably pretty quickly subdue the Samaritans and subdue the Edomites and start first by being a regional power and then maybe be sort of like Alexander the Great and sort of break out and maybe march his armies through and if he was tremendously successful, he would end up in Rome within 10 or 15 years. Jesus would be like Napoleon or Alexander the Great for all of these two and the mother of James and John imagined that Jesus would then maybe James and John would get it on the ground floor. I knew Jesus when he was in Galilee sort of like Jonathan Pujol was on Ruslan KD talking about how he found Jordan and they became friends and because they became friends early, Jonathan has risen up the hierarchy with Jordan as has John Vervecky. I didn't have the good fortune to find Jordan that early so I don't have a personal relationship with Jordan Peterson so I really haven't taken the, haven't been on the shirt, tails of the status rocket and gone up with them and actually for me, I'm absolutely fine with that because when John and Jonathan both say in my recent talks with them, I'm not here to found a community. I say I kind of am here to found a community and when you look at like the John Mark Comer interview where you had, I watched people found mega churches and I know people that did it and part of me of course says, yeah, it'd be really cool to be the pastor of a mega church. You get to be on stage, you get to have thousands of people there, you get to have a building program, you get to do all of these things and all those things are fine and I asked myself, is that really how I wanna spend my time? PVK, PVK, make him king, Luke and now some of these dynamics are true and you can see them in the little corner. Just look at Luke, look at who the people who have some degree of status are in this corner. You know, look at Jacob Federechi, look at, you know, there's a whole look at, look at Sam, look at, look at how many people have a degree of status in this corner and look at those who have sort of worked their way up from the bottom. Look at Chad, look at Grizz, people who sort of came in in the second wave and have sort of worked their way up. You've got now people coming in in later waves like Christian Baxter who are making videos and so there's a lot of this going on and so there's truth to the fact that because Luke came in early and Sam came in early and all these guys came in early, they have a degree of status because they in a sense got in the ground floor and as the thing grew, they grew with it but they also worked in a certain way so that they grew with it and so that's kind of how a community and a structure grows. But the question of whether or not this is going to become one of those very rare things in history where actually a tiny little movement maintains its cohesion. Again, remember Jonathan Peugeot's level thing. This tiny little movement maintains its cohesion all the way to the top. I was watching the other video, another video with Neil DeGrand and Jonathan Peugeot talked to Ruth Rusland Cady and they're talking about orthodoxy and the Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church and the different traditions. Is the Orthodox Church that meets in your little strip mall in your little place of the world, God bless them, the same as the church in Corinth that Paul was writing letters back and forth to? The way you can do that is the way you connect those two churches has everything to do with whether or not you're Orthodox or Protestant or Roman Catholic. So all of this question about identity that I go through in the deconstruction video that Glenn Scrivner and his guest point to with respect to, Harari sees a mountain. Oh, is that what you see? Why? Because a mountain, again, this is the idea of a gestalt. Harari sees a gestalt, this is a mountain. Just look at something like Mount Everest. What is Mount Everest? Is Mount Everest one thing or is it actually when you look at it because a mountain isn't shaped like a pyramid. A pyramid is sort of a manmade mountain. Mount Everest isn't shaped like a pyramid. You find these outcroppings and these outcroppings and these outcroppings. If you drive north of here, north of Sacramento, up the five, you'll get to Shasta, Mount Shasta. And next to Shasta is a thing almost as tall as Shasta. But when you look at it, sometimes you say, that's Mount Shasta, or sometimes there are two names. That's where this whole naming thing comes in. So that's to say a few things. So I know I spend a half hour on the first question every time and we're almost getting to that point. If this little corner has millions of participants, it will not be the same thing, but it might be the same thing. If Peugeot and Verbecky and VanderKlaai are still doing events, we're still talking to each other. And if Luke and Sam and Jacob and Chad and Grizz are there, and if new people like Emily and Christian are coming in making their way, is it the same thing? So what I would suggest is that a better level of analysis is to think about the spirits in the world that are creating what we are participating in. And so when you listen to Peugeot, Ruslan sort of put him in a, you know, put the thing, is what's your hierarchy of churches, Jonathan? And of course Jonathan has, for Jonathan, his hierarchy of churches sort of reflects where he spends his time and what he's a member of, et cetera, et cetera. As does mine. So, but I of course have a different story from Jonathan's. Jonathan grows up French Canadian. You have this fall of the French Canadian Roman Catholic Church, his parents go evangelical, Pentecostal evangelical. And then you have sort of the fall of evangelical, at least in that tiny little area, and Jonathan goes Orthodox. Matthew Peugeot, where's he at in this? None of us really know. He's much more cagey, much more below the radar. We're curious, but this is the problem of naming and identifying and all of those issues. And so in my conversation with Elizabeth Oldfield, that'll come out next week probably. You know, she, at the end of the video, she challenges me and says, I don't think you're the pastor of a dying church. You're the pastor of, well, what? That's the question. Living Stones is an organization, but even the organization of Living Stones, there are people who are in formal membership and people who are very important and integral to the church. I'll just give, I'll just name one guy. We'll just leave this up here for a while. I can't see that and not laugh. Oh no, here we go. Rick is a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. He's a Christian. Rick isn't a formal member of Living Stones. Bum, bum, bum. Rick, I hope I didn't out anything. You know, Rick may become a former member of Living Stones soon, et cetera, et cetera. But Rick is very much a part of Living Stones. Living Stones, if Rick were to stop coming to Living Stones, Living Stones would struggle. It wouldn't be the same. Think of the Inklings. When Charles William died, C.S. Lewis wrote that nobody else in the Inklings was the same because of course Charles Williams made the Inklings something different. And so on one hand, we use the term the Inklings as sort of one thing, but in other ways, the Inklings was a very living organic thing for which naming is necessary and it has a power, but it's always as a limited capacity to actually contain the thing itself. And this little corner is something closer probably to the Inklings than it is to Living Stones. So there's a ton going on in this. Now, will what we are, well, here's one way to do it because within this thing called this little corner, there are some fairly well-defined entities like Paul VanderKlay and Jonathan Peugeot and John Vervecky and Jacob Federecci and Luke Thompson and Sam Tiedemann and Sandy Bassey and C.W. Rieks and Free Rillian. See, now I'm starting to use the other things. Oh yes, Jacob. Yeah, you should really get with MJ. It's always, always, always indictments, always. What is the Living Stone? Yes, Jacob, yes, Jacob, yes, Jacob. All of this is the way this works. Now, you can ask the question, to what degree will Jordan Peterson, shape the world of 2040? I don't know. How can you answer that question? Even Donald Trump. Donald Trump has been an enormously consequential figure in the United States since 2014, 10 years, but he's an old man. And despite the spray tan and the suits and all of the hair implants and everything that Donald has done, who knows how long Donald has to be influenced? We're seeing that with Joe Biden. Joe Biden, of course, his age is a topic of conversation. Donald Trump's age isn't a topic of conversation, but who knows? How on earth can you answer these questions? So I would suggest that, don't worry too much. If you sign on to this little corner and decide to give it attention and participate and do all of these things because you're motivated like the mother of James and John, and you think this is gonna cash out into big money or anything like this, I'd say there are probably better things that maybe you can pay your attention to. If in fact though you come here for the joy of it and for the relationships. And if you come because you love the people, Rick comes to Living Stones, not because it's the best preaching around, you can find better preachers on the internet, not because Living Stones is going to, sorry, Rick, I'm talking about you. Rick's a pretty low, Rick doesn't surface too often as you well know. He's probably not even listening right now, he's got a day job. He doesn't come to Living Stones because it's gonna be a mega church and be the forefront church in Sacramento, all of these things. Rick, who is Rick? That's exactly right. Rick comes to Living Stones because of love, love for the people. And it's not just my friendship with Rick, although I'm sure that's part of it, it's his friendship with Roger, it's his friendship with Marshall, it's his friendship with Nine, it's his friendship with Jared, it's his friendship with Ali, it's his friendship with Freddie, it's his friendship with Kimo. I'm listing many of these names and if you come to Living Stones, of which there's no line there, I can't get a Rando's conversation. You can walk in the door at Living Stones and sit down for 9 a.m. estuary and you'll probably come away from 9 a.m. estuary not thinking about PBK, you'll come away thinking about Joanne or Edie or Roger or Dave or Ray or, and again, most people don't know this, but I'm not the most interesting person here. In some ways, Freddie's way more interesting than I am, but only Freddie and Paul show week after week, it's two to 400 clicks. So all of these questions are tied together. And so when we talk about things like deconstruction, which is basically going up and down this tree of levels of analysis, it's not even really a tree, it's just that we sort of bring it together in a hierarchy because it's easier for us to manage, but mountain, rock, stone, dirt, embankment, organic material, inorganic material, tectonic plates, former sea bed, why are there fossils up at the top of the mountain? I mean, reality is so complex so that if this little corner is a player in American elections, who, what presidential candidate will get Paul VanderKlaas' endorsement? Dum, dum, dum. The day that that happens, this little corner will not be exactly what it is now. And this little corner today is not what it was three years ago. And even if we stay sort of a small group of friends and relationships three years from now, it will not be the same as it is now. I had reasons to go back and look at a video, not a particularly important video, popular video, but there were very particular reasons why I had to look at this video. And I just scanned the comments. And I scanned the comments because I'm always looking at the comments when certain names stand out. And why is Luke Luke? Why, here's another great one. Why is Anselman Anselman? It's because he's still here. Six years into this, you go back video after video after video and Anselman will be back there making his comments. And you know it's him because you know his comments. CW came in a little bit later. And CW, boy, CW, if you haven't watched CW's Randall's conversation. And you know, so CW starts his, and CW just has the brilliant idea of saying, I'm gonna start a channel and I'm gonna start it with Nathan. And just look at, just watch the first few minutes of CW's video. There's background music and there's the set. CW has been pouring over this idea for weeks. And he comes in, he's got the circular desk. He's got the big Microsoft Surface, not the Surface laptop, the big Surface has got this round chair and he's got the ponytail and he's got the way he talks. And I loved it, I loved it. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Oh, ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. Oh, yes. I love this little corner because of the people in it. I love this little corner because I love the people. And Jacob can complain about my leadership all he wants and I'll still love it. And Mark and Iron Root and I'll still love him. I'll still love him. Nathan, Nathan, I still love Nathan, still love Nathan. And so I get tired of some things. I don't watch for some reasons because sometimes the territory's mapped and once he starts down a certain road, he'll just keep going down that road and I find that rather dull. Joey, Joey, many of you know Bridges of Meeting. Joey sometimes watches some of my videos and then he doesn't watch my videos for a long time. And I'll see Joey and Joey will explain why. But even Jacob or maybe just Jacob, maybe just Jacob. Thank you, thank you, Hank. Hank knows something about leadership too. So don't participate in this little corner for the motivation of the mom of James and John. Because if that's your game, go into politics. That's what politics is like. If you want to come down to politics, if you want to come to this corner, come to it for love. And I don't mean just love in general, come to it because you love the people here. And if you do that, because the problem with coming to this little corner because you think it's going to change the world someday is because the odds are very poor. You're wasting your time. And that's my expression of love to you. If you come to this little corner because you see that there's love here and you are willing to love and you're willing to be loved and you participate, even if you're ornery and hard to deal with like Jacob, calling Luke this and that and calling Mia this and that. Even if you're that kind of person, but if you're here for love, then it's worthwhile being here. Now, why would you say something like this, Paul? Think about the gospel. Think about Peter, think about Jesus. Peter's in a hard pressed, a slave girl. You're a Galilee and I think you're one of those with Jesus. Peter says, I never knew you. Jesus hears, Jesus predicts it. Peter does it. Even after Jesus predicted it, you would think that, again, this is the way we think and it's not at all the way we live. If someone would say to you, it's like I'm having trouble with this camera. There we go. If someone would say to you, oh, the whole Oedipus Rex thing, someone say to you, you're going to, oh, let's think of some horrible thing. You're going to invest all of your money in Microsoft stock and it's going to, and Facebook, let's use Facebook. You're going to invest all of your money in Facebook. Next question, please. I'm still loving there, Spatch, I'm still loving. You can pause and come back five minutes later and I'll be on the next question. YouTube gives you all sorts of choice. If someone says, if you invest your money in Facebook, you'll go bankrupt. You can say that to someone and they'll still do it. So Jesus tells Peter, you're going to deny me. I'll never do that. Peter denies him. You wouldn't think when we get to that moment, Peter would say, oh, Jesus said I was going to deny him. I'm not going to do it. Nope, nope, nope. He does it. And then the end of the gospel of John, Jesus meets Peter. And what does Jesus say? Peter, you signed in for the wrong thing. No, Peter's, we're still talking about the primacy of Peter and the Bishop of Rome, et cetera, et cetera. No, the mother of James and John picked well. Not quite as good as the mother of Peter, however. And it was probably their cousin. But what does Jesus say to Peter? Peter, do you love me? Then feed my lambs. Peter, do you love me? Then feed my sheep. Peter, do you love me? Filet-o-agape. And then of course, John gets a little, well, you know, Peter, you know, what about John? It's between me and John. You follow me. So come to the corner for love. Come to the corner for love. Don't worry about where it's going. Just love the people here. And that's what we'll do here, okay? That's what we'll do here. We'll love each other. And love will have all different levels. And you're not gonna love everyone the same. And all of those things are true. Come here for love. Next question, but same guy. Yeah, see, I spent 40 minutes on the first question. How do you build community when people have become so jaded and reluctant to depend on others? You do it with love. You do it with love. You do it with love. It's the point. It's the point of the gospel. It's the point of Christianity. It's the point, in my opinion, of the corner. Not politics, not money. That's why Grim Grizz got so much of it right. We're virtually not alone. We're in this together. All of the little mind control. What is forgiveness? Forgiveness is not, is not making people pay what they rightfully owe. Forgiveness is not an excuse. Forgiveness is, you've hurt me. You cost me. I forgive you. Forgiveness is what the father does to the prodigal son when he brings him in. He burned through probably a third. He squandered a third of the father's money and he goes out and brings his son back in and says, yeah, I know you burned through a third of the money and all the village elders are really angry with you right now because not only did you burn through a third of my money because the way a first century Jewish village works, you're not going to get a third of the money that a Jewish village works. You probably tank the economy of the entire village. But I still love you. Come home. The older brother stays out in the field and that just read Ken Bailey on the prodigal son. He's written how many books on this parable? It's beautiful. The older son stays out and one of the things about the gospel is that you can run it through different circuits. So one of the ways you can understand the parable of the prodigal son, it's a question of forgiveness because the younger brother hurt the older brother. He did. And what the older brother is angry at his father for is because his father forgave the younger brother and the older brother says, he starts the conversation with luck. You don't talk to your father that way. And some would say, well, this all start, this is the father's problem because when the younger brother came to the father and asked for his inheritance before the father died, a good father should have beat his son. Okay, well, you know, that kind of lesson, that kind of accountability is important. It is important. But the father doesn't beat the son. This is what makes the parable amazing. And it's a parable. The father gives the son what he asks for and everybody in town is furious, horrified with the father. They're furious at him. How dare you do this? You're threatening the social structure. You're breaking everything down. You know what that worthless son of yours is going to do with the money. And he does it. He goes to a far off land. He blows the whole business. He's feeding pigs. He has a worthless little speech where he says, I'm with Kenneth Bailey. I don't believe he repents in the far off land. He says, at least my father's servants have bread on their table. I'll give a speech to my father. And maybe the best I can hope for is that I live in the house. I've been watching Yellowstone. You know, I live in the house like Jamie Dutton with a difficult relationship with John Dutton. And he goes back and the father puts a robe around him, puts shoes on his fingers and kills the fattened calf. So the older brother is out in the field. The older brother is out in the field. And he says, this is wrong. My father has not been a good father. He's not done what's right. He's not led the family correctly. He's not done a good thing. He should have beat my brother at the first instance, not giving him a dime and told him to go back out in the field and work for another 20 years until I die. And then maybe, maybe I'll forgive the request that you just made and give you something in my will. That's what the older brother thinks. And he's not completely wrong. So he's out in the field and the father, just like the father went out to receive the younger brother, the father goes out to plead with the older brother and the older brother says, look, I have been a good son and I have worked all of these years and I've not even asked for a goat to celebrate with my friends. And look what you've done with that worthless brother of mine. And the father says, my son, all that I have is yours. In other words, yeah, there's been real consequence to the decision of the younger brother. All that I have is yours. But my son was dead and he's alive and we have to celebrate it because he's still my son. Just read Luke 15, the social culture war context of that parable and you'll understand its power. And the story ends there because the story wonders, will the older brother forgive? That's where Jesus leaves it. And then he goes on to Luke 16, the parable of the swindling steward. So what forgiveness is, it's costly. It's tremendously costly. But the more costly it is, the more beautiful it is because the greater grace and generosity it shows. Amen. Yeah, you got me in preacher mode. A question for you guys. I've listened to a lot of PBK's podcast and learned a lot about this little corner, but where is this little corner? Where is the kingdom of God? Is it between you? Yes. Is it among you? Yes. Is it right here right now? Yes. But that's sort of like sit down with an old married couple who they've been through it with each other. They've maybe even have divorced and gotten back together in no couples like that. They've had children, they've had grief, they've had joy, they've run the gamut of what a marriage can offer and can cost. Say, where's that relationship? That's sort of like Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson with Elvis's guitar. Where's the Elvis's guitar thing in that guitar? If you take the guitar apart, you can't find any Elvis, Elvis, el, elvisness, it's elvishness. It can't find any Elvis in the guitar. Or maybe you can find some dead skin cells from his fingers on the strings or maybe a little bit of hair or dead skin fell into the guitar or something like that. But if you didn't, I mentioned this before, if you did an autopsy of Elvis, can you find Elvis? Yes and no. So where's this little corner? It's kind of like the question of where's the kingdom? It's between us. It's in the love. Well, where's the love? Well, where's the love between that couple? Well, it's in their children, it's in their home, it's in how their story has impacted other people. And what's amazing is that you'd say, well, that's not really real. And this is where materialism is breaking down and why materialism is breaking down because you could own a guitar that you picked up at a garage sale and think, oh, that's a pretty cool guitar. It works pretty well. I didn't pay too much money for it. I like it. Maybe it was Elvis's guitar, but as long as you don't know that it was Elvis's guitar, it's only worth a few hundred bucks. Or maybe you don't even care about Elvis. Maybe it was Elvis's guitar, but you don't give a crap. So that's why the whole business about this movement that's far larger than Jordan Peterson, this recession of modernity in a certain way of looking at the world, that has everything to do with this. And so that's why there should be no question that figuring out where this little corner is, is no easy thing. Where this little corner is, is in some ways in different estuary groups and it's on videos and it's in Chad's Denim Dinner. So if you go to Chad's Denim Dinner, you participate in this little corner. What platform does it exist on? It exists on many platforms and sometimes on no platform. Is it in multiple spaces? Absolutely. There you go, Andy, the writer. Ha ha ha. Dennis is, Dennis is, Dennis is warden in the comments. Okay, Ducka Duck 360. In Maps of Meaning, Peterson critiques the enlightenment for having giving up on the importance of symbolic truth, especially those associated with Christ. Since Jesus is often considered the logo, since Jesus is often considered the logos discourse, backed by John 1.1, do you think abandonment from association, associating worshiping Jesus as discourse in the sense of the logos from both mainline and evangelical churches has in some ways led to the fall of church attendance and people overall leaving Christianity because they're not emphasizing the point, this point as Peterson does. I think that's a strong point. What Peterson was able to do to a limited degree, he wasn't able to break through to Sam Harris despite eight plus hours on stage plus podcasts, plus, you know, again, that last Peterson conversation with Harris, Peterson has just studying him. Harris might as well be in the, and it might as well be in Peterson's therapist office because Peterson is just drilling in on him. Sam's just, you know, Sam doesn't even know he's an analysis. Ha ha ha. It's clueless, it's just clueless. Ha ha ha. Oh yeah, T. Grogan, if you've watched him in the comment section, he's doing his thing. And I know a lot of people, you know, might wanna ban him and, you know, T. Grogan, you better be careful because you just go ahead and dare Joey to ban you and it'll put you on a timeout fast. Ha ha ha. Because he's, oh, oh, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. Defend the enlightenment against this superstitious nonsense. Dum da da dum, out we ride. Good luck. This is far bigger than any of us. Ha ha ha ha. Oh. I'm sorry, I shouldn't, I shouldn't, I shouldn't. It gets ahead of me. It's just a flesh wound. Spirit of Monty Python has come into the room. Yes, CW. See, T. Grogan, you have probably just, you've probably just won your way onto CW's podcast. Ha ha ha ha. Wait a minute, maybe I can hit him with Calvinist stuff. Ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha. Oh. Oh, it's happening all around us. And it's gonna continue. And the enlightenment is receding. And what's interesting is that in many cases, it is those, and this is almost always the way it is, it is the scientists who are destroying or correcting the enlightenment. And it's cognitive science. And it's the frame problem. I mean, the enlightenment naively thought, well, if I put some cameras on the front of this little thing with wheels, then it will see. And what they discovered was that seeing, back to the dark ages, seeing is not that simple. And so, and if you want to see spirits at work, you know, this kind of thing used to work and it doesn't anymore. I mean, and in that way, sort of, what are the things that has been, you know, someone might look around and say, well, the blue church is terribly powerful. No, the blue church is coming apart. Other good things that I love are coming apart. You know, evangelicalism, the video I made about that is coming apart. Protestantism is changing, but so is orthodoxy and so is Catholicism and so is Judaism. And it's all changing because of all of this stuff underneath and this is an old story. So, yeah, and I don't know if we can call it a counter enlightenment because we're not going to give up on many of the things that we earned in the enlightenment. The enlightenment was a correction. I think the better way to understand humanity, rather than sort of a Hegelian hierarchy and pyramid, although there's some dynamics to that, it tends to be much more correction and overcorrection. Almost always when we discover something, we push it too hard and then it comes back. So it's actually much more like opponent processing back and forth. And that's what's happening. And we're having some opponent processing with respect to the enlightenment. And the reason we know that is because it's actually science that's doing the opponent processing, ironically. And it's science that, you know, just read Thomas Kuhn's history of scientific revolutions. I remember reading that in college and it just blew my mind. So this is the way life works. All right. See if there's a question there. Cause there's a lot of things in the questions, things that aren't questions. Peterson Dawkins talked about how to survive the, to survive the organism must be a microcosm of the environment. Is the Holy Spirit internalized? And due to our nature, we encounter it as an agent. I'm not saying this to exhaust the metaphor, just to map onto the subjective and creates an intimate binding of the arena in personal relationships. This feels true to me for my experience coming into dialogue with the Holy Spirit. So God number one, God number two. Again, these are, these are boxes on my theological, philosophical, epistemic work bench. And the reason they're numbered one and two is because the labels change. Sometimes I'll label this one, this and that one, that, because what I'm doing is teasing out of polarity. And so the latest one, the one that's dominated me for a while has been the arena and the agent arena relationship. All three members of the Trinity have arenic and agentic qualities. In many ways, one way to understand the Holy Spirit is deeply arenic. When you see Jesus walking around in Galilee and Judea, that's very agentic. But in one way to sort of understand Jesus' ascension, is he goes from being very agentic and a little arenic, to very arenic, but also agentic, because all arenas have agentic qualities. That's the whole point of the metadivine realm. The metadivine realm can be seen because it has agentic qualities, because it impacts the actions of Zeus and Hermes. So the Holy Spirit, our problem with the Holy Spirit is usually that we imagine it to be too small. And that's almost always true of our imagination of God. So, any theory that we have of God's providential, sovereign guidance of history towards an eschaton, towards an eschaton. Well, yeah, the Holy Spirit is intimately involved. That's a great question. Deep Dark Seas, John, Shyla Buff was recently confirmed into the, oh, Father Big Mac corrected him. Thank you, Father. He was received into the church and confirmed. He has stated the intention to pursue the diaconate, but we generally don't let people pursue holy orders when they are recent converts. This is a strength of the Roman Catholic Church, sometimes, because they're so massive and so ancient. And because they have canon law that Father Eric is studying now, they're not gonna be so easily pushed around by a Hollywood celebrity. Now Shyla Buff is sort of a Hollywood celebrity that's no longer sort of in peak brightness of his career. But, you know, God bless Shyla Buff and his conversion and the Roman Catholics that are working with him. And who knows what God is gonna do in his life. So, praise God, he's joined the church. And praise God that he has aspirations for church leadership. We live in a funny world. So, but we've always lived in funny things. I mean, just go through the history of the church. There's incredible stories, incredible stories. Yeah, one of Luke's favorite actors, he's a good actor. Um, Hanselman's got some, he's got some shade to cast. All right, Michigan man Sam. What would a Protestant do? What should a Protestant do who feels a need for confession? This is an excellent question. Recently discussing with some Catholic members of this little corner, the topic of sin and how to deal with shame. Ask a person what you should do to deal with sin when someone responds to go to confession. I think it's probably solid advice, but it occurred to me that unlike the other sacraments, there's no real Protestant equivalent to confession. So part of the reason the, so the live stream on Luke's live stream that I posted on my channel after the reformational, the Jake Meader reformational video. What, what, what I, that conversation was really helpful for me because it sort of helped me understand some of the movement beneath that caused the Protestant Catholic stuff. And I found, I found the book Transubstantiation super helpful with that too. The Bible says confessor sends one to another. There's tremendous, tremendous, tremendous value in having a ritual around confession like the Roman Catholic church has. I see that as a Protestant minister. Part of me, I once thought that boy, if I could find a, if I could find a confessional booth, I would put it up in back of Living Stones just to help people at Living Stones have the courage to say, can I talk to you? There's something I've got to get off my heart. And I would more than happily go into the other side of that booth and hear their confession and say, God loves you, Jesus sees you and your sins are forgiven. Now, the fact that only a priest can do that in a certain sense and correct me if I'm wrong in the Roman Catholic church, there's, there's good reasons for that. You don't want to go confessing your sins to just any old Tom, Dick or Harry around because confidence is important. And you need to have a pretty good, you need to have some pretty good systems that say this person isn't going to take your confession of sin to ruin your reputation and play other foolish games with it. So there's a ton of wisdom built into these traditions of confessions to a priest. And Protestant ministers regularly hear confession, but we don't frame it in such a way. Now the lack of framing makes it difficult for that to happen. But on the other hand, on the other hand, an AA sponsor will hear a lot of confession from the person that they are helping. And they have a degree of authority given the fact that they are a sponsor in AA. But they don't have all of that machinery that let's say a priest has. And confessions can sometimes happen in small groups. If there's a small group that's developed and there's trust in there, then they'll confess their sins. Now someone might jump in and say, okay, you don't really need the priest for confession. And that's true. You can share your sin with anybody you want to. You need the priest for absolution and only the priest can offer absolution. And now you've touched on this entire tradition, ritual, history, ideas of structure and accountability and all of that, that something like the Roman Catholic Church has majored in and God bless it for that. What the Protestant Church says is, if you're there with, let's say you've got two members of AA and now I probably get corrected by Lance or by Chad on this because I regularly get AA wrong because I talk about it a lot, but I've never been an alcoholic and I've never been an AA sponsor. I've just known, I've just had church members who have talked to me about their experience with it. And so an AA, somebody comes to their sponsor and says, I did this and they're both Christians. And that sponsor says, you know what? The blood of Jesus was given for the forgiveness of your sin there. What Protestantism says is that it's not necessarily the declaration of pardon given by an ordained priest that affects the forgiveness of sins. Now I don't think the Catholic Church necessarily says that, but the difficulty is it's difficult to talk about these sorts of things. When the AA sponsor says, I believe Jesus has forgiven your sin. You confessed it to me and I know our Jesus and I know his love and your sins are forgiven. There's the priesthood of all believers right there. That isn't to say that there isn't value or truth in this priesthood. Somebody, a couple of weeks ago I mentioned, I'm a minister, I'm not a priest. And some of you said, you should elaborate on that a little bit more. And this is me doing that. In the Protestant, now there are times when I act in a priestly role. You read the Heidegger Catechism and believers sometimes function in three different offices, prophet, priest and king. Believers can speak prophetically and you don't need to have a Pentecostal idea about that. Believers can speak in terms of kingly authority and rightly authority. And believers can speak in terms of a priestly role. In the Christian Reformed Church, there are rules about official celebrations of the Lord's Supper, let's say, and they want an ordained person doing it. And so they have rules about who can and can't do it for an official. But you always have these unofficial things. And again, these things cut both ways. And so that's where this is from. But having said all that, part of what happened in sort of the loosey goosey tradition around Protestantism is that some of the ritual and formality and power that is built into the Roman Catholic tradition and sacrament of confession was lost. And so I think there are good many Protestant churches that could use way more structure around confession. Now, my friend Rod Hugin, his church, The Village, which is sort of halfway in the CRC, long history, for a number of years, they had a chair in their room called the Sinner's Chair. And you would sit in that chair if you needed to talk to somebody. And so it was kind of like a confessional booth, but then one of the other members would come and minister to you. So it was very Protestant. It wasn't just the ministers. Again, they're ministers. Notice the difference between minister and priest. Priest assumes an entire system. Minister is much more charismatic in that sense that they, in this moment, are functioning in an office. They don't hold that office all the time. They function in that office. And again, even in the Christian Reformed Church, which is a magisterial Protestant church, I hold an office. And this gets into the ideas of vestments and all of these things. So all of this stuff is at play in these issues. But again, I would say that when you lose certain traditions and rituals, there are almost always costs, even though there are also certain gains. And the interchange between Protestant Catholic, you're navigating all of this stuff. And so, yeah, Hank has decided to go that way. Now, part of what makes this so complex is that there are these boundaries that get crossed. So when you have this picture of the Pope receiving a blessing from an Anglican priest, I look at that and say Protestantism won. I'm not saying it's a bad thing that the Pope received the blessing from the Anglican archbishop. I'm just saying that that shows the Protestant frame and the way that the Protestant frame has impacted all of our imaginaries, including the imaginary of the Pope. Now it's up to the Pope to decide when to bend and give. And having that level of position in the Roman Catholic Church means some things, but it also means that when Roman Catholics who sort of understand a lot of this stuff, whether they can articulate it, or whether it's just intuitive in them and they feel something, it's because something's going on. It's an amazing thing. All right, good question. Andy, the writer again. If you think of the Christian faith as a center of gravity, for the first time in my life, in the first time ever in my life as a Christian, 40 years plus, I'm seeing people in the West being pulled into its orbit. That's right. The wave went out, the wave is tight, is coming in again. People who are in outer orbit like Dawkins are saying they see some merit to it. People closer in, but also not across the line like Jordan Peterson and Tom Holland have become advocates, but not proselytizers. Tom Holland is, Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson are proselytizing in what they're pointing out, even if they're not on a street corner as a street preacher saying, come to Jesus, I'll hear your prayer right now. And they're both keeping their relationship with churches private. I asked Jordan Peterson if he was baptized. He said, yes, as a child in the United Church of Canada. At least he thinks he was, he probably was. Tom Holland, I asked him, I mean, it's so weird. I talked with these guys and I asked, were you baptized? What difference does that make? Ah, all the world's Protestant. I'm not as Protestant as I could be, apparently, because actually Protestants is still trying to be part of the Catholic church, small c Catholic church. Find that in our Apostles Creed. So is Jordan Peterson in the church? He was baptized. Jordan Peterson could go in many, many Protestant churches and receive communion, even if they don't technically have open communion. So could Tom Holland. And this gets into that whole dynamic of, but are they going to church? Is Jordan and Tom going to church? I don't know, I don't follow them on Sunday morning. Poor Jordan Peterson, when he goes to a Catholic church with his wife, people take his picture and put it on social media. Poor fella. Tom Holland isn't quite so famous, lucky for him. Maybe now is the time when the faith needs friends from outside the faith. Yeah, that's always the case. That's always the case. Read the gospels and the disciples go out on their mission, two by two. And if there's a person of peace or a house of peace, how do we think about those households of peace? Similar dynamic. Then of course, there are people who come completely out of orbit. I and Hersey Ali, for example, Jordan Hall, for example. I'd be interested to see if this continues. I would say it's always happening. The question is sort of magnitude and attention. And I think Jordan was at the front end of, Justin Briley begins his book, The Surprising Return of Belief in God, with this Matthew Arnold quotation, which Douglas Murray had used, where, well, if tides go out, they can come in again. And it's coming in again. I think it clearly is. How high will it get? I don't know. Every time the tide comes in, it's a slightly different tide because the ocean is slightly different. We have a little estuary. And what the estuary does is sort of hold some of that water coming in and hold some of that water going out and slows it down so we can look into the tidal pools and see some of the crustaceans. Now, if you're standing on a cliff looking at the beautiful California coast, you don't see the crustaceans because they're very small. And what we do in this corner is sort of slow things down, get our feet wet, get into the tidal pool and look down and say, oh, that crustacean's named Luke. That crustacean's named Grizz. That crustacean's named Chad. Aren't they interesting? And they have other little crustaceans around them over in the hive mind. And waters come in and waters go out, nutrients come in from the ocean and fresh water comes in from the stream and we have a thriving little ecosystem. We have a thriving little ecosystem. How has Sunday morning estuary been? It's been great. Do you think people are any more or less likely to come than at other times? And are estuary members doing other things with Living Stones? We've had this dynamic for a while already because remember, you know, Rick came in because I made a video and Rick has stayed and we've got some other people, I won't necessarily out them here and now, who are at Living Stones because of the videos and we have regular visitors because of the videos. Again, it might be hard to get a randos conversation with me, but it's pretty easy to see me on Sunday morning. Indeed. Yeah, Swordfish, yeah, good luck in that tidal pool there, Swordfish, a Swordfish in the tidal pool. That'll be something. So, yeah. So what's happening on Sunday morning estuary is exactly a lot of what I wanted to happen. I'm sure some people in my church wanted 40, 50, 60 people every Sunday morning in estuary and then maybe a third of those staying for service. That's like the golden imagination and then lots of people start coming to service and you have to, for many church people, the Sunday service is really important and I loved how Jordan Hall talked about that and that he laid it out as did. Enough, enough, you're just gonna sit there, drink some bad coffee, it's only an hour, you shake a few hands and then you go home. How hard can it be? Well, ask Californians who are even members of church and only show up once or twice a month. Oh, realish. Rick is real. So what we have is that we have some people from the evening estuary and I have to get better at, I have to sort of prime the pump on the evening estuary because some of you know Josiah, he's having twins. He's having twins battening down the hatch. He gets a call for a church and he has to move and he has to get twins so poor Josiah can't run as many estuary meetings and so a lot of the estuary regulars in Sacramento, they're just having their own meetings, very Protestant of them. They're just doing their own meetings and they're building friendships and so usually a few people from the evening estuary who don't come to Living Stones and don't necessarily, good catch Nate in terms of identify as Christians. I use that to sort of be gentle with people. They come to estuary and what they're discovering and what the church people are discovering is, oh, well these are lovely people and we're having a lovely conversation and we're having a good time together and it's wonderful because the people in church are getting to know the other people. The other people are getting to know the people in church and they're sharing stories and you do this every week and you do it every week for a year, you're gonna have friendships and well, will you come for that worship service? Well, the worship service is a little different and so a lot of the people who have no church background look at the worship service and like, I'm not sure what's going on. Jordan Hall figured it out fast. So it's really cool what's happening. I'm loving it, I'm loving it. I'm a science and religion class at my university. It's taught by a professor who's a Catholic and an evolutionary biologist, pretty great mix. He's been defining religion this week. I remember the difficulty in defining this term. Can you summarize the idea of what religion is given the idea that it's really a thing unto itself until it wasn't the thing unto itself until the enlightenment? Your religion is your basic operating system in the world. That's really what it is. And just like the Windows or Mac OS or Android or they're sort of a low resolution analog for this, but your religion is very close. And this is what Jordan Peterson saw. And if you listen carefully to Jordan Peterson, the reason that he talks about religion in this way is he's trying to tell Sam Harris, Sam, you just keep pointing out religion. You don't even know what the thing is. Your religion is the filter through which you see the world. And it's the thing you act out. Jordan said at that Lafayette College question and answer back in 2018. It's the thing that you act out. It's why I've used this illustration in my men's group. You go to a, and it's also an illustration for symbolism and why symbolism and religion is so tightly joined. You go to a graveside service and you all act a certain way and different people do different things. And then they lower the casket in the ground and many of the people take flowers and they throw it in there. Now, after the service, you'd stop to say, why did you throw that flower in there? Sort of like a split brain patient, they'd make up an answer. Was that the reason you put it in? No, probably not. The reason was your religion. Well, but religions have lots of layers. Now, let's say someone went to there and they had just gotten some McDonald's food. So then they go to the service and they're doing the service and everybody is there dressed in nice clothing and they're somber and they're grieving. And he got some Yahoo over there with a Big Mac and a McDonald's cup and he's slurping up and people are just trying to ignore him. And everybody throws a flower in and he comes and he throws his McDonald's cup into the grave. That's the limit. Then everybody is pissed and someone reaches in and pulls that cup out and someone takes the guy by the collar and says, why don't you leave? What's happening? Religion's happening. Symbolism is happening. Now, it could be that the guy being taken by the cuff who threw his McDonald's in there tells a story. And the story he says is, most of you don't know me, but this guy here knew my parents. And for years I was in trouble and this guy came and helped me out. And the way he helped me, and we'd always meet at McDonald's and we'd have a Big Mac and a Coke together every month and he'd always buy for me. And whenever I was in trouble, he helped me. And so I had to show up at his funeral. And when all of you are throwing flowers in, the thing that connected me with him was this McDonald's cup of Coke. And so you all threw flowers in there and I threw the cup in there to honor him and what he did for me. They take their hands off him. They give him a hug. They learn his story. There's religion. It's all right there. All right there. How do you understand Matthew 15? If you're gonna drop a text in there, you gotta look it. It's, oh, okay. He replied, it's not right to take the children's bread and toss to the dogs. Yes, Lord, even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall on their master's table. Then Jesus said to her, woman, you have great faith. Your faith is granted. And her daughter was healed at that very moment. Part of the difficulty of dealing with Jesus is we're never quite sure exactly what he's doing, which is part of what's really godly about him. So John Sook, former member, pastor, banner editor, is kind of top of the hierarchy in the CRC. You can find it in his blog. Left the CRC, went to a United Church of Canada. I read a sermon that he had, or a pre-sermon thing. He was doing with his blog what I was doing with my blog for years. Read a pre-sermon thing, and basically he says Jesus is kind of a racist because of the way he treats that woman and what he says to that woman. Okay. Or was Jesus looking to make a point? Was Jesus looking to grow her faith by saying a thing that we now look back and say, well, that would be racist. But nobody then would have thought what Jesus was saying was racist. So, and there's so much I could say about that, so many levels to it, but Jesus is Lord, and he gets to push our buttons. In light of your investigation of Islam, my tiny little shallow one, Malcolm and Simone trying to build their own religion, what do you think of defining religion as a map of good and evil? Religions definitely map good and evil, but that's not all that they do. They do so much more. It's your basic operating system. It's sort of like saying, Windows helps me transfer, Windows has a firewall. Yeah, Windows has a firewall, but having a firewall is not all of what Windows does. A firewall is sort of like good and evil. A firewall says, this is good, I'll let it in. This is good, I'll let it out. This is evil, no entry. But Windows is far more than a firewall, just like religion is far more than defining good and evil, even though if you want to have a sense of your religion, look at what you label as good and evil. Van Gogh's Ear, how accurate would you say the description of hell is in Dante's Inferno? Ah, now we're bumping into modernity. Tell me what accuracy means. So, Peugeot in that interview, Freedom something or other channel that he did, and I used that in one of my videos where he talks about McGillchrist and this thing about deconstruction. So Peugeot talks about hell. Part of the difficulty for a lot of people listening to Peugeot is, we use heuristics to decide who will let in and out of our firewall. And a lot of the heuristics are propositional. And I noticed in the comment section on the Jordan Hall video, someone says, or on Twitter it was, someone says, does he believe in the resurrection? Now on one hand, as a heuristic, in a confessional church, in a propositional world, it's really helpful for me to say, I believe in the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ. Suddenly I am let through the firewall of a whole lot of people, that if I start saying all kinds of other things about the resurrection, that firewall shuts. So we use these words and these terms and these confessions as pass codes to get through different defenses, to get into different rooms, to have different conversations. Peugeot talks about Dante in that, because what Dante did with his Inferno was sort of illuminate the imagination for a lot of people. Now you can go to Grail Country. You can go to Grail Country and participate in the discussions about Dante's Inferno. But if you would say, well, is in the center of hell, is there really sort of a Satan you can put your finger on? And he's munching on Judas and with three heads and, and, and. Nice one, Gabby. Nice one. Yes. I, it's a hard question to answer. Tim Keller, when he was asked, do you think hell is full of fire and flames and devils with pitchforks? He gave an answer like to the degree of, well, those are images of something, but the reality is likely far worse. See, that gets complicated because look at Howard Hughes, Howard Hughes, playboy, slept with Hollywood starlets, read a biography of Howard Hughes a number of years ago. It's fascinating, fascinating. One of the wealthiest men in the world can have anything he wants. As an old man, he's sitting in, sitting surrounded by jars of his own urine. Is he in hell? Depends what you mean by in. So there, we have so many questions about so many things. Now, part of the problem is when you start talking this way, people then get the idea that, well, this is, this is all just like literature and stuff and fiction and stuff. Howard Hughes' hell was not fictional. But does it exhaust the judgment of God? Well, there's judgment of God in it. Now, what is the Bible talking about? So just, I point to Jesus and say, outer darkness, gnashing of teeth. What does that mean? The one thing you should take away is, you don't wanna be there or go there. And that's basically what Jesus said. Don't be afraid of the one that can cast your body into prison. Paul can sing hymns in prison. Be concerned with the one that can cast your soul into hell. Well, what does it mean to have a soul in hell? Well, it's not a question of what it means to have a soul in hell. I don't know that walking through all of the complexity of that is always necessarily worth it. Jesus sort of cuts to the chase and says, you can spend forever trying to figure this thing out, but what's it like to be a dog? You have no idea. You're never gonna figure it out. You can have all kinds of theories. You can do cognitive science of dogs. You can do all of that and you'll never know what it's like to be a dog. When you're a kid, I remember as a kid looking in the mirror and thinking, what will I look like when I'm 60 years old? Now I look in the mirror back at myself as a 60 year old and thought, I had no idea when I was a kid what it would be like to be 60 years old. I have an idea of what it's like to be a kid, but I can't really even recapture that perfectly. So asking a lot of questions that we can't answer can be a fun thing. Sometimes it can be an important thing, but pay more attention to the questions you can't answer. All right, have we gotten a lot of questions? All right, Charlie, finish typing your thing because I can't do this all day. I've got other things I gotta do today. Okay. The Van Gogh's year, the real issue with that question is what do you mean by accurate? And I know I sound like Jordan Peterson saying, what do you mean by believing God? But that's kind of where we're at. Gosh, CW. There you go, man. Sam Harris and others have stated the idea that one of the primary reasons people are Christian is because of fear of death or fear of going to hell. In other words, pastors use fear to control their congregations. Do parents use fear to control their children? Do dog owners use fear to control their dogs? We were in a place where two people, three people are standing at the edge of a cliff in Yosemite National Park. One slips and falls off. And the other says, I don't use fear to, I don't use fear to motivate you not to be careful around the edge of the precipice. He's a fool. Fear has its place. He's a fool. Fear has its place. I'm 63 years old now attending a Lutheran church, which grew up, but grew up CRC in Northwest Iowa. Fear of death or hell never really entered my mind. My reasons were much more to do with Christianity as a better way of living in the kingdom. That's right, because in a lot of ways, there are some people that have been driven by fear. And what has happened in our world is that that's no longer a terribly effective thing. Fear isn't a bad thing. You should be, when you get near the edge of a cliff. So a little bit of fear of heights is a good thing. The way, the truth and the life and your experience as pastor, what do you see most people primary motivation for believing and living a Christian life? I'll go all the way back to the beginning of this podcast and talk about love. That's, if you love me, you'll keep my commandments. Peter, do you love me? Jesus, Jesus would talk about fear. And he said, don't fear the one who can throw your body into prison. Fear the one who can throw your soul into hell. Yeah, okay, fear's got its place. But in my experience, I used to have a thing up my sleeve. I used to have a thing up on my wall in the 21st century. I'll elaborate, it was from a church growth book. But basically, that isn't working. So when evangelism explosion would go door to door and basically knock on doors and say things like, if you died tonight, how, what would you say to Christ to let him and let you into his kingdom? And that was sort of a variation on, if you die tonight, you're probably going to hell. How do you know that you're not going to hell? Hell avoidance is no longer as potent a strategy for motivating people to come to church as it used to be. Because many people no longer have a sense of eternal judgment. Now, is that a bad thing? I think there are issues. I think people should fear judgment more than they do. Because you're almost saying judgment isn't real. How does this tie into the fear of the Lord? Well, it has a tie. Fear is sometimes awe. Fear is sometimes terror. Genesis or Exodus, when God thunders from the mountain, he says, I'm going to say this. I want to give them a good dose of fear so that they obey me. And it doesn't work. Work somewhat. Doesn't work. I mean, that's how all these things sort of go. Okay, did God say that? Because God was mistaken about how kind of a motivator fear would be. Or maybe God said that because God wanted to show us that fear has its place. But the kind of obedience I want is free. It comes out of love. I don't want my children visiting. Most of my children have left home. My wife and I, so Christmas arrives. My kids are like, what do you want for Christmas? I don't want anything for Christmas. All I want for Christmas is your presence. And I don't mean presents. I mean, you being in the house. That's all I want for Christmas. It's the highlight of my day. It's all I want. And I remember my parents saying things like that. I didn't understand. Now I understand. I don't want my kids coming home because, if I don't come home, then dad is really going to turn the screws on me. He's going to play manipulative emotional games. I want them coming home because they love me. And they love their mom. That's why I want them. But at the same time, if I see one of my kids kind of going near the edge, I'll say, not near in the same way that I did when they were small. I mean, that might threaten a timeout or even a spanking or something like that. I don't think, did I even spank any of my kids? I don't think I did. Timeouts were effective enough and withholding things here and there, those were effective enough. It's love. It's love. It's love. It's love, people. It's love. It's the center of the Christian faith. All right. Oop, oop. Where are we? How is it that we feel love, emotion, connection with someone we've never met or ever will meet? My grandfather passed away before I was born and I get emotionally thinking about when he went to the afterlife, hoping he's in a good place. Is that irrational? No, it's not irrational. It's completely human. And we're designed to do it. And this is exactly, again, a lot of times we're just thinking, again, a lot of the point of this little corner. And part of what John Vervecky has gifted us with is this idea of the imaginal. Because if you say, and this has a lot to do with language and its valence, if you say imaginary, I should leave this. If you say imaginary, post-enlightenment, then everybody's sort of dismissive. So you change the word a little bit. And so, Nathan complains about that. And yeah, okay, I see your point. You change the word a little bit and suddenly it's imaginal instead of imaginary. But when Charles Taylor uses the word imaginary, he's not using it the way we do. This is how rhetoric works. You change the word a little bit and suddenly it means something else. Language is a powerful tool like that, but it can be used in many different ways and it can be destroyed. So you have a relationship with a grandfather that you've never met. What that imaginal, what that does is, let's say your grandfather left you a million dollars and you never met him. You're grateful to him for leaving you a million dollars because on the basis of a million dollars, you're able to buy a house, you're able to get a start in business, you're able to do a bunch of things because your grandfather loved you. Your grandfather didn't even know you. That's part of the power of families. Let's say if, okay, so this little corner becomes a thing and Paul VanderKlay becomes outrageously wealthy and famous and powerful and all of those things. And so, my kids are, I don't have any grandchildren yet. Now at the age of 60, my father had 10 by this age. My father had 10 when he was in his 50s, 10 grandchildren. That's the way it's going. Kids are a little slow off the block to produce what their parents really want out of this, part of what they want. Let's say I become more wealthy than Jordan Peterson and in my will, I leave my millions to my great grandchildren and I die before they're even born. Well, that imaginal capacity will mean that my great grandchildren in some ways have a relationship with me even though I'm dead. And that relationship is mediated by the inheritance. And if you read the Bible, this language permeates the Bible. Often in the New Testament, heavenly reward is called an inheritance. Now that's a weird thing because inheritance seems to come from the past and heavenly reward seems to come in the future. Time is weird in the Bible. So no, it's not a weird thing at all. You're doing right. So love your grandfather. And people are emotionally connected to Abraham Lincoln or Martin Luther King Jr. or Benjamin Franklin or Franklin Delano Roosevelt or Jesus or Moses or Mohammed or the Buddha or on and on and on and on and on and on. That's how we work. That's how in fact our relationships work now, even when we're alive. It's just a lot more difficult to be in a relation. There was a situation in the Dominican Republic when a pastor died. That dead pastor was my most problematic pastor. Why? Because everybody was speaking for him. Oh, well, if pastors so and so were alive today, he wouldn't say that. He would say this. That's like, well, the pastor isn't here to say, to make the judgment between you. So the wife says one thing and a guy who worked under him said another thing and they're all fighting over what this pastor would have said. It's the way the stuff works. How in the world do you have time to keep up with the videos around this little corner? I've spent last week trying to make it work. And even at two times speed, I find I missed two live streams in a video. You cannot keep up with all of the videos. Most of you cannot even keep up with just my videos. Nevermind my videos and Verbecky's videos and Peugeot's videos. And this is part of the combinatorial explosiveness of the corner. How do I try to keep up with this? Even though I... I have time for two to four conversations a week. And he's like, well, why aren't there more rando slots? It's because that's kind of what I have time for. Maybe on a week, a big week, five or six, max. So I can't have that many randos conversations and the number of videos being created has proliferated. So, and I think... I wish I could take credit for my brilliance in designing all of this, but I have no such brilliance and so I should take no such credit. Part of why some of you watch my channel is because I'm watching other channels and I take little bits of what they've done and I say, this is the important part. So now you don't necessarily have to watch that whole Jordan Peterson video. You can just watch my video because I'm doing the filtering for you. We're outsourcing our relevance realization. That's how humans and community work. Part of the reason I keep very close eye on Grim Grizz's channel and Chad's channel is because I trust their salience filters. And they watch other channels that I don't have time to watch and they point me to things that I should pay attention to. And so I can't watch everything, but I'm watching the other people, what they're watching. And everyone is doing the same thing through me. And it becomes a big chain of, dum, dum, dum, distributed cognition. Cause we're distributing and outsourcing our time. We are actually multiplying the amount of time because none of us have enough time to watch everything. And so what happens is that there develops a hierarchy and I can't watch everything, but I can probably get the salient bits by watching these other people. And so that's why I often include other people's videos on my channel and many of the channels downstream from me, Chad and Grizz, they do that too. Now, Karen Wong almost never does that. I keep an eye on Karen's channel because in terms of who she's finding to think. So I've outsourced an element of my cognition to Karen, but Grizz and Chad, I keep close eye on their channels because Chad, by virtue of his vocation, Chad and Grizz keep a real good eye on the corner. And so I listen to them because they keep me up to date. Same thing works in church. Even though my church is very small right now, I listen to my council. Why? Because the people on my council are in relationship in different ways with other people in the church. So I keep an eye on the church through the council. I keep an eye on the corner through the rest of you. And some of you send me links on Twitter. Some of you send me emails. Some of you send me texts. Some of you send me, some of you put it in the comments. I keep an eye on all of those modes of communication, even at the price of watching other people's videos because I'm using all of you as a filter. Okay. A lot of animals in estuary are filter animals. Why? So waves come in and they bring nutrients in from the ocean and those little, now I might be getting some of the biology wrong. So be gentle with me. But those little urchins and those little crabs, something floats along and they take it. Well, we human beings, we're always watching each other. So I see Luke take something because he's king crab, he says. And so, oh, Luke got that. I'm gonna go look where Luke looked. So then I go look where Luke looked. Oh, Luke found something. So I'm doing distributed cognition through Luke. I'm doing it through Jacob. I'm doing it through Chad. I'm doing it through our so we're doing it through each other. And that's how you keep up with the corner. And over time, generally speaking, not always important things will sort of rise to the surface. And so the corner itself has a consciousness and we are participating in that consciousness. It's distributed to it among us This is what we're doing. You can't watch everything, just like this is the combinatorial explosiveness problem. You can't pay attention. There's too many things in the world. So the amazing things about human beings is that we network together. But Vervecki's point about well, the bias and the relevance realization are the same thing. Exactly right. We're all in this hive mind and we're all paying attention to, you know, that Jacob launched yet another war about leadership of the coroner. We all pay attention to it. And a whole bunch of people are like, you're going to pay attention to that thing again? It didn't get us anywhere the last two times we paid attention to it. So then you start paying attention to something else. And then Jordan Hall becomes a Christian. Oh, pay attention to that. And then two or three days later, maybe that loses its salience. And of course, this happened on a larger scale. When Jordan Peterson came up, we paid attention to Jordan Peterson, that a bunch of people stopped paying attention, but other people kept paying attention. And so all of that negotiation is always happening between us. So to try to keep up with the corner by watching everything. Well, if you could do that, God bless you. And then please report back to us what you find. Jacob, you are a key member of this little corner one way or another, and you are creative and you love people. You really do. That's why you can be so caustic sometimes. You really do love people. You really do care. You've got a good heart and a tender heart. And you start new things and they don't all work. But that's the dilemma of innovators. Innovators start 10 things for every one thing that's actually actually success. So and I can tell all these things to you, just like Jesus told Peter, you'll deny me and can't stop Peter. None of this is going to stop you, Jacob, because you are who you are. I praise God for who you are. You're always launching new things and you're doing creative things and you're bringing vitality to the corner. That's exactly what you do. And many more of you do too. And that's the way it goes. That's the way it goes. So that's how we work together and that's what we're doing. And so the corner is richer for Jacob Federechi. The corner is richer for Nathan Orman. The gospel is richer. Now, don't carry this too far. The gospel is richer for Peter and Judas. It's all part of the play. So even where do you go? Even our even our defender of the Enlightenment. I don't know, did anybody ban him from the comments? Even for him. Even for him. That's why I have only sort of silenced two or three people in six years and I don't block people on Twitter. There are other tools by which I can sort of mute people if they're getting under my skin or if I find myself, you know, I don't want to wear my buttons on the outside because if you wear your buttons on the outside, the whole world of trolls is going to press them. So don't do that. Keep your buttons on the inside and have a little bit of a poker face sometimes. Wear a mask sometimes. It's a very useful thing. But you don't want to, again, this is the fringe argument. You don't want to exile all your enemies. Keep your friends close and your enemies closer. Why would someone say that? Oh, and now I'm not saying that Jacob or Nathan are my enemies. I don't consider them that way. And neither neither Grogan, the guy who's defending the Enlightenment, he's probably lost patience with me and wandered off. But yeah, exactly. Exactly. So this is this is what we do. And it's a beautiful thing. And I'm loving it. I'm absolutely loving it. And I don't I don't mind when people denounce me or call me out or say I'm doing it wrong. It's absolutely fine. It's absolutely fine. I won't say that it never gets under my skin or I don't get tired of it or anything like that. And every now and then I won't lose my temper and, you know, use my status to smack someone down or even mock them or something like this. I will do that sometimes. But yeah, it's this is this is this is this is what it means to be a human being. And this is the game we're developing. Okay, Peter K. How are we doing on time? Oh, gosh, what a mess. I was thinking we post questions here, but now I'm not sure. Yes, you post questions here. Pineapple pizza. Okay. 49ers win the Super Bowl. That's a hard question for me to answer, because if I say no, boy, I've got Freddie and Nancy and a whole bunch of people at Living Stones that are going to be all over me. Last week at Living Stones when the Niners were playing the Lions, you just look out at a sea of red, everyone decided that the thing they needed to wear to church was their 49er outfits. And someone might say, is this really appropriate church attire? I mean, it's kind of a conflict between the church of the 49ers and the church. And so now in the corner, you got Kansas City versus the Bay Area. Who do I think will win? It's impossible to know. Football is so unpredictable. That's what makes it fun to watch. I wondered if the Lions would win. Boy, I know a lot of people in Michigan that would have been so happy if the Lions had won. I don't know who's going to win. I don't know who's going to win. I just want a good game out of it. I don't really have a favorite between the two. I don't know who's going to win. I don't know who's going to win. I just want a good game out of it. I don't really have a favorite between the two. Good morning, Chad. Using the frame of the Imaginary Silk Road, could you give us a description of the book you have yet to write? What's it about? What are your hopes for this book? What would you have done differently if you had to rewrite it? I have like, part of the reason videos work for me and books don't is that I'm so ADHD. I can, when I have an idea, make a video quickly and then move on from it. What happens inside my head is I have an idea for a book and I start to work on it, but I have another idea, depending on sort of the pacing of it, either a day later or a week later or a month later or a year later. So if I read, a book requires sort of a sustained vision and what that means is that when and if I ever do write a book, it's going to have to be something really deep inside of me that gets sort of sustained in terms of my attention hierarchy. For that reason, it'll be a Christian book. Well, any book I read is going to be a Christian book. So I've actually thought about doing booklets because there are times, part of the weakness of what I'm doing is that I'm not giving sustained attention to certain things that deserve sustained attention. Now I do give that and that I come back around to things. So you might have noticed that, you know, a couple weeks ago, I'm talking about Islam. I didn't talk about Islam at all this week. A month or two later, I might cycle back onto the Islam thing. And that's the thing that I'm talking about. And that way video and the pace that I'm working sort of works for me. So, but at the same time, and that's why I say a book probably won't happen until some of the structural aspects of my life change. So right now, I've got a church I've got to manage. I've got, my family is in a very active phase. I don't have any grandchildren. My wife and I are both working. Our relationship has certain patterns. My father didn't write the book that he wrote. And you read it. I know, Chad, you picked it up online, which is really fun. There are hardly any hard copies out there. So lucky are you. He didn't write that until he retired, because then suddenly he didn't have a church to mind. And then he was doing interim pastoring in churches. So he wrote it in a little pause where he had about six months. Now that's why people often write books during sabbaticals. Now the Christian Forum church, you should give your pastor a sabbatical every five years or seven years. And I've been in the ministry since, formal ministry since 1991. I've never had a sabbatical. I don't say that to complain. Living Stones, there are sabbaticals I could apply to that would, you know, give Living Stones money and pay for me to go around the world and all this stuff. And I could probably get one, except I'm getting towards the end of my career. So I'm getting out of this little window that these sabbatical funding places want to do. But anyway, others of my colleagues have done it. I haven't partly felt the need for a sabbatical because I so love the rhythm of weekly worship and ministry and the rhythm of the corners even faster. And what the coroner has managed to do is multiply the number of people without necessarily having me to manage weddings, funerals, baptisms, graduations. If I had a church the size of the corner, you would hear me on Sunday sermons, you would almost never get a chance to talk to me. And because I would be dealing with all of the various levels of elders, deacons and small group leaders that make up a local large church. And what we're seeing is that the church is not just a small church, it's a large church. And what we're playing with via the internet is all sorts of other different ways of relating. Yeah, Phlebas is right. You're also supposed to move every five to ten years. Phlebas knows. Oh Jacob, this is the difficulty of naming. Because how many hundred of people know anything of you? And you're a pretty important part of the corner. And this is why I sort of pushed back on Grizz when and Chad when we had the when we had Rick, you know, Walker in here a couple of weeks ago. Name the savings throws. So then when Trey was up for a couple of weeks because it was dog watching for someone and so he came to Sunday morning estuary, two Sunday mornings in a row and he got to meet us and he got to be in here for worship and it was so much fun having Trey here. And Trey's on the Freddie and Paul show. Name Grim Grizz's savings throw. Now is Trey in the corner? Yes. Can he name Grim Grizz's savings throws? No. Well you have to be able to. Oh now we're getting into these other kinds of structures, these gatekeeping structures. Who's in the corner and who's not? How much Grim Grizz do I have to watch to be in the corner? How much Fedoretti do I have to watch to be in the corner? How much PVK do I have to watch to be in the corner? Even just understanding what on earth this corner is, is itself a shibboleth. It's a gatekeeping device because people hear about it and Simon and Simone and Malcolm, you know, when they tell me about this corner, what's going on? Where to start? How can I describe it? It's really hard to describe. So yeah, depending on, it's like who's in Living Stones. There was a banner article once that came out and there was a, the article was completely different and the person mentioned in the article said they lived a few hundred miles down the valley. They said they were members of Living Stones Christian Reformed Church in Sacramento. I've never met you. I'm used to this very, this very difficult to talk about thing of membership. Now you can have a church that really minds those frontiers and polices those boundaries and that has value. This little corner, really tough thing to figure out. Joseph, I noticed a distinct parallel between your division of deconstruction that glorifies and deconstruction that desecrates. To the rabbinical concept, Jacob and I are often mentioning of arguments for the sake of heaven, iron sharpening iron towards heavenly pursuit of truth, goodness, and arguments for the sake of, arguments not for the sake of heaven. Filet-O-Nikea, zero sum. However, the deconstruction framing is propositional while the arguments, I'd like to say, is participatory. Excellent observation. Very, yes, very true. One of the critiques we've heard multiple times, including this week in CW's great conversation with Nathan, but earlier from me, Matt C, the jazz professor talking to John Breveke, is that one element that seems to be missing from dialogue estuary is how to have healthy arguments. Yes, true. Whereas the wild arguments are usually either automatically seen as bad or unhealthy. Of course, if you're not ever experienced healthy arguments, would you paint them as a bad thing? No. Do you have thoughts whether the estuary specifically or more broadly for this little corner and how we might teach the wisdom of healthier arguments? Obviously, embodying them is a big one, but we can argue whether BOM or our live streams really do this well, and I'd say whether they could do it well. So the Dutch and the Jews, now there's a reason there's a connection between the Dutch and the Jews because a lot of the Jews went to the Netherlands. The Dutch and the Jews, and to this degree in the Christian Reformed Church, is known. If you go to a place like Northwest Iowa, you will find families fighting about the Christian Reformed Church. Brutal, brutal fights, and then they sit down and have Thanksgiving dinner together. They don't break bonds even though they go after each other hammer and tong. This is part of the reason I'm not offended when Jacob goes off on me, which he does semi-regularly, if not in the comment section, then on his channel, or he'll just text me. It's so funny. Jacob's a Jew. I grew up in New Jersey. This is how people are. It's just how he is. I hate you. I never want to talk to you again. Oh, okay. It's like a kid saying that to its parent. I hate you and I never want to talk to you again. All right. It's the poverty of parenting today where people come, my child said that they hated me. Oh gosh, grow up. It's a child. So no, you're exactly right, Joseph. And part of this has to do with this whole culture of nice that we have developed and goodness. C.S. Lewis wrote about this. Goodness and niceness are equated. And now there's good things about niceness. There's being polite. But one of the things that healthy communities can do is have big disagreements. And this is modeled and just read the, just look at the fights that are going on in the desert wanderings. The Lord is like, stand back, Moses. I'm going to let them have it. I'm going to blast them and we're going to build a new nation from you. Moses goes, no, no, no, let's not. And then Moses, and then Moses, he's upset. He's like, Lord, why did you bring me out here and, and, and, and, and, and the Lord's like, Oh, Moses, just settle down. We all play this role with each other. And it bears witness to the strength of love and the relationship. You could find this, you'll have some married couples that you have some relationships that can't weather one argument and you'll have some relationships that are arguing all the time. And, and counselors know this, some relationships that argue all the time, argue in a certain way that it isn't destructive and it's actually helpful. And you have some relationships that argue all the time and it is destructive and they should stop it and knock it off. And sometimes it's some of both. So, no, it's a great point. It's a great point. Oh boy. Yeah. Someone is someone, someone came to Living Stones. He doesn't listen to my stuff. So came to Living Stones, could never join because of some situations in his family, but gave faithfully to the church, participated in everything, moved away, life changed in some dramatic ways. And now he's in town just for the afternoon and texts me, I'm free for the afternoon. Do you have any time? I'm going to be in a zoom call with other ministers. I'm doing this right now. Pete's going to come in. I got to do rough draft for Sunday. Am I going to do, I've got four ideas in my mind for videos. That's kind of what my life is like. And I love it. I love it. It's great. I just wish I could do it all. When we've been there 10,000 years bright shining as the sun, we've no less days to sing God's praise and to enjoy God's people than when we first begun. Do you think God is capable of being surprised? I keep rereading the ending of Job where God enters to ask some questions. I get the impression that he isn't saying, where were you in a derogatory manner that's meant to make Job feel smaller and significant. I read that as if God is saying, this is a surprise moment, as in compared to all the great and terrifying things that was put in motion. He's also shocked to find the good man somewhere emergent out of fallen creation. That's right. Just read the stories of Jesus and think about if you don't believe in the divinity of Christ, then a lot of the stories like the one I'm preaching on this Sunday, for a moment focus on Jesus is going through a mob and you just get the sense that he's been pressed on every side. Everybody is touching him and this woman with an emission of blood thinks, if I can only get to him and touch him, I'll be healed. And she makes her way through the crowd. Of course, probably making everyone else she touches ceremonially unclean, but not letting them know. And she reaches out and she touches Jesus and Jesus says, who touched me? And his disciples say, what do you mean who touched you? Everyone's touching everyone. Why did Jesus say that? Why does God show up in the garden in Genesis three and say to Adam, where are you? Then you run into these things. I think God wants to play with us. Just like, you know, if you have a toddler, rough and tumble play, you've got a toddler and, you know, they come up and they wrestle you and you fall to the ground so they can get access to your head and your face and you're all over and you pick them up and you put them down, but then you let them do stuff and you're just like, oh, I'm going to be a good man. And you're like, I'm going to do stuff and I don't think the fact that we don't have a sense of what it's like to be a dog, even though dogs are an animal that we love and we're real close to and we project like heck on them and all that's really cool. How on earth would we have a sense of what it's like to be God? In this thing on Ruslan, I said it really well. Part of what you give up if you give up the deity of Christ is this connection between heaven and earth. And I totally understand why the debate about the divinity of Christ is fierce given that it's only fierce because of the Jewish roots of it. It's not fierce if you're a pagan. There's lots of gods all over the place. Oh, okay. So I am not a cat. I'm yeah, I know we saw you with the cat. So yeah, John Calvin, Paul Van der Kley is going to quote John Calvin. Shock. Paul Van der Kley isn't really reformed. He just quoted John Calvin. Anybody can quote John Calvin. Anybody can quote John Calvin. John Calvin said, God condescends. And I would say God condescends to play with us for our good and for his glory. He wrestles with Jacob. And John Calvin says, he fights Jacob with one hand and he upholds him with another hand because how could anybody wrestle with God? This is the game of theology and how we play it. So I think when Jesus says, who touched me? Well, how on earth would you figure out how on earth would you figure out how man could be, how God could become man and what that would feel like on the inside? These questions are too wonderful. Who coined the moniker PVK? Oh gosh, I've used it forever. Name as long as mine, Paul Van der Kley. How many letters that is? Initials. And it's nice that it's a three. There's not something nice about three letter initials because JP can be Jonathan Peugeot or Jordan Peterson, which is why I always use JBP. So we know that's Jordan B. Peterson and I seldom use JP for Jonathan Peugeot because it's confusing. I forget what Jonathan Peugeot's middle name is, but I could say Jonathan Pajow. Thank you. Thank you, William. PVK coined PVK. The English language coined PVK. Yes, it predates YouTube. It definitely predates YouTube. I've been PVK for many years. Jacob had a stream and the term trauma bonding came up. As far as I was aware, this term that refers to a toxic relationship between a narcissist and their victim. Can you identify traits of a narcissist that people can look out for? Oh, there's this channel that my friend Rod Hare always points me to. It's an Israeli psychotherapist and his channel is almost all about trauma and narcissism and all of this stuff. And you know, we all have a narcissist. A narcissist takes a aspect, normally healthy aspect of personality to an unhealthy degree. And you know, we can develop this whole, we use this category of healthy and unhealthy as if we know what it means. It's sort of like the, yeah, psychology is going to continue to be unmasked in terms of its religious pretense as we go into the future because people are just that complex and they have overplayed their hand in many respects. So a narcissistic person, I'm not even going to try and answer it. It's just way too complex. And that's not a term. I'm not a psychologist. I think we have sort of a common sense that a narcissist makes everything all about them, even when it shouldn't be. And you can spot it in people. And there are moments of narcissism in all of us. And there are enduring patterns of narcissism in others. And when people demonstrate those patterns, be careful around them. Hi, Paul, apart from the obvious, where do you see the disagreement, where do you see the disagreement with John Vervecki? I've got lots of disagreements with John Vervecki. I got lots of disagreements with my wife. You know, obviously one of the big disagreements is I, the term theist isn't a great term either. And so I say I'm a theist, he's a non-theist. Well, yeah, I'm a Christian. He's, you know, exploring neo-Platonism. But there's a lot of Christianity in John from a very young age. I would say Jesus is Lord in a way that he won't. And that has, you know, the changes things as it goes down the stack. So, but I really like John. John's a wonderful human being. I really enjoy him. He's not a perfect human being. And I know there's some people around here that are a little sore with John for this or that. And there are a lot of people out here. Remember when I talked about the gates and language that we use them as gates? It's not a bad thing. We need gates. We need boundaries. We need borders. You have to decide in a minute how you're going to react to someone. And that's another video that I haven't made. But part of the reason I don't, you know, people want me to go talk to this person on the internet, that person on the internet, this person. And maybe now because your channel's large enough, you can have conversations with all these people. Sort of like Jordan Peterson is doing. And again, absolutely nothing wrong with what Jordan Peterson is doing. I don't like it because I would rather have a deeper relationship with a few people than a very shallow relationship with lots of people. And when I do a conversation online, I would rather have 50 conversations with John Verveke than one conversation with 50 high status Christians. Because I think part of what makes conversation good is the potential for relationship. And none of us have enough time in our lives to have potential for relationships. So John Mark Comer talked a lot about Dunbar numbers. The reason that's very salient for him is because he's been a local church pastor and Dunbar numbers are something that local church pastors deal with all the time. How much time should I spend with this person? How much time does this person require? Where should I devote my time? How much time should I spend in my study reading books? How much time should I devote to dead people through their books? Pastors are always dealing with those questions. And because we're dealing with people, and it's that so many modern institutions have ways of taking this off the board. If I'm a therapist, make an appointment. I'll see you once a week for an hour and you're going to pay me for it. And our relationship is going to be in this little box by design. If I'm a medical doctor, I'm going to see you depending on how your health is going. But this is our relationship in this little box. That's modernity. My relationships with people are really loose ended. And so I'm always managing Dunbar numbers, just like this friend texting me right now. I haven't even answered him. Do you have any time this afternoon? I'm racking my brains trying to think, how am I going to pick and choose between who needs me most and what I want to do most? And whether I really want to see him while he's in town only for a couple of days, but he's got daughters that live here and he's here with his new wife and he wants to see Living Stones people. And he and I have had a good relationship because we really hit it off and we were at an important point of time in his life and, and, and, and, and, and, and it's combinatorial explosiveness with respect to relationship, which on one hand is glorious. And on the other hand, tortured because we're limited by time and space. Poor Jacob. Jacob is an illustration over and above here. If you weren't so visible, Jacob, I wouldn't use you. I love spending time with Jacob. Jacob, Jacob is so much fun. That's why, you know, you go to Jacob's channel, there's always got a group of people around him. And when Jacob came to Sacramento, he says, I'm going to take you out for steak. And he and I went to Outback Steakhouse and he told me about Trinity Broadcast Network. And he told me about his form of Judaism and he told me about his life and he told me, and it was just, Jacob is just a fascinating, interesting person. And he does love, he does have a huge capacity for love to lash out because in my experience, lovers lash out because they love. Yeah, 45 minutes are up. So that's why this is so torturous because churches create a community that creates an environment for love. And then we can't love each other as well as we could because of time, space, personality, hurts, wounds, limitations. And that's what's so glorious about the vision of the kingdom of God and life in the age to come, because you get a sense that a lot of these ceilings on love will be lifted. What does that mean? I really don't know how it'll work. But if you ask me what this little corner is about, it's that we're getting more and more chance to love each other. We're getting more and more chance to love each other. That's a good thing. That's a good thing. And we're doing it through these, I'm sitting alone in this room talking to this camera. What a good thing. We're learning to love online instead of do all that other crappy stuff we do online. Isn't it worth it? Yeah, it's worth it. Yeah, it's a very long sermon, Kate. It's a very long sermon. And what's fun for me is, you know, and like, you know, here's Sandy. There's Gavin got a chance to get to meet Gavin's wife just a little bit. I had a chance to get to know Phlebas and had a chance to get to know Luke and, you know, even chance to know this cat, even if it's hard to say his name. Why would you name your account this? Almentry, he's over on other channels and CW and, you know, on and on and on through the stream, on and on and on through the stream. We're stretching the Dunbar numbers here. And, you know, I don't, we're far beyond just the randos conversations and we're going to keep doing them. But, you know, I know some of you because you show up on the other streams and I get a little bit of you over on Jacob's channel or on Grail Country or in Grim Grizz or on Chad's channel and Chad's, you know, leaning into this, doing these conversations. And so then when I see something that's, I think, helpful for more people to see, I pull it up on my channel and I put it into a video and then five or ten people find Chad's channel and then find Chad or Grizz or Jacob or someone else. Oh, another little connection. And most, we don't have time in our life for all of these relationships to go, but in the age to come in the kingdom of God, the promise is, well, we're not going to have the age of decay to contend with. And how will we do with that? Yeah, Sherry, you know, how many people here? You know, William, mostly known through the comments section. So, you know, I got a chance to get a chance to know McMoe through his conversation with Neil. So, yeah, that's what this is about. Let me shoot. I got more questions. OK, I'll try to sneak a real short one. Did Jesus deke? Oh, end of today's question. Ah, I don't have to answer any of the other questions. I can't help but read them though. Oh gosh, those questions. All right, so I'm going to, oh gosh, I don't have any time, but just because I like you, if anybody wants to come in here, and I can't spend a lot of time in the after show, but there's the link, boys and girls. And if you want to come in for the after show and say something, you know, 10, 15 minutes, that's it. And then I've got to answer my friend and I've got to do my rough draft and I've got a Zoom call with other pastors. And I think if we're going to have another video for Monday, besides maybe I'll release the verveci video on Monday. I don't know. I've got to edit another video. And so if you want to come in, now's the chance. Yeah, that's right. It's hard to keep up with in real life friends because it's, well, it's richer as it should be. Oh, here they come. You know, we'll still be here next time. Even though I only get to pop in when I'm not working. Go see your friend. We'll still be here loving you. Oh, thank you, Sandy. Thank you, Sandy. And thank you, Andre. How's the cat? I saw the cat on the live stream before. She's right here. She's sitting right next to the screen, making sure I like watch the whole thing. Well, what'd you guys want to say? I never stopped loving you. But like listening to you, maybe love Jacob more. Have love for Chad. Grim is okay. I'm getting to know him. I know you love him, but like. Yeah, we can't. We won't all love each other the same. Mm hmm. It'll be different. And that's good. Yeah, I'm trying. Give everyone a chance. If we all loved each other the same, some of us would never be loved. Very true. Very true. Oh, how have you been? Good. I think it was very good answers. I couldn't stick around for the whole thing because I was. You say you have ADHD and I believe you. I also have ADHD and sometimes it goes off the rails a bit. And that's why I was saying I'm not typing too fast. You're typing too slow. And I realized I'm saying this to like an audience of like 20 different people. So usually if there's one person who's doing something and 20 other people doing it, completely other behavior maybe it is my fault. So I should say that a little bit. I could do that much. You've got a fancy mic there. Have you been putting out videos or doing something with it? I did a live stream for four hours before I came here on Jacob's channel. Oh, wonderful. That's where the trauma bonding question came from. I talked about that with Sandy for a long time. And the problem is people misunderstand trauma bonding as sort of like a toxic parasitic relationship, which yes, it can be, and narcissistic. And I also made a joke about trauma bombing because the original question was what is the strongest form of community? So my original answer was, well, of course it's bodybuilding, the strongest. Took a while for them to get it. Had some good input from like Grim Grizz and Chad and like a bunch of people in the chat. But I think Grim said something about trauma. And I made the joke, which didn't land correctly about, well, trauma bombing would be the best community because they're most active, because you're not worried about conserving the community. You just move on to the next person. Because the process is like, you want to bomb as many people as possible. Just listen to my problems. Like, okay, you've listened, next person. And I think someone read that with like, hang on, trauma bonding is bad. I'm like, yeah, that's okay. I need to explain it again. Once we explained that you don't go to a specific echo chamber of a trauma bonding community with no hope of getting to an end purpose, but you actually work through a process. And Sandy told me this was important. In tandem with a TALOS and like success statements, that's when it really works. And also usually has to be one where it's a mixture of people with trauma and people who don't have it, as well as like just general depression and anxiety. Because if you're only around traumatized people, you get to a certain point where everyone is too traumatized. No one can make a first step. And it's just, it's toxicity almost. Yep. Yep. Yep. That's true. That's true. Oh, we got a whole bunch of people in here. Aaron, you were next. What do you have to say? I actually have kind of a question if I could ask you. Okay. So I guess speaking of trauma, my older brother recently said that he was going to be an uncle, which is great. But then I got a text. I worked late, but I got a text really late that he passed away. Or I mean, it's in the womb, so it's like, you know, it's, it doesn't really see there's no more. I'm not really sure the science of it, but I wasn't sure, I guess, how to deal with that or how to be a good brother. This is just in the last day or so. Yeah. I mean, I saw him, it would have, uh, my nephew called me AA. And then my older brother said like, Hey, Leo, you're going to have your own AA. He told me that Thursday and, uh, I think either Thursday or Tuesday, actually. And today's Friday. Does your brother live close? Can you go to him or does he live far away? He lives close. Okay. We'll go visit him. Yeah. We lost the one right before my oldest that has, um, autism and all the stuff I usually talk about, uh, 16 weeks along. That was really tough. There's a ton of things nobody warns you about. And, um, yeah. And then we almost, then we had issues with almost losing, um, my older son at birth, cord around the throat and stuff. Um, my ex, yeah, he, I don't think he, when we came to the next one, even like a year later, I don't, he was in the special care nursery all night and, um, but he also didn't know if, he didn't know at all what to say or do like with me and the whole, that whole process the year before. It's a tough spot. Be good years. Just, you know, just be with your brother. Yeah, it's a big thing. Give him attention, care for him. Do what you're his brother. So you know him and you know each other. So do something for him that would help him to know that you, you know, and care. Okay. I will. Uh, thank you for that. Alan enough. What would the, of the enough fame. Yeah, exactly. The, uh, right after I, uh, tell everybody to go to church and leave the corner, I, uh, start showing up to things in the corner, but, uh, Hey, I'm participating. I'm not a lurker. Okay. Anymore. I've recovered. Yeah. I guess part of, uh, one thing I wanted to bring up though, just in my life and also I think really related, uh, recently on like on my heart, I feel like it's really been put to work with other men, especially in my church and even at like a more traditional church. Uh, it's very, I, I've, I've suddenly found that it's very hard, uh, to, I feel like it's hard for men to participate. And as a guy who's not the traditional man's man, uh, who, when I rest for, you know, I didn't even rush, I went to two, two separate events. I was like, nope, don't want this. Like, uh, I'm now like, no, I want the guys to be around each other and to like, and it's like, yeah, guys are disagreeable and mean and like they say horrible things. But then I look and I see the guys who go to church, but say nothing, do nothing. I sit in the back, bring their girlfriend, bring their wife. And I'm just like, is it really better for that guys sit and do nothing? I mean, obviously, you know, uh, you know, men who are really aggressive are like some of the hardest people to deal with, but I feel like almost any form of aggressive male is just slowly like driven out or just like, and so, especially as someone who is now just sort of realizing the benefits, like more and more clear of the benefits of that masculine spirit. I'm just like, uh, like I'm like, I want to, I want to do something because I see so many guys who feel, uh, I'm interpreting that they like feel like it's hard to, um, and I, we have a poker night tonight that I'm in my apartment. So like, I'm not doing nothing, but just even then I feel like there's some pressure, like people are like, oh, well, this chat that we had, I don't know if what this guy said was correct or was right. And I'm like, it's a group chat with nine people. And he just said one opinion. We can't immediately be like, let's bring it to the pastor. Like, you know, it's suddenly like, I don't know, this chat's pretty dangerous. Someone said something that not everyone believes. We got to bring it to the pastor. I'm just like, guys, like, like I know, like I get it. I get that, but like, I mean, you know, guess what? Yeah. There's some guys, if you talk to them for an hour are going to say some wildly, not just weird stuff, but heretical and downright like blasphemous stuff who are in the church. So like, are we really just going to, sorry, that's been a long preamble, but that's my sort of position now is like, I'm like, I want to do stuff with the guys. I feel like that spirit more and more is clear to me what it means to be a man, having other male friends and in a sort of traditional church, it's very hard because it just immediately turns into like, I don't know if everyone agrees with that. That's not good. I'm just saying. Okay. Traditional church is very hard. John, you got to mute your browser. There we go. Yeah. Yeah. Guys in church. Well, the donks church, they have every year they have like a camp out that all the dudes go out and yeah, churches have to find guy things and do guy stuff. A lot of the easy stuff to do in church is much more feminine. So and the feminine and the women, I don't care if you don't have women in office. Yeah. A lot of women run churches. I'll tell you. The pastors live in fear of, I have all these women in this church that are, I don't live in fear of them, but boy, I got to keep my eye on women. So, all right. I'm going to keep this short. Okay. What did you have to bring in here? Now we can't hear you because you muted yourself. Now you're supposed to mute the browser. Okay. I do know how to do this. I was going to say, but you already said it that sometimes outdoors activities like an annual camp out to go with a bunch of guys into the wilderness, bring your four-wheelers, your mountain bikes, your golf clubs and whatever, and focus more on the physical activity and the being together than actual conversation about very highfalutin spiritual things that most guys don't even particularly care about. It's a great way to bond. Another thing, if you're also focused on older men, I'd like to suggest you read in the Christian Courier, Sleepless Nights. The Christian Courier is a Canadian Christian magazine, and there's a little write up there about Sleepless Nights. Sleepless Nights, of course, is named after if we serve a God who neither sleeps nor slumbers, then we who serve are his nights and ought to also be Sleepless Nights. But for the most part, the reason why we get together and use that name is that we have to get up six times a night to go to the bathroom. So, we are now presently at Crosspoint Church, a group of 12 older guys my age. I'm kind of the youngest one there, and we simply go around and share our stories. And over time, trust is built and the stories go deeper. The article will describe it for you in some detail, so I will not bother this crowd right now with this. So, you should put a link to your article, John, after this live stream ends. Then the comment section will come up. You can just put your link right there in there. Okay, I'll do that. All right, I gotta land the plane because I got, so final thoughts or closing comments? Hi, Joe. I just shared a link somewhere else to a Friends podcast thing he was talking about. There's so many toxic men out there on the internet that if people have nobody to follow, they'll follow. So, anything you do, yeah, he goes golfing with somebody from work or this or that, or he just said that's what's really needed. Just follow your instincts. Somebody approaches you, hey, would you like to be a good listening ear? Yeah, men need men. Yep. It's not what I was gonna ask you, but go visit your friend. All right. Okay, everyone. Thank you for jumping in. And I'm gonna end transmission. Take care.