https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uMbgB1X5QVY

 And I assume we are streaming. Although I don't see it up yet. Rick always makes me wait until I see the live stream come through. I'm waiting to see it. If you're in the chat. Oh, okay. I'm up. I'm up. Good. Welcome. It's Friday morning. This is the question and answer from the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. Rick has started a new day job, which is putting a kink in my access to all of Rick's skills that I'd always get for free. So now someone is paying him for all of his skills again. And to start his new day job, which I think he'll mostly do from home, he had to go into the office. And sure enough, he went into that office and eventually got sick. He doesn't have COVID, but he probably got a cold or a flu. So poor Rick living in virtual isolation now suffers the consequences of his diligence. So if you're with us this morning, thank you for being here. I haven't done this for a couple of weeks. Jacob very kindly reminded me of the calendar. So we will today is the 10th of December. Next week is the 17th of December. I intend to be able to do this next week on the 17th as well. But after that comes the 24th, which is Christmas Eve. So we will not do a Q&A. And then the 31st, which is New Year's Eve, where we will not do a Q&A. So Q&A next week, but not for the next two weeks. All right. If you want to participate in this, because I can't monitor everything, I won't really be taking a look at the YouTube live chat. And I won't look at the Q&A real-time text chat that Joey also set up here, the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. I put two links into the notes on this live stream. One is to get into ask a question on the short questions for PVK. Looks like Joey. Joey's trying to put his foot down to keep the question short. And also the live voice room so you can hear it. You can hear the transmission directly from there. And as I said, Rick isn't here today, so I'm managing all this myself. So those of you who have administrative privileges, if someone comes in with an open mic and needs to be muted, go ahead and mute them and I'll try to stay on top of it too. Okay. Questions go all the way back to November 23. Aaron asks, who would Jesus have been during the Holocaust? As an imprisoned Jew being led to the gas chambers, I think he must have died with the rest of the Jews in the showers. This appears to follow the patterns of this life. But all our memories of the Holocaust are devoid of resurrection. These things are so often presented as simply evil that no good can overcome. But do we need a narrative of resurrection in the narrative of Holocaust? I've been dreaming lately about mass death and being the person who walks into the gas chamber. I apologize for starting this off with such a heavy question. It's a good question. There are a lot of different ways to come at this question and I will by no means pretend to be exhaustive or have the last word about it. Many died like Christ and await their resurrection. In some ways, the armies of the Soviet Union and the allies, the Western Allies, ended the Holocaust. In some ways, the Holocaust survivors are memorialized and there is perhaps a pre-testimony to resurrection in there. It's helpful to remember that all of history in the age of decay is a Holocaust. What happened in Nazi Germany was a speeding up of the death that each of us face. It's difficult to talk about things like this because in some ways, when people visit, they're not going to be able to see the dead. They're not going to be able to see the dead. It's difficult to talk about things like this because in some ways, when people visit, what's left of those camps is holy ground. A few years before my father died, he had a cousin's son do a genealogy. Whereas we knew we had in my father's side some Jewish roots, that all became explicit when this individual did a genealogy. That led a whole bunch of the rest of us to Ancestry.com and to genealogical sites only to discover that my great-great-grandfather and my great-grandfather, these were Jews, and my great-grandfather came to America and sort of fit in with all of the Dutch Reformed in Western Michigan. I don't know what life was like for them in the Netherlands beforehand, but it could be that my great-great-grandfather married out of the community. But then what that forced me to see was all of the Van der Kley's, Van der Kley, K-L-E-I, that died in the Holocaust. These were all my relatives, and of course our family had no knowledge of that, except my father remembered once when he was a boy. My father was born in 35, and so he was a boy during the Second World War. And his father, my grandfather, once quipped to him, yeah, if we hadn't emigrated, we might have gotten swept up in that. I don't know. That's a tough question, Aaron. One imagines all sorts of things. It's always important to remember that Jesus came intentionally at a specific time and place to do the work that he did for the world. It's not lost on many people that, yeah, that entire chapter of the Nazis and what they did. It's important to remember, too, that the Jews who died in the Holocaust, there were just one of many groups. Timothy Snyder has written a lot about this. There were many Slavs who died, and most who died, most who died at the hands of the Germans did not die in the death camps. Most of them died by, they'd line people up over trenches and used machine guns, and the Nazis in their ruthless, in fact, they were in many ways incredibly inept at it. And again, Timothy Snyder's books bring this out in incredible detail. So we've sort of, in the memorialization, we've created some, we've created some images that don't exactly represent the historical accounts. More people died of bullet than of gas. More people died outside the camps than inside the camps. It's a horrendous, horrendous thing. So that's a good question, Aaron. I don't have anything more beyond that. Richard Zurich, do you think it's significant that there are no Protestants in the Four Horsemen videos, Four Horsemen of Meaning videos? The way I understand how that video came about, John Vervecky mentioned this when he did his conversation with Jonathan Peugeot, that I think originally Jordan asked John Vervecky to join him with Bishop Barron, and John Vervecky insisted that Jonathan Peugeot be a part of it, which that's John Vervecky. He's very, very generous with his attributions, and I think that's a model we can all emulate. He's someone who is always trying to share. He's by no means someone who wants to hog the limelight, especially because as he said early on, he's not exactly comfortable in the limelight at all. So maybe he just wants to share it a little bit. It's a good question. In some ways, Peterson and Vervecky are the Protestants, but they're not confessional Protestants. So yeah, I don't have any more answer to that. There's been a lot of criticism of the historical grammatical method of interpreting the Bible, the Four Horsemen Convo, and obviously there's been some merit to it. However, you yourself use historical context in your Acts Roman series to get a better picture of the world of the New Testament and how that would impact the author. That, in fact, I do. How do we keep both historical and the symbolic readings of the text? I think the early church sort of had this polyphonic, or at least the church fathers sort of had this polyphonic approach to the Bible where they have the different readings. And probably what's going to happen is we're going to revive some of that, and we're going to revive some of that in terms of, and we're going to be explicit about it. As with modernity, that which modernity highlighted is true, and ought not to be simply cast aside because of its association with modernity. And there's been a tremendous amount of knowledge that we have of the scriptures because of archaeology that a lot of which has been done in the last 200 years. In a video, I think I'm going to release the video tomorrow along with my rough draft. I bring out both the Rest is History podcast on Neanderthals and on Napoleon in Egypt, two recent episodes that the Rest is History has done. We know a ton about the ancient world now that contributes to our knowledge of scripture. The misstep of modernity was to demand that that is the only reading possible and necessary. Oh shoot, does someone need to be banned from that room? Oh, Rick is on the job. I was looking at the chat room. If anything, what modernity and the historical grammatical methods offer is a clarification and a betterment of one layer, which should, I think, in the whole add to the betterment of the rest of the layers. But it is that bias of modernity that finds its expression, let's say, in skeptical atheism that prohibits all of the other layers that needs to be corrected. So, this week I talked about you've got the first personal and the third personal and the first personal. So, I have hand gestures for each. Rick and I are going to develop our Benny Jesuit hand signals. So, here's the first personal. Here's the third, monarchical vision from up on top. The first personal, which is really the way Peugeot is approaching it with his symbolism, I found that tremendously helpful. You could see the grip of historical, of atheist skepticism breaking when the literary criticism, criticism, that's not a great word, basically the literary that was already back in the 80s when I was in seminary. It was abundantly clear that at that point the historical grammatical had its place, but we were deriving way more meaning and way more wisdom from the kind of work that scholars like Robert Alter and many others were doing at the time. So, a lot of this correction has already been done, but it's not a good thing. So, a lot of this correction has already been taking place and now I think as we get into questions of wisdom we're going to see the symbolic come into the fore maybe. So, I think the correction is underway. Zato, that's not a short question. Joey would not be pleased. Peugeot has talked a lot about the fact that we live in the time of revenge of the margins. That's true. That there is a contempt or belittling of normality. That's true. In some ways this is very much continuation of the concepts of sincerity and authenticity traced by Trilling and Taylor, which are symptomatic of the emergence of large cities, community into society, and what Taylor calls the affirmation of ordinary life happening in the Reformation. I think that's true. Leading to the loss of the heroic higher life. I think the noble part of what drives the marginal critique of normality is the sense that people cannot be reduced to their ordinary social roles. That there is something higher for each of us to be striving for. The problem is when the marginal becomes tyrannical and leads to the great leveling, where all social structures holding normality, however, collapse. I think that's right. Someone in the Pitch PVK section pointed me to a video coming out of Westminster, Minneapolis, where a theologian, I only got a chance to take a little, the shortest look at it, but there my biases are operating and they might be totally wrong, so subject to future information and correction, but the gender theologian looked exactly as you would imagine that person to look. Young, high voice, no facial hair, gender unspecific clothing, and suddenly what happens is that a new normal will always develop. We can't help but normalize something and when the fringe, so my wife and I are working our way through the corpus of survivor and whereas Paramount Plus nicely has almost no commercials, that always begins with a commercial and they're always promoting RuPaul's drag queens on the one commercial I have to be subject to and this is something that I really have very, I have no desire to see, but I am subject to it by Paramount Plus and just a little snippets I capture here you have men in beards with dresses and so there's always going to be this in and out of the normalizing and then something's going to be in the margins and this is where Peugeot was so helpful because these patterns endure and you can't get away from them and so once the fringe is the mainstream that becomes the new normal and then the new fringe will be the fringe and this is, it was a conversation with Akira the Don, I don't know if I was able to snip it, I should have, I'll have to find it, I think I put it on my leading church blog where basically he asked the question for someone, you know, how naked can Madonna get? If clothing is normative then nudity is fringe and then everybody opts for nudity, what goes beyond nudity? Well it's clothing, you know, it's sort of that old missionary story where the only, you know, western missionaries go into a village and, you know, most of the women are naked and the missionaries, of course, the Victorian missionaries want the women to wear clothes and so they sort of coerce all the women to wear clothes, not understanding that in that culture, they had clothing but only prostitutes wore clothing so they just turned the whole village, they turned all the upright women in the village into prostitutes socially, so no, you're exactly right with this. Okay, I'll keep reading the overly long question and see if there is a question in it. The revenge of the margins is morally justified to a large degree in my opinion since normality has always turned a blind eye to the exception and hid the sins of the father which should be brought to light, Matthew 18, 15 through 17. The hierarchy doesn't like to be exposed. We know some of what happens, we know some of what happens if you look behind the curtain of the Roman Catholic Church but what would happen if the same happened to the majority Orthodox ones, of course, and on the video that I'll release tomorrow, I've got a little bit of the King's North appearance on rebel wisdom. Right now people are, the sins of the Roman, the sins of the Western Church have been forefronted and so then one woman asks, well, is the Eastern Church without sin and you know King's North is smart enough not to go there and he I think takes a rather correct tact of saying all of these, these are human beings doing all of this so all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God. He didn't quote Romans 2 but he certainly could have. This time of increased interest in Orthodoxy and in the digital age might become very problematic for the church soon enough. I think that's true because if people go into Orthodoxy as, oh this will fix everything, oh it may be an improvement, it may be the church for you but I can promise you it won't fix everything because you just do a little bit of looking at, let's say, the Orthodox Church in Russia and its cozy relationship with the Tsars. So the church is the body of Christ but it is certainly the fallible body of Christ. I don't mean any disrespect to Vatican One. It's a fascinating book. Vatican One is, I think Tim, I think it was Tim that, Tim DeRouche that pointed me to Vatican One. Fascinating how, out of what, you know, out of which derived the doctrine of papal infallibility. It's fascinating. Anyway, the problem I have with Peugeot's view of the ideal society, the medieval village and Byzantium, is that I suspect a profound romanticization on his part. Yep. Isn't the irony of Peugeot's position that there are societies did very poor job of dealing with the margins, although they did provide believable models for higher life. I don't know. I'm not in a position to judge that but that, whenever you, I watched my own tradition do this with Calvin's Geneva, okay? Because once you have a hero, you're going to romanticize what's around the hero. And so the Calvin, you know, the Dutch Calvinists in America are all romanticizing Geneva and all someone has to do is mention, oh yeah, Servetus and boom. And that's always the sort of the low resolution. Oh, Paul VanderKlay is a Calvinist, Servetus. I'm supposed to run an eye or deny Servetus or tell some story to make it better or, yeah. And I just speed up the process when people visit Living Stones because they're like, oh, I like Paul's YouTube channel. Maybe I'll visit Living Stones. And then they come into church and they're like, what's going on here? This is part of the hero. And it's also part of the reason why saints always have a sense of their own sinfulness. If you find someone who doesn't know they're a sinner, run away because they are going to do real damage. I, thank you, Lisa. I read some of that in, I think it was the little live stream that I did where I took Peterson at Cambridge and then C.S. Lewis, Mere Christianity, and then Hiding Place. If you see someone who doesn't know their sin, run away. How do we create a normality that allows marginality, a normality that doesn't pretend that individuals lack depth and uniqueness without degenerating into endless fragmentation and shallow authenticity? In the CRC, it's often quipped that total depravity is the one sin that is, or the one doctrine that is immediately verifiable. I think I find Peugeot's observation of the pattern between the center and the fringe as helpful because in this age there will always be both. And I think what that means is wisdom means a degree of liberty and tolerance. And I like how Peugeot interprets leaving margins in the field as sort of a mythological image for the dynamics of center and fringe. My favorite biblical analogy for Jordan Peterson is the unauthorized exorcist. And it's an amazing story where just down the road from Jesus and his apostles, someone else is driving out demons in Jesus' name, but he's not a part of the group. And a tyrannical church would say, I don't care if you're driving, I don't care if you're using the power that Jesus is about to instantiate in the church for good, we're going to shut you down because you're not part of us. When we talk about the wildness of God, I think this is what we're talking about. That God is always beyond us and what humility is for is for us to pause and say, I might not know everything, in fact I know I don't, and I might disagree with things, but I'm going to say, I'm going to say, I'm going to say, I'm going to say, I'm going to say, I might not know everything, in fact I know I don't, and I might disagree with things, but I'm going to leave well enough alone and let God finally handle things as he chooses. And I think that is behind the saying, Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, I will repay, repay, because none of us are able to judge, because we don't know enough, we're not wise enough, we're impure, and so we have to, part of human responsibility is knowing where our margins are and what we can and should do and what we should leave alone. You have this parenting, you know, lately we've been talking about helicopter parents, they're too tyrannical, and Jonathan Haidt says, let the kids roam, let them get into trouble, let them get into scraps, they're going to play with sex, drugs, and alcohol, and rock and roll, and some of them will, just before we went on the air, Chad was talking about the fact that he's grateful he was an alcoholic because his alcoholism brought him to Christ, and there's something to this mysterious idea that the Apostle Paul has that the angels epithumia into the gospel, because there's something of the gospel that the angels themselves will never taste, that we do, and part of that is because of our fall. We now know the amazing glory and thrill of redemption that an unfallen angel cannot know, and that's what Chad was saying with respect to his journey into alcoholism, that if he had never been an alcoholic, he wouldn't know the thrill of rescue, and this is part of the margin of chaos, and I think it's this reality that gives a lot of Peugeot's work life, because someone on Twitter pointed me to an Anderson Todd video, and I made it about half the way through, and there were a few things on there that were helpful, but one of the points that he made was that the order chaos dichotomy doesn't really sufficiently encapsulate the journey of life, which is if you imagine order as such to continue to grow, you get something like a crystal, where with crystals basically you have the same structure fractally multiplying, but life is different. When you have human reproduction, for example, the seed cells produce stem cells, and the stem cells differentiate, and so you have a degree of chaos that remains with the order, and we use the word complexity for it, but it's beyond to fully grasp that's combinatorial explosiveness, so in the church, I know this in terms of church leadership, there are a lot of pastors who are much more tyrannical than I am, and I'm a rather libertarian pastor in that I don't hound people if they miss service, I don't hound people if they stray, and in some ways perhaps the congregation would be better served if I did, because I would warn people from precipices that sometimes they fall off of. On the other hand, others will go astray and learn from it, and that's not a bad thing. So, yeah, this is good stuff. Okay, now I've just muted in my software the Q&A recorded session, which I can still hear it, but it won't come through the stream, I just have to remember if I start engaging with you guys verbally, I have to turn you back on so it'll get recorded and recording. Okay, good. All right, and those of you who have administrative rights in the Discord, go ahead and mute people that haven't muted themselves. All right, Joe, I, Yosef, Joe Schmo, 788, I really like your pitch, so maybe you and I can talk about that, because he's got some more assessment, he's one of our faithful Jews in the Discord, and I really value our observant and confessional Jews in the Discord because they, just like our heterodox Sam, poor Sam, he's just the poster child for heterodoxy and estuary, because you all challenge us and you're in a sense that that part of the, that's the field that isn't fully mowed, so your presence is welcome here. Given your last video, I want to stress this will end in a genuine question, and I'm really curious to know how you deal with this tension. Well, we'll see. See, part of the issue is that you all know more than I do in whole ranges of things, and so I can't fully and satisfyingly always answer your questions, because I probably can't in a short order sufficiently capture or value your input. That's part of what it means to be human, but I'll do my best. The longer I'm hanging out in this corner of the internet, the more I'm coming to appreciate the rabbi's assessment of Christianity as non-monotheistic pagan idolatry. Now, I'm aware this is a generalization over many branches, but the Servers Powers and Principalities Convo, followed by the Peugeot Baron Convo, really brought this home to me. I used to think it was just a Trinity issue, and maybe in the era of demythologization, it really, um, it was really limited to the Trinity, and sorry about the springing France Rosen, Rosen-Wig on you like that in the last time. Even with the Trinity aside, belief in a spiritual realm full of powers and principalities seems to reintroduce a meta-divine realm. Yeah, that's a good point. At least, the very least, a regress from monotheism to monolatry. And then the Peugeot Baron, just so totally fixated on the need for visual beauty that the way to connect to the divine just screams pagan idolatry to someone in my frame of an invisible God. Now, let's pause there, because when I read descriptions of Solomon's temple, it's beautiful. And it's full of images, and it's full of symbolism. The imagery and the symbolism of the temple are that of the garden. So, you know, perhaps there are, and correct me if I'm wrong, more Protestant and more beauty-oriented and imagistic-oriented Jews too. Now, of course, we can't help but pay attention to the split that happens in the first century between rabbinic Judaism that becomes the Judaism of today and Christianity, you know, over Jesus and the resurrection. But there's boy, this would be interesting. I just don't know enough about Judaism or the Jewish communities, which again makes me really value those of you who are here in the server. Let me finish the question, and then maybe I'll open up the sound. And I see Jacob's around, but this is Jacob's busy time, so I don't know if he'll be able to talk. Oh, oh, Joseph's in here. Really? Joseph's in here. Really? Am I, how about on the internet? Is that side hearing me fine? Somebody put a, put a- Breaking up big time. Rick, Rick! Rick can't help. According to my, according to what I'm seeing, I'm doing okay. I seem to still be streaming. Okay, you're back. Now we can hear you. Yeah, you weren't robotting on the live stream, as best as I can tell. Okay, okay. All right. So let me finish the question then. Perhaps this is a parallel to what you mean by liking Jacob for helping you clarify your faith frame. I guess my question is, do you, perhaps as a Protestant, perhaps as a pastor, perhaps as someone who takes the Bible seriously, not see danger in remythologizing? Yes, I do. You don't see icons as such in my office. And that's again, nothing against someone I dearly love and admire, Jonathan Pigeot. In my Protestantism, post-iconoclasm, even though I use images in my sermons via PowerPoint all the time, I've got a healthy, healthy, question about the power of these images to distract us and to capture us. It's the same, it's the same thing that happens with the serpent on a pole that the Lord tells Moses to fashion, to save the people from the snake, to save the people from the snake, to save the people from the snake, to save the people from the snakes, and then that then becomes a cult. And part of what we don't know, I mean, we have the law and the prophets, but this is where the historical grammatical archaeological studies are so interesting. We don't know what all was going on. And this is where when I listened to Christine Hayes and her Yale lectures on the Old Testament, which I really enjoyed, these questions about, well, what was really going on back then? Because the Deuterotomists are leaning in heavy, and it's probably because they're leaning against something pretty pervasive. So yeah, I've got questions about remythologizing, no doubt. Do you not see how this reifies some of the more fraught elements that which Christianity claimed it can redeem from the pagan world? Yeah, I agree with that. I don't know if Jacob or Joseph, you have something you want to add to this. Yeah, I've got questions, but part of what I also recognize is, so I've lived my whole life in, I've lived my whole life in pretty Spartan Protestantism. If you walk into the room, the sanctuary here at Living Stones, there is very little on the walls. There's a couple of crosses. There's a couple of banners. There's not much. It's pretty stripped down. And what I've also noticed is that if you strip it down, people will, there's the danger of idolatrizing the blankness, or even the one symbol that you allow to remain, such as a simple cross. So even stripping away the mythology doesn't finally solve the idolatry problems or temptations. And so on one hand, yeah, I am not going to start praying in front of it. I'm not going to start, I'm not going to put an icon before my eyes as I pray, because I think I will get stuck not seeing through, but stuck in the middle. And so I will pray with my eyes closed. You know, when I was a kid, very typical Protestant, you know, didn't pray like a Jew, which actually makes a whole lot of sense symbolically. Eyes to the heavens and hands outstretched to receive. I pray eyes closed and hands folded. It's kind of like, boy, even that is very Protestant, isn't it? I mean, this is the God who's going to come from the inside out, instead of the God who's going to come down from the heavens. Instead of the God who's going to come down from the heavens. So no, you guys, you guys make good points and hard points. And so I like getting pushed by you guys. So yeah, Joseph, you and I are going to have to do a video and bring out some of this stuff. I don't, when I get pushed, you know, it helps me in the long run. So it isn't very comfortable usually. And it's a little scary to do it out in public because, you know, fortunately I've, I do hide behind a mass of content. Because if someone really wants to come after me in my church, if they want to do their homework, they got a lot of homework to do. They want, they're going to have to really want to come after me. But yeah, there's danger in this for me too. Saying things wrong and deciding, someone deciding they want to, you know, have a heresy trial against me. It's possible, but no, it's a great question. All right, Colton, who is re-reformed. It's fun. I got to see Colton in the open studio the other day. That was great. The longer I hang out in this court of the inter that the more I'm coming to appreciate the reformed assessment of Christianity as correct. Thank you, Colton. I don't think it's made me less reformed. I think it is, just as you said, Colton made me, helped me to appreciate many of the riches of our tradition as well as many of the riches that are beyond it. God is good and he showers good gifts on his children. Do you not see, do you not see how Protestantism is the balance between demythologizing Judium and overly pagan Eastern Orthodoxy and Catholicism? Oh, it's one question follows the other. I'm admittedly stirring the pot. Feel free to move on. Oh, I think I, you guys are all seeing real good things. I think you guys are all seeing real good things. I think you guys are all seeing I, you guys are all seeing real things. And I have this saying that I use sometimes history. History is its own justification and ontology is its own justification and fantasies by Roman Catholics and Orthodox. Oh, if we could have only avoided the Protestant Reformation. Again, I haven't finished the book yet, but a professor of history of mine at Calvin College back in the day, Dale VanClay worked very hard on the Jansenist movement, which is a very interesting movement in Roman Catholicism, which was eventually sort of pushed away as a heresy. Part of the reason that the French have a different take on secularism and part of what was behind the French Revolution was that they didn't deal with the inevitable fruit. Now is this fruit of nominalism? I don't know. But all of that stuff had to be dealt with one way or another. And it's gone through Judaism. It's gone through Roman Catholicism. And I don't know about the Orthodox Church well enough. If they've gone through these things, they probably have someone in their own ways. But now that Orthodoxy in America is here, they're going to go through it too. They're just aspects of reality that can't be avoided. All right. Single celled one. Hi, PVK. Hope you are well. I'm a little bit thirsty right now. I've been talking a lot. Need to take a drink. To Augustine, love, in its positive form, caritas, is the force within our souls that drives us to ascend from the sensible to the intelligible world and to the contemplate and to the contemplation of God. Reason to Augustine, as nowadays commonly believed, is not the faculty by which truth can be known. Right. That's very much enlightenment. But only when reason has behind it love. And that's sort of Luther. Reason is a whore. She'll, you know, work for anyone. Just, oh, I can just press this. All right. Good. I'm learning all the little controls on OBS as I do this thing. Love is truth's moral precondition. You must first love something in order to find it. Reason then serves to ensure that you are headed in the right direction. That sounds good. Plato understood, similar to Augustine, that love comes first, to which reason was then applied in order to direct it to an understanding of the good, the true, and the beautiful. Why does love, why does love and how it not just relate to truth, but is necessary, but is a necessary prerequisite of it, feature so little in the meaning crisis debate? I think it's emerging. And I think you can hear it emerge in the recent conversations. And I suspect if Bishop, okay, so I got, a lot of people like to push back in the comments on my assessment of Bishop Baron in the, my commentary on the first hour of the Four Horsemen video. I wasn't sufficiently, I didn't sufficiently laud Bishop Baron. I'm a fan of Bishop Baron. The Bishop Baron is a bishop. And I'm amazed that John Verveke can spend as much time on this aspect of his project as he can. And Peugeot is spending, you know, he's an icon carver, he's a YouTuber, he's spending a lot of time on this. I'm spending a lot of time on this. Bishop Baron is a bishop. He is responsible for and to a lot more than anyone else in this meaning in this corner of the internet. You know, so Bishop Baron can be forgiven not being able to keep up with all the content we are producing here in this corner. The fact that he's giving it any attention at all is quite frankly a really wonderful thing. But he's a tremendously brilliant, gifted, well read, well educated individual. And this theme is coming through more and more in the coming weeks. Presuppositionalism has always been lurking around the sides here too. When I started my channel, a number of people would come up to me and be like, have you read Cornelius Ventil? Presuppositionalism? As Colton notes, that's something that's often been said by the people who are watching this. And there's a relationship between presuppositionalism and what you're pointing out here. So I think we are going to see this theme elevate. The difficulty with this, the difficulty with understanding the There are limits. There is a, our attempt at a monarchical vision is always limited by the fact that we are not God. And that we first move from a first personal sort of into a third personal, but the first personal is not God. First personal, but the first personal is always the limitation of our third personal. Boy, that sounded hard. And what that means is that, let's take it, let's think of an illustration here. Two people in an unhappy marriage. Go to a marriage counselor. The marriage counselor spends a lot of time trying to first personalize the marriage from the inside. But that marriage counselor is always seeing it from a third person perspective. And that's good. But it's limited. If knowledge is, if the only true way to see knowledge is from the inside, then we are all in danger of solipsism. So the point that we need to love in order to know is a powerful one. But if you push that point too far, because none of us can love perfectly, then none of us can know perfectly. So that's part of the tension in this realization. Vervecke gave a great description of Agape in his lecture series. Yep, it's on my clip channel. However, that was that. And it seemed to play little or no role in his philosophy. And so Monday I am releasing a new video, which is made up of old videos of some of these thief in the night live stream episodes. So why do I call them thief in the night live streams? Because they're not planned. It's when I have time and it's when I'm in the discord. And it's when the conversation really seems to get going that I say, okay, let's take this out on the channel. And let's do some reaping. And of these ideas and put them out there into the hive mind, as Grimm Grizz would say. And so the video I'm going to record Monday morning will be a looming of some of those things. I'm going to weave them together. First you reap, then you loom. And again, I'll give my attribution to Grimm Grizz because he's the one that used that language. And I'm I'm Grimm Grizz is a master at catchy language. And so that's why I'm I've told you a long time pastors are thieves. We're word thieves. When we hear a phrase or an idea that's useful to us, we steal it. And I'm giving the attribution now. If it's really powerful, I'll just keep using it and people will attribute it to me. Sorry, Grimm. Hate to rip you off like that, my friend, but that's the way it goes. So yeah. I think and so in the in the in the reaping and then looming of what happened in those thief in the night impromptu live streams that we did this week. I think we reemphasize the point that you're making here. Peterson appears to intuit a relation between reason and love, love and agape, but it isn't an instant. It isn't it isn't an intuition he has explored in any detail, at least not in any of his online discussions. This is well, this is so Peterson's going back to a book tour and I'm not happy. I'm not happy for a variety of reasons, not just because he isn't coming to Sacramento. But because chances are good, he's going to go dark again for nine months. Now I think they're stacking up conversations and I think they're spreading out his book tour better than they did the first time. But one of the knocks against Jordan Peterson that I during the first wave, I talked to a number of people who were students of his graduate students, even people who had listened to him for a long time. And one of the knocks against him, people would say was he always sounds like he's making it up on the fly and so it's fresh. But if you listen to him enough, it's just the same old thing. I don't know that that's true. I can't say that it isn't. But I think in the conversations he's having, especially if he's going to put in the reps, what do I mean by that? In the Four Horsemen video, you had Peterson, Vervecky, Peugeot, and Bishop Baron. In some ways, their performance in that video was a function of putting in the time, the repeated conversations. Vervecky is following the conversations in this little corner of the internet closely. He watches some of my videos. He watches some of Peugeot's videos. He watches other videos. He's integrating the stuff. What that means, and many of you are you are too, what that means is that you are actually developing knowledge through love. You love this little corner of the internet, and so you're giving it your attention and you are benefiting from the development that is happening in it. In the Four Horsemen video, there was a capacity between Peugeot and Vervecky that was created by love, which was evident that to a degree, Peterson and to a greater degree, Bishop Baron couldn't participate in. In the conversation between Vervecky and Peugeot, they noticed that. Now they're happy to welcome Bishop Baron into this because those of us in this little corner of the internet think what's happening here is a really big deal. What do we mean by big deal? Will it bear big fruit going forward? We don't know, but we're excited. We're giving it love, and that love is producing attention and repetition and all of this stuff. And it is fruit is it's fruitful. It's productive stuff is happening. So Peterson goes on this book tour. I don't know. Is he basically going to be out of the conversation for a while again? I don't know. It's up to him, you know. We'll see. We'll see. Love being foundational to any form of knowledge is, to put it mildly, an important fact and one frustrating and one frustratingly that is either not understood or appreciated or simply ignored. Amen. And I think we are seeing that. And we are experimenting with these. Video communication tools. In a new and exciting way. And again, just to give Grimm Grizz some props. Grimm is at the chaotic bleeding edge of this in a lot of ways. And. This is what we're doing. And we're. We're finding out to what degree can we use these videos and podcasts to think together. To be virtually not alone. And to influence each other and all of this is bound up by love. So no, it's a great comment. It's a great comment. What is the secret? How do you maintain that glorious beard? Well, I trimmed it. And usually I don't I'd never knew how to trim it. So I just shave it off because that's the easiest way to trim it. Let it grow back. I do nothing too much. Let it grow back. I do nothing to my beard. Maybe it is God's grace that since he is not allowing me to grow much hair on the top of my head. He has given me a lot of hair on the bottom of my head. So that's I. I am not a slave to fashion. I am not someone who likes spending a lot of hours looking in the mirror. Brother Brian, my question in a recent video, you mentioned 12th century peasants sneaking the Eucharist to a sick cow. Was this to define. Based as F to your listeners, because that guy is very based on the right path to me. I once I once did a one of my Sunday school classes, I asked if squirrels could be saved. And. Of course, I did that just to. Just to disrupt the frames of the good Protestants who gather at living stones. Disrupt the frames of the good Protestants who gather at living stones. Yeah, that's that's that's not a dumb farmer, even if. The the priest would be. The priest would be fine saying. The Lord gives the Lord gives grass and hay to your cow every day and. The cow is fine for it, you. Upper and lower register heaven and earth meets creature you need the bread of heaven. For your wholeness and salvation. Your cow can be saved by the grass of the earth because it doesn't have the upper register it's already feeding from the Lord's bounty so. So. Tales from the intellectual dark web hey Paul hope you're well I am. There is a youtuber John Doyle that has put out two videos recently that are more political but touch on some of the things you talk about as well in the socio-religious domain if time or interest allows me. Would you consider dissecting riffing on them can't do it right now I feel like he might be a bit wacky and edgy. If I didn't like wacky and edgy I wouldn't watch grim grizz and his saving throws. Here's a link to a shorter one. I'm going to click on it a second. All right so there's the video. 323 subs pretty big I will like it so I will be able to go and find it and. Maybe I'll check it out you never know see if I if I subscribe to his channel then chances are the YouTube algorithm will kind of go through it and the YouTube algorithm is really dumb. But it's smarter than most other algorithms out there so I tend to play with it I haven't yet watched this video. I am. I am. Looking forward to watching this one with Benjamin Boyce and Rod Dreher. So yeah. That's looking that's looking interesting anyway so. For an actual question sweet potatoes or pumpkin pie I've been having both lately Costco had these nice mashed sweet potatoes and kind of a big thing. So I'm an empty nester now. But I'm a lover of Costco because back when I had. You know seven mouths to feed in my household Costco was a big deal my neighbor used to laugh at me when I'd come home from Costco and my my little wagon full of stuff in the back because I had to feed all those kids and now they're all gone. So I buy at Costco and my wife's like you know we can't eat all that and I'm not interested in eating any of it so. I've gained my cove in 30 after. After after after lose weight and exercise all right have a happy new year Thank you. Catherine which passage of scripture has been most helpful to you during intense difficulty testing trials. If I had to pick. A single passage it would be Romans eight. I also have to say that in times in my life of some of the most intense difficulty testing and trial. Christian music was really helpful. Christian music was really helpful. And that's kind of Christian music I've tended to listen to for a long time John Michael Talbot Michael card Audrey Assad. A lot of. Sarah groves often a lot of traditional hymns contemporary settings of traditional hymns. Oh oh the name of the. Sarah mccracken. Indelible grace some of those stuff some of the neo Puritan stuff. And in some times of real testing and trial I was. I was downing two or three Tim Keller sermons a day and sometimes repeating some of them he had a great series on Romans six seven and eight. That that he riffed on Robert Louis Stevenson's Dr. Jacqueline Mr. Hyde I must have listened to that sermon 30 times or those that little group of sermons 30 times so Tim Keller was. A point in the between like 2006 and 2010. I paid a lot of money to listen to Tim Keller sermons are like 250 a pop and I just kept buying and. Yeah Tim Keller was was hugely helpful for a time and then you know. I moved on that's that's kind of the way things are but um yeah Romans eight if I have to pick one passage. There's no mountain when I was a seminary intern in Columbia Missouri at the little CRC church plant there. At the little CRC church plant there. We used to sing this song no mountain high enough it's just riffing from you know none of these things can separate me from the love of God in Christ. And and when. Either because of my own failings or. Or other other things going on in my life. That's what I cling to is is not that not the strength of my grip on God but the strength of God's grip on me and I know there's sometimes chat about. What my particular Calvinism is like and I think that's at the heart of Calvinism that it's not finally my ability to hang on to God. But God's desire to hang on to me that's what finally matters and that's where I find comfort and shelter in the storm. Skylar. This is for next week or whatever but here we go in the last awakening from the meeting crisis Q&A John was befuddled by a question posed to him. He asked us two questions is kairos possible without teleology. Oh. Good question. Why do people care so much about death or da faith. And the open participation in a narrative future embedded within teleology teleology and a final cause. Yeah you you you awakening from the meeting crisis people you're you're always what you're always floating up here in the abstract and get down and get some get some concrete illustrations it'll it'll help people understand you better. It's tough though I know the framing of this question to do with the off. He grew for faith or faithfulness our participation in an open future in a narrative structure as well as kairos and teleology kairos is usually with a K. Does our sense in the open future require a teleology for that future for Vicky was astonished by the suffering in the world. For that future for Vicky was astonished by the suffering in the world. Union with the beloved has in my mind an open future in it and we are participating in maintaining continuity of contact with co creation of that future. I think I think I would suspect that our poor Chad the alcoholic is just you know zoning out at this point it's so abstract. I'll get down to the questions. For Vicky wants to know why do people care so much about this. He ponders that purpose and narrative structure contribute to our sense of meaning. Absolutely why are we wedded to this so deeply. Absolutely why are we wedded to this so deeply. Verbecky always makes a strong point that we learn narrative. It's a point that I'll come back to that I've repeated a number of times and very early on in our conversations with John. Infants don't do narrative not the way we do and for many of us ourselves our lives are. The strange autobiography that is evidently fallible full of errors full of biases all of that but for many of us that's what we are. You know they can cut off a finger they can cut off an arm and cut off a foot and we are still us now without a foot. The stuff gets complex but in many ways we are stories. And I think so early on when smartphones came into being. Windows there were very early Windows smartphones and there's kind of like tiny little Windows computer on your phone and if you think about that some of you will just shudder and think why would I want Windows on my phone but that's what Microsoft was doing. And that's a really good ideas in there and you could play with it and then palm came along and made the interface seriously. Simple and people could have a sense that that was better than Microsoft and then of course Apple in 2007 comes out with the iPhone. And that changed the world. And now palm had gotten there first Microsoft had gotten there first but Apple swept the field and then of course Google some of you might remember that. Well they were sort of like the first Microsoft phones they had keyboards physical keyboards and of course we shouldn't forget Blackberry was very quickly in the game and it was sort of palm like. But Apple was was just sort of stealing the space and the space was just sort of a But Apple was was just sort of stealing the stealing the market and very quick it very quickly I you know I remember when the iPhone came out I was tempted but I was on the wrong carrier and I didn't want to go over to AT&T. And I listened to a ton of of tech podcasts and gadget podcasts back in those days and. So I didn't get an iPhone and then I think I was on Verizon Verizon came out with the the droid and it was built by Motorola and I've still got it in the closet I think you can slide it up and you have a little mechanical keyboard. And you have like it's I think it was like Android 3.0 something like that and it wasn't really as good as an iPhone but it had a mechanical keyboard and. So then Windows Windows tries to catch up and so they and they have Windows phone and Microsoft is just doing a ton of investment and then they buy Nokia and I mean Microsoft is doing whatever they can to try to get into the marketplace but as it turned out. Blackberry eventually went along the wayside Palm they had the Palm pre which is a really cool phone that went along the wayside eventually there would be there would be iOS and Android. As you got some hobbyist playing with Linux on a phone etc etc. But iOS and Android there wasn't any more room in the marketplace beyond that and very quickly. Microsoft had to had to admit defeat and you know now. With my with my Galaxy phone Microsoft and Samsung are sort of collaborating so that you know it'll it'll work well with a Windows computer and Amazon is you know writing some really great Android apps and. So in some ways narrative like iOS and Android. It's just got the human market and to. I can understand a big so if if Peugeot is all about the first personal. Verveky is all about error checking okay and and and not just error checking but refinement and so John Verveky really wants to. What video was I was I watching what's it. I don't remember which which which it was with for Vicky but you know when he had to sort of. But you know when he had to sort of communicate his project to someone else you know it's all about. Understanding. Understanding the rickety aspect of. Science post nominalism and having a non nominalistic science. Of cognition and wisdom that's what he's really going for. And that now has to do with error checking getting the errors getting the bugs out of the system and you can look at narrative and say. Narrative is so hackable our memories are I mean you can implant false memories you can you can talk people out of things they know the narrative is a can be a it's a limited rickety system but sort of like iOS and Android. It's not going anywhere. The sunk costs are just too deep. And so. And you know the recent the the reaping and looming video that i'll release Monday you can find most of the pieces of it already and the thief in the night live streams but. The points that mark the fever and for cults Nick made in those two. Which both had to do with the larger frame at least in Christianity being Jesus helping to reconstitute communities and ecosystems quickly. And so so it's above and below comes together and then with Nick really talking about the personal coming down and the role of the personal in terms of connecting these things up quickly. Ontology is its own justification. To. To at this point. I'm not saying it won't happen but at this point to try and found a new world religion. Good luck. I mean. Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism and then a host of religions that aren't formal but are sort of subversive and sneaky that are in some ways parasitic and that's a lot of what we're dealing with here. It's for for all of the hand wringing we do about the. Moral depravity of the way that every world religion is propagated itself. And so I think that's a good point to make. How it hitched a ride on violent emperors on. On manipulation on on bullshittery on on all these things. And so I think that's a good point to make. On manipulation on on bullshittery on on all these things. You're better off working with what's there. If you want to accomplish something in the next hundred years. And the argument that if you're live in North America. You can you know you're going to reintroduce Buddhism. Well one of the things that I noticed with all these California Buddhists as Jonathan Peugeot calls them there's so much Christianity in their system. I mean it's so funny all these you know. There you're going to eliminate desire from your life right in order to achieve happiness I know that's a super low resolution view of it but. All they wind up doing is desiring what is sort of new age chic. You're not eliminating desire you're just starting some other ones you haven't dislocated anything. There's a reason that when. New world religions break into the system there's enormous amounts of disruption and bloodshed. It's because the coding is just that deep. And if a corporation like Microsoft couldn't even though it got there first in many ways couldn't maintain. Couldn't create a platform. Which would hold in the world against ios and android and of course many of you living in the West think ios is the king but, of course. Pull further back and android is far larger because it's open source and there's yaw it there's Huawei and there's the the the forking of systems and all of that stuff. You know if anything boy what i'm about to say is going to really. I mean if there's any any new thing that has come recently into the world that might really revolutionary revolutionized thing hang on here folks. It might be blockchain. You mean bitcoin. You know you don't know how much time I spend chasing bitcoin spam out of the comments section but. I was listening to Cyprian's conversation with Jonathan Peugeot and. Cyprian has some strong points he's an interesting critter has got some strong points. So. You might look at the church you might look at theology you might look at the practice of Christianity and say oh i've got all kinds of critiques and problems and difficulties yeah. But if you're living in. To whatever degree post Christendom is actually post Christendom. It's going to be super hard to actually break in with something different. What is the nature of the process that leads to valid forms of behavior. I think it's in trying to describe culture or something from maps of meaning. Which is all that's done or the rules ofdeep divided. I'm trying to really talk about culture means i'm trying to learn something from culture. What is the nature of the process that leads to valid forms of behavior? I think it's in trying to describe culture or something from maps of meaning. Valid forms of behavior break out all the time and are tested. That's in a sense what we're doing in culture all the time. We watch each other. Look at the first episode of Peterson's Biblical series. There's so much in that episode. We watch each other. We don't know we're being encoded via our eyes. If I want to put code into my PC, I have to download something or put it on a thumb drive and one way or another I have to get it in there. Our eyes are coding us all the time. Our eyes, our ears, but there's already tons of code in us. So, we're always working from valid forms of behavior. Invalid forms of behavior tend to get us killed. So, Darwin had a point. Short question. Good for you. Any advice for finding a church for myself and my wife? Look around. There are more, there are more, I should probably just do a whole video on this. There are more tools available for church shopping now than there ever have been before and COVID made it better because churches are streaming. And when you look for a church, I should read the rest of it before I answer. Used to work at a mega church. Oh, so you've seen it from the inside. I've been burned and now I'm pretty cynical. Went to one local here in Sacramento area for a while with solid theology, but the community aspect was basically zero. Yeah. And right now community is really struggling. The beauty of a mega church is it's easy to get in and maybe if they've got all their systems going, you can get in a small group and yada, yada, yada. Small churches can be wonderful to get in and so sometimes it's really cool to get in on a church plant. We also looked into your church. People always say, Paul, if I lived in Sacramento, I'd go to your church. I'm very dubious of that. My church. We're struggling, baby. We're struggling. It's a struggle. Are in our twenties and I'm not sure we would be a good community culture fit here. Can you speak to that? I'd love to have you try. My son and his girlfriend are here. They're in their twenties. That's about it. At nine o'clock here at Living Stones, there's Sacramento City Life and they've got a lot of millennials and younger people in city life and their music is very fitting for that and the pastor is only going to be here for another 10 months and there's other people there and they're probably a little too, they might be a little more woke-ish than some of you think, but not necessarily. Josiah is around and Josiah is in the community. So I'd say try out city life and when you come, identify yourself and I'll get to see you in the face and greet your wife and shake your hand and you can check out Living Stones here. Part of what is happening for a lot of people is they are grazing, which pastors tend to hate this, but what that means is they kind of go to a small group in one church and they go to worship in another church and they do other kind of ministry in another church and they sort of hodgepodge their church thing together. That isn't great on community, but again, I'm sort of, pastors are in a particularly weak position to be dictating a lot of things right now unless you're orthodox and someone really wants to be orthodox and so, you know, one year of catechesis and then maybe we'll let you in. So I think it's a problem. You got to work and you have to keep an eye on your consumerism. In other words, don't just look for a church that meets your needs because a big part of the church and this is everything to do with meaning. We haven't done nearly enough talking about the relationship between meaning, the meaning crisis and consumerism because in some ways there's an antithetical relation to them. If you're a complete consumer, then you are going to be starved of meaning and what I mean by that, if you go to a church that doesn't need you, like a mega church, which doesn't need you very much unless you have all kinds of money or are super gifted or, you know, are somehow integral into their overall program and they can't swap you out with another piece. If you go to a small church, well, the preaching might suffer, the worship might suffer, there might not be ministry for your children. I mean, I don't want to out her too much, but talk to Catherine about her church was way up in a little town in northern Ontario. At the same time, if you can get in to a small church, especially, and it's not too hard to get into a small church if you're a little bit aggressive. What do I mean by that? I mean, keep showing, if you show up three weeks in a row at a church, at a little church, everyone will notice and they'll get all excited. Now, how much room they have in their lives, I don't know, but they'll get all excited and then maybe invite someone over to your home for dinner. Oh, and especially in California and the Midwest, that's a little bit more normal, but in California, don't invite them to your home, invite them out to a restaurant. Midwesterners love to bring people into their home. Californians are kind of, well, let's just go to a third neutral place. OK, we started doing in-home small groups at Living Stones. And within a year, most of them migrated back into the church building, which I think was telling. So anyway, you're going to have to work the problem and you're going to have to commit finally to a place. And I'd say commit to it for a few years if you can, because that will then give you a chance to maybe get in and you'll break their heart if you leave, especially in a little church. But little churches are used to having their hearts broken. So work the problem, find a church that needs you, and then there'll be a lot of meaning. And in time, people will let you into their lives if you let them into yours. And actually, you know, Rick is a huge part of this church and Rick is sick today. And Rick said, and I don't know about Sunday. I thought, I don't know if we can have Sunday without Rick anymore. So, Jared, if you're listening, you might have to get here early. You might be in Rick's little office there running the stream. I'll try and set it up for you. You and Roger. Good luck. So if you want to know how things are going to go, tune into the Living Stones channel Sunday morning. We'll see how rickety can be without Rick. So it's a hard thing, but you got to work it. And that's true of almost all valuable things in life. So but if you're living in a place like Sacramento, the good news is there are lots of churches and lots of good ones, but they're not necessarily easy to find. So this I met this week actually with a woman who goes to Epiclesis. That was the church that brought Rod Rear out. And, you know, they don't have a building. You know, they meet in rented space, but they're trying to do sort of the evangelical slash orthodox thing. Think about that. But, you know, I had no idea about that church and, you know, good on them. I'd say, you know, come in and try city life and get to know some of the people at nine o'clock here at Living Stones. And, you know, or, you know, you can always slide into my adult Sunday school class at nine thirty. You're in there with four or five people and once they, you know, you'll definitely stand out and they'll be all excited to have you there. And and here at Living Stones, you know, when Rick got here, you know, Marshall and Cynthia and Reggie had Rick and his father over to their house for Easter. You know, and it's just, yeah, it's not a program. They're people and you got to work it. So great question. Have you done any research into the failed utopian founding of Hopedale, Massachusetts? I have not. But it sounds interesting. When I was studying history at Calvin, I read a very interesting book in one of our courses taught by Ronald Wells on when a mass. But no, that sounds interesting. Failed. All utopian communities fail. Should be an axiom of Calvinism. It's especially interesting when Calvinists try to found them. So is there anything standing in the way of Gnosticism continuing to grow? Yes. Reality. Materiality. It always puts a cap on Gnosticism. The enemy of Gnosticism is a well aimed two by four. It's just this. And what way are people shaken out of Gnostic ideologies? Maybe with some shaking. Physicality. Androgynous videos are the inspiration for these questions. Androgynous? Do you mean the anadromist? Is, is burn power in the Gnostic world? Burn power androgynous? One, maybe mean androgynous. I don't know. One current Gnostic form being meta by Facebook is given a high dollar value, a mainstream embrace. And Gnosticism. Gnosticism lasts because it doesn't suffer in the same way from the age of decay as materiality. But it tends to float away. Hi Paul, Justice from Portland. You often know Allah Tom Holland that post Christianity is nested within Christianity. Yeah, can't even shake it enough to get rid of it in the name. Can we say in a similar way that post-modernity is nested within modernity? Yes. Great question. Short answer. Your question is very intelligible and I hope the answer is too. Chad the alcoholic. Have you had the opportunity to watch the show Yellowstone? I watched the first episode. Who's. Okay. One question at a time. Yeah, I watched Yellowstone. A lot of people had talked to me about it and you know, Kevin Costner, he's compelling and there, there's some, there's some very, there's some real archetypal elements to that show. We watched the first episode and my wife didn't seem particularly engaged by it and it seemed like in some ways, sort of another soap opera. So I might watch more. Lately, my wife and I have been watching a lot of Survivor because if a show is because usually towards the end of the evening, because she's, she's got to get up in the morning to go to school. And so I always tailor my schedule to match hers just so that we can sort of be in sync, at least in some of these aspects of our lives. So if the, if TV is too dramatic or too interesting, it doesn't help her fall asleep. I never have trouble falling asleep anyway, so it doesn't matter to me. So that's why we're watching Survivor and really kind of enjoy it. Reality shows are really sort of money induced tortures. The bachelor and bachelorette, Jared always, my son Jared always talks about the heart stopping and, and, and Survivor, I mean, some of the, some of the challenges in Survivor are just torture methods and it's like they're torturing these people and putting them in moral quality and they're torturing them in a way that they're not going to be able to do it. It's like they're torturing these people and putting them in moral qualms for a million dollars and we call it a game and it's the whole people. What's your all time favorite heretic? Sam, maybe. Because, you know, having a dead heretic isn't anywhere near as much fun as having a living one that I like. So I'll say Sam. All right. Oh, I had, I had the muted. Sam just said, I thought it was Luke. Is how heretical is Luke? Well, if we ask, if we ask Trip, Trip claimed that everyone on our OG, OG Randos were heretics. So is Luke, we'll let the discord decide is Luke or Sam more heretical? So I don't know. I don't know. It's a good question. All right. How do you interpret Proverbs 24, four to five? Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest you be like him yourself. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own words. That is sort of the quintessential couplet of Proverbs, isn't it? Because it has everything to do that the answer is given when you actually encounter a fool and you actually have to decide what to do with that fool. And I deal with this every time I open up Twitter and often when I go through the comments on my videos and I have to ask myself, actually, Douglas Murray asked this on Twitter one day and, and Trip made the comment that, you know, Trip wanted to see Douglas, you know, take down the, take down the, the fool who was, you know, snipping at Douglas Murray. Part, part of wisdom is always context. And there's a lot to be said in life about keeping your mouth shut when someone accuses you or says something against you or straw man's you or isn't understanding or most of the time, the best thing in this place of comments and Twitter and back and forth is just simply shut up. Maybe they're right. Maybe you're wrong. If they're a fool, most of what they're doing will come to nothing. So don't spend your time on it. That's just wisdom. So our interpretation of that is what we do in real life. All right, we're at the bottom. Okay, get in there now. Roger Marshall and of Roger Marshall sent me a really nice post on Neo Platonism. And he's in Barcelona, Spain. Ooh, I'd love to visit Barcelona. So if I ever get to Barcelona, Roger, you can show me around. That's how, that's how I'm going to get, you know, my wife to come along on these tours I want to do. It's like, honey, you want to see Barcelona? You're going to have to endure a meetup or at least sit in the hotel while I go do one. Okay, now I've got that marked. Although Roger, if you get yours in there, I'll, I'll answer it. Hi, Paul. I don't understand the argument of atheists who say that temporary life actually makes life meaningful because of its scarcity. I kind of understand that argument, but I don't fully buy it. I agree with you. I'm eventually going to die. It doesn't matter how I live my life. That's, that's right. That's the problem with that perspective. There's, there's a deep connection. There's a deep connection between meaning and the future for us. If it's arguing that I could add meaning by contributing to the lives of those around me, if they, if they themselves are going to die, it doesn't matter how I affect them. What am I missing here? I don't know. I agree with you feature bug. That's not really my argument. I, I, I know both Peterson and Vervecki tend to dismiss the, if, if death means the big sleep, or the nil or the null, then that doesn't, that doesn't make life meaningless. I'm not so, I'm not, I'm not terrible. I think there's something again, Vervecki is all about error checking. And so, but I, I, I think that's the problem. I think that's the problem. I think that's the problem. And so, but I, I continue to believe that, and again, I go back to the kinds of things I do in my ministry. I, my father, my grandfather before him, I work with a lot of hopeless cases. People are hopeless cases often. And, and not just homeless winos, but church people who do most things right. You know, you can't pastor a church and be impressed by the lack of transformation evident and, and the people that you minister to and with sometimes. Some people have personality issues that they take to the grave. And it's easy to look at someone and say, they'll never get better and walk away. Fair enough. But we tend to We tend to appreciate people who will continue to love and continue to hope even for a hopeless case, you know, and I'm not, I wouldn't be categorized as a hopeless case. I'm not, I'm not a hopeless case. I'm not a hopeless case. I'm not a hopeless case. I'm not a hopeless case. You know, and I'm not, I wouldn't be categorized as a Universalist, but I, you know, it's up to God what to do with us after death. And by faith, I say he will do what's right. So, you know, again, I, you know, this one homeless guy, gosh, I've been friends with him for 10 years. So he's just about to turn 62. So he's just about to turn 62. And right now he's going to the DMV. I think he's going today because he keeps losing his IDs because he can't keep track of anything. I told him, you want me to hold your ID for you? I'll hold it for you. The problem with that is, he always knocks at my door every time he needs it, but that's sometimes better than the alternative. So I've been working with this guy for 10 years. And I've worked with a lot of homeless people for long periods of time, and most of them go to the grave with their addictions. They go to the grave untransformed. And it would be easy to just walk down the street and see all these people and say, why throw good time after hopelessness? But there's a glory in, I mean, this is, this is part of what mother Teresa was, you know, everybody now, Oh, mother Teresa, mother Teresa was criticized for a lot. And not all of it was unfounded. But one of the big criticism was why you're just giving palliative care to people who are going to die. Okay. Yeah, fair enough. That's what she was doing. Why did so many people find that inspirational? I think part of it is because most of us have a hope that somehow, despite all of our folly and sinfulness, that God is able to redeem and restore. And that's kind of the heart behind universalism. That's not a bad, it's not a bad thing. So no, you're, you're right. Feature bugs. I agree with you. Copy it from something I asked on hashtag Protestantism in that room, that I had no relevance for anybody other than me as usual. Maybe word based worship services are the rough equivalent of gathering for a royal address. That's exactly what they are. Look at, I mean, you're Christian reformed. I got to meet you in the room. You made the cut in the, in the thief in the night video with your, with your poem, which was really rather wonderful. And that Eucharist based worship services are rough, are equivalent to royal audience. Any thoughts? Yeah, I think that's a great idea. I think the, I think you have a real point there. And so I, we had communion last week at living stones and my first, those of you who follow. So I had to switch bait. I had to switch tracks from my Pauline sermons because I've begun to appreciate more deeply the wisdom of a Christian church calendar. I'm still not as enamored with the revised common lectionary as my friend, Eric Dirksen. So actually in January, I'm switching back over to this narrative lectionary that comes out of Luther seminary because it's a little better at just kind of keeping to a gospel track and not, and being able to one way or another keep to the liturgical calendar, because as I said in my recent Advent sermons, we really do need calendars to structure our lives and to keep things from just being one day after the next. It's part of the real power of sabbatarianism of one day a week, breaking the rhythm and, and trying to realize the, the grace of God and how you shape your day. So we had, we had communion last week at living stones and I had, I still had my conversation with Len van der Zee, which is on the channel about the crisis of Protestant worship. Posted that a few weeks ago and we had communion and we had a lot of people who were I don't want to do that. I would rather have the elders say to me, they'd say, let's have, let's have communion twice a month instead of once. I'd say, good. Then they'd say, let's have communion every week. I'd say, all right, I'm with you, but we have it once a month. I wish we had it every week. All of our church plants have it every week now. And I really liked that. And I'm really persuaded by what Len had to say yet. Ewan, I think you're right. I, some really great, I, you know, be, when I do a video that has a lot of Jonathan Pigeot, every now and then we'll get the comment of, well, you just have to get into the divine liturgy and then you'll really know it's like, Oh, okay. I'm not saying anything against the divine liturgy. I'm not saying anything against the divine liturgy. One comment made, I wish I would have snipped it was a really wonderful comment. I should have pinned it. Basically talked about the rationality behind disciplined liturgical worship. And I think it's profound that you will be changed by the liturgy. That's what Peugeot says, you know, I think that's true. Yeah. I look at even mega churches that are much maligned, they have liturgy too. And as much as I might kind of poke fun at skinny jeans and smoke machines and guitar riffs and suede studio lights, it's not without its value. It's producing mystical mythic experiences and transformation for deploying it on a mass scale for a lot of people, as did Billy Graham and his crusades, as does God and his church uses a lot of methods. And it's not bad to have a preferred method. And it's not bad that different traditions have their preferred methods. I think about, um, Oh, where is it? Streams of living water. Richard Foster's book, the charismatics, the liturgists, the neo-sacramentalists, the African churches, the Haitian churches, I'm just naming churches, you know, did a lot of worshiping in Haitian churches when I was a missionary in the DR. Bingo. I spent almost four hours in a service with the Anglican Nigerians when they ordained, I found the whole thing just incredibly moving. A little bit of Africa here on Florin road. That was lovely. You know, they had the vestments and they had the pageantry and they even had guys with swords. And my friend, Eric Dirksen, who's the pastor of the church in Davis is like, you should have told me they were going to do this. I wanted to, I would have loved to have been here. So it would have been there for four hours with me. And I had a headache last week. I thought, did I get Omicron from the Nigerian worship service? I don't know. Christ plays in 10,000 places. When we get to the banquet of the lamb, I love Isaiah 60 where the Lord harvests his invested goodness into the diverse cultures of the world and calls them back to be redeemed and celebrated. It's, it's taking the image of the restoration of Israel and multiplied by the cultures of the earth. And we're experiencing that in churches all around the world every Sunday now. Now, none of us have the monarchical vision to see it, but it's happening. And I've had the opportunity to, you know, I'm a, I'm a minister, I'm a working pastor. So every Sunday I'm here. So I don't get a big chance to get out. Not like I had more when I was a missionary. I'm a pastor. I'm a pastor. I'm a pastor. I'm a pastor. I'm a pastor. I'm a pastor. I'm not like it had more when I was a missionary. But it's amazing what God is doing around the world. And it's not, I'm not offended by someone coming into the comments section and until you get into the divine liturgy. Amen. I'm not going to argue with you. You keep doing it. You keep promoting it. You keep, you keep them at, you keep, you keep declaring that it's the best thing around. you go for it. And then there's the Pentecostals and then there's the mega churches and then there's the frozen chosen and the reformed and Presbyterian and then there's the African-American churches and and then there's and then there's and then there's and then there's all around the world praising God, sometimes messing it up terribly but they're making a joyful noise even if it winds up being a lot like a noise. Yeah. What does it mean to be saved in preaching the gospel in Christianese and in your point of view? We are saved from ourselves for him. We are given the privilege of participating in his glory and that gets acted out in our day-to-day lives and it will be summed up and celebrated in worship where we learn to trust him more than we trust ourselves where we learn that any good thing we do is him working through us where we find that there's no hole so deep that he can't reach down and pull us out of it and where we also find that when we live in our holes it's because one way or another we've told him no thank you I don't want you and he said okay and the mystery of the difference between those two we will never fathom but he's a good God and he only wants what's best for us even grim grizz as little catchphrases are perhaps cryptic messages from God who is really inviting us to embody and to express our agency because he does want what's best for us and bit by bit this is going to be true of the whole world and his will will be done on earth as it is in heaven that's the story against the Catholic and Orthodox need for images and icons is it possible to see the New Testament as representing individual believers as visible concrete instantiations of beauty wrought by the spirit oh absolutely look at the name of this congregation I remember when we used to be Sacramento Christian Reformed Church and then we were planting churches and so there are a lot of Christian Reformed churches in Sacramento and then the obvious move would to be we're first Christian Reformed of Sacramento but we didn't go that way all of our church plants like granite Springs were all sort of combinations of rock and water we had granite Springs and River Rock and we had the gathering up in Natomas which is no longer there we had Bridge of Life which was in North which was in Gardenland Northgate and it's no longer there we have Christ Church Davis which sort of expressed the new iteration of church names that are sort of Anglican ish but we changed our name from Sacramento Christian Reformed because people would walk by and say of course they didn't look at Sacramento because that's was where we were and they didn't bother with Christian because of course you're Christian you got that cross on the outside Reformed is that like reform school that's always the question we get it's like this name isn't helping us so then we picked a equally cryptic name but one which was more biblical some people that the race finally came down to cornerstone because we are in the corner we got a lot of stone workings around the corner cornerstone verses and then I proposed living stones and of course I proposed living stones from first Peter too and that's exactly what you're saying Roger that we are living stones following the living stone and we are erected into a temple to his glory and here on the corner of Florin Road we are a misfit little bunch you know it's so funny because we had the OG randos conversation and you know island of misfit toys but that's always been my spiritual gift it was my father's spiritual gift to a tractor of misfits that's what I do I've done it all my life I can't help it and we're a little misfit church and if you come to our church it's like this is a misfit church and nothing here fits in anything somewhat but yeah individual believers as visible concrete instantiations of the beauty wrought by the spirit that's beautiful I really like that just as the body of Christ is represented by the Apostles as the living perpetuation of the temple exactly and Paul uses this imagery Peter uses this imagery I mean the strange thing in the earth in the very early church was where are your statues where are your buildings now eventually don't want to initiate too much here because eventually churches had buildings and statues and you know it's amazing in Europe that the the power of the cathedrals in Europe will continue to instantiate Christianity in that sense perhaps the rocks of the cathedrals are crying out and when Notre Dame burned the rocks were crying out and France listened now what you do with it but that's right that's exactly right we are being represented we are representatives of Christ and the church you know it's the old song we used to sing in Protestant Sunday school the church is not a building the church is not a steeple the church is not a resting place the church is the people that's why I'm a Protestant and you know in all fairness to the neo-sacramentalists and in a mysterious way some of our holiness sinks into the stones and the plaster and the wood and the fixtures and and they become holy and we're we're tempted with idolatry but in many ways none of these tensions can be adequately held or maintained without falling off I mean Tertullian one side or the other I mean we keep doing it but that is us icons and images are unnecessary even obsolete ideally yet what happens and you know all fairness to Sally one of our artists and residents you know one of her frustrations is that Protestants and art you know why can't Protestants get straight with art well that's this is part of the reason and so by virtue of God's grace we also have Orthodox and Roman Catholics and you know I love the work Jonathan Peugeot does and if I ever get to Europe I want to see some of these cathedrals and I know I'll walk in and just you know I've seen cathedrals in the New World and I suspect they're nothing compared to the cathedrals in the old world that were lovingly crafted over centuries Barcelona if you get that thing you're building there still so no but the church they're living stones and and finally you know it's when Notre Dame was burning they still wanted to make sure there were no people inside why because we are image bearers in a way that a stone building never will be we don't last as long as a stone building but we bear his image and we have potential for glory and that glory within the age of decay will always have a cruciform shape now we wait for the end of the age of decay and who knows what God will do in the age to come I don't know that that we can successfully comprehend it because we're so deeply formed by our contextuality so yeah that's it for today thank you all for hanging in there as I've got I've got my sermon to finish today I don't have Rick here Rick and I usually work on some things you know pray that Rick gets well for Sunday we look and see if in the room Jared is here Jared where are you Jared I don't see Jared I'll have to text Jared and say Jared I might need you to come in a little early on Sunday and maybe you'll have to sit in that room and I'll tell them what buttons to push so we can live stream the Sunday school and then the church service so yeah yeah so thank you all for being here thank you for your time and attention and I will end the transmission I'll stay a few more minutes in this chair then I've got to get up and stretch and get something to drink and move around a little bit and then finish my rough draft and I might get back to the discord this afternoon and then maybe if there's some conversation that's worth sharing do a little bit more reaping and then you know maybe if I do some reaping and find some other things I'll do a little a little bit more looming next week so all right I'm going to end transmission