https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7ze-UANS4EE

 As we've been working our way through the book of Leviticus, we've noticed many skeptical complaints about the book. Dietary laws make no sense. Purity laws are abusive or offensive. God calls errands sons for potential error, for procedural error. God gives rules about sex that we may or may not agree with. But in many ways, what we struggle with more in the church, especially in a pastoral sense, is moralism. Most skeptics don't go to church. It's kind of by definition. Moralism essentially says this, that the Bible and other religions, moral teachings or our parents tell us the rules. And the idea is that if we keep the rules, we get rewarded. And if we break the rules, we get punished. People disagree about the rules. So keep your own list of rules and live by them and be true to yourself. And if you do this, then somehow God will bless you. And there's actually a lot in the Bible that sounds like this. In fact, today's passage sounds a lot like this. And it's a long chapter. It's a very interesting chapter, so I'd like to read it. Leviticus 26 will begin at verse 3. If you follow my decrees and are careful to obey my commands, I will send you rain in its season, and the ground will yield its crops and the trees their fruit. Your threshing will continue until great harvest, and the great harvest will continue until planting. You will eat all the foods you want and live in safety in your land. I will grant peace in the land and you will lie down and no one will make you afraid. I will remove wild beasts from the land and the sword will not pass through your country. You will pursue your enemies and they will fall by the sword before you. Five of you will chase a hundred and a hundred of you will chase ten thousand and your enemies will fall by the sword before you. I will look on you with favor and make you fruitful and increase your numbers and I will keep my covenant with you. You will still be eating last year's harvest when you have to move out to make room for the new. I will put my dwelling place among you and I will not abhor you. I will walk among you and be your God and you will be my people. I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt so that you would no longer be slaves to the Egyptians. I broke the bars of the yoke and enabled you to walk heads held high. This is a beautiful passage and this is what we long to hear, our hearts long to have God in fullness so completely take care of all of our needs to be completely free from trouble and strife and difficulty from death and sin. This is in many ways a picture of heaven. It is a picture of the age to come and what the Lord is telling Israel after he is giving them all these laws, if you obey my law and if you fulfill my law I will bring heaven on earth. So we listen to this and our hearts are thrilled. The passage continues, but if you will not listen to me and carry out all these commands and if you reject my decrees and abhor my laws and fail to carry out all my commands and so violate my covenant then I will do to you this. I will bring on you sudden terror, wasting diseases and fevers that will destroy your sight and sap your strength. You will plant seed in vain because your enemies will eat it. I will set my face against you so that you will be defeated by your enemies. Those who hate you will rule over you and you will flee even when no one is pursuing you. If after all this you will not listen to me, I will punish you for your sins seven times over. I will break down your stubborn pride and make the sky above you like iron and the ground beneath you like bronze. Your strength will be spent in vain because your soil will not yield its crops nor the trees of your land yield their fruit. If you remain hostile towards me and refuse to listen to me, I will multiply your afflictions seven times over as your sins deserve. I will send wild animals against you and they will rob you of your children, destroy your cattle and make you so few in number that your roads will be deserted. If in spite of these things you will not accept my correction but continue to be hostile towards me, I myself will be hostile towards you and will inflict you for your sins seven times over and I will bring the sword to you to avenge the breaking of the covenant. When you withdraw into your cities I will send a plague among you and you will be given it to the enemy hands. When I cut off your supply of bread, ten women will be able to break your bread in one oven and they will dole out the bread by weight. You will eat but will not be satisfied. If in spite of this you still do not listen to me but continue to be hostile towards me, then in my anger I will be hostile towards you and I myself will punish you for your sins seven times over. You will eat the flesh of your sons and the flesh of your daughters. I will destroy your high places, cut down your incense altars and potty your dead bodies on the lifeless forms of your idols and I will look for you. I will turn your cities into ruins and lay waste to your sanctuaries and I will take no delight in pleasing aroma of your sacrifices. I myself will lay waste to the land so that your enemy who lived there will be appalled. I will scatter you among the nations and will draw all my sword and pursue you. Your land will be laid waste and your cities will lie in ruins. Then the land will enjoy its saddest years, all the time that lies it lies desolate and you are in the country of your enemies. Then the land will rest and enjoy its saddest. All the time that lies desolate the land will have the rest it did not have during the saddest you lived in. As for those of you who are left I will make their hearts so fearful in the land of their enemies that the sound of the windblown leaf will put them to flight. They will run as though fleeing from the sword and they will fall even though no one is pursuing them. They will stumble over one another as though fleeing by the sword even though no one is pursuing them. So you will not be able to stand before your enemies. You will perish among the nations. The land of your enemies will devour you. Those of you who are left will waste away in the land of their enemies because of their sins also because of their ancestors sins they will waste away. But if they will confess their sins and the sins of their ancestors their unfaithfulness and their hostility towards me which has made me hostile towards them so that I send them into the land of their enemies then when their uncircumcised hearts are humbled and they pay for their sin I will remember my covenant with Jacob and my covenant with Isaac and my covenant with Abraham and I will remember the land. For the land will be desolated by them and will enjoy its Sabbaths while it lies desolate without them. They will pay for their sins because they rejected my law and abhorred my decrees. Yet in spite of this when they are in the land of their enemies I will not reject them or abhor them as to destroy them completely but breaking my covenant with them. I am the Lord their God. For their sake I will remember the covenant with their ancestors whom I brought out of Egypt in the sight of the nations to be their God. I am the Lord. It's tempting to read this text again as common religion that God keeps score but mostly just the big stuff that heaven is for the good and hell is for only the really bad that God will understand as long as you try to mean well but if you read this passage it's a lot grimmer than that. Christians have obviously known this passage and been reading it for a long time and there are a number of things that are important to point out. First of all this was written to a particular group of people at a particular time. In the context of the covenant God says if you follow me and obey me I will make life flourish but if you turn and reject me this will be your path. And many scholars have in fact noted that if you read Leviticus 26 you pretty much read the Old Testament because everything in Leviticus 26 happens throughout the Old Testament. They will rebel against them. They will serve other idols. Their enemies will come upon them and Israel will for the most part except for brief periods of freedom live in subjection to the enemies around them and then when the exile comes they will be hauled into another place and everything described in Leviticus 26 will come to pass. The Old Testament prophets look back on Leviticus 26, read this and were saying to its people This is what's happening to you. This is what you've done. Christians often read this passage and notice that in fact the curse falls on Jesus. That's nice but we don't seem to be fully living the blessings of the first verses. If Jesus got the curse where are our blessings? Now the book of Job also in the Old Testament cuts against this kind of moralism. If you remember the story the Lord and the accuser, the devil are having a conversation and the devil basically says to the Lord Job is only good because it prophets him and the Lord says okay Job take away his blessings and let's see what he does. And so the Lord so then a whirlwind comes and his children are killed and his flocks are driven away and his enemies take all his possessions from him and still he doesn't curse God. And then Satan says skin for skin and so the Lord says okay afflict him, afflict his health and take his health away from him and see what he does and that then launches a very long discussion through the book where Job is at the point of despair and he wants to die and he's angry with God and then Job's friends come to him and whereas they should be comforters Job's friends come to him and say look Job if things are bad for you it must be because God's curses are against you. If things are bad for you you must have somehow offended God and therefore if you repent God will restore you. And Job said again and again but I have not wronged God. I don't know why these curses have come upon me I want the Lord to answer me and in the end of the book God shows up and basically shows himself to Job. Job does not get satisfaction as such for his question but puts his hand over his mouth realizing he can't question God. But God turns to the three friends and says you are all in the wrong. You do not know my mind by reading good circumstance and bad circumstance. When evil befalls don't imagine that you know my mind and that somehow you can turn this into an easy equation. So we have the book of Job and we have Exodus 26 and we think how do these things come together? How can they interrelate? Is it true that karma is real and when we do good things we get rewarded and bad things and then we are punished and when in fact things are hard for us that that is God needing out punishment on us for our sin. Can we make those kinds of equations? Furthermore with this passage Leviticus 26 comes after the golden calf and we would have to ask Lord you are cutting a deal with these people and you are telling them if they obey your covenant they will be blessed and if you fail their covenant they will be cursed. But we already know something about Israel. They are a bad bet. They don't have the morality credit score to qualify for this agreement. These are not the kind of people you should be giving a deal like this to because they will fail. In fact many skeptics will look and basically say does God work? Well I trusted in God and I prayed a prayer and he didn't give me the answer I wanted so therefore God doesn't work. I have given up on him. This is a story from the website Debunking Christianity and it is a story of someone who spent 10 years in full time Christian service. In the last 10 years I began to see that no matter how much faith or belief I had, God was and did not work. Oh I thought he did. I pretended he did. I duped myself into believing that on some level he was really there for me. In that time a dear friend who deconverted in 1999 asked me this question, Steve what has Jesus really done for you this week, this month, this year? I came up empty. All the trite answers I could give him were just fluff. Stuff I had really stopped believing after many many disappointments with God. I wasn't really looking to leave. I just kept searching for reasons why God was not answering my prayers and helping us. So I left because I could not believe it anymore. I could no longer tolerate the let downs. This guy is not alone. I meet people who tell me this same tale. I tried God and he didn't come through for me so I left. The irony is of course, left for what? What have you now gained by giving up on God? If you could have resolved your situations before with your resources you would have. So now you basically know there is no hope. I think part of it is in fact the personal issue with God. I mean it is one thing to have God say no but I love you. It's another thing to imagine God saying no I hate you and so then we turn away. Why do we need these conditionalities? In Leviticus 26 we have God saying to Israel obey me and I'll bless you. Rebell from me and I'll curse you. Why leave that when we also have the book of Job? I think part of it is we need the conditionality. We need God to play this part for us because the truth is that in this world there is no justice and we need someone to say you know all that stuff that Edi Amid got away with and then hopped up to France and died in comfort in the first world? The Lord saw him. The Lord knows him. All of the suffering that is created in this world the Lord will make right. We need to know that God will bring justice. We need to know that God has our back when the Lord says to us, vengeance is mine saith the Lord I will repay. What he's saying to us is don't get your hands dirty trying to equal the scales. Let me bring justice to your enemies. You try to love that. We need to know that God will do what's right even when we can't and won't. For the man who prays and prays and the Lord doesn't give him the answers he's looking for at some point if he says there is no God he's also going to have to face the fact that there is no help and there is no answer and why do you bother to live? Why not just simply sink into despair? We need to know that God has our backs in a way even when we don't. There have been many times in my life when I have prayed for things and months or years later I remember those prayers and thought I'm very glad God didn't answer that prayer. That was a foolish prayer and I'm glad he didn't give me what I wanted. Every living relationship is a dynamic exchange of affirmation and criticism. Think about that. Can there be any relationship without give and take, push and pull? Can there be any relationship? Have a relationship with a chair. Can you have a relationship with a chair? The relationship is fairly simple. It's a chair. It may hold you up if it's in good shape. Can the chair resist you? Can the chair say no to you? Is the chair interesting? It's a chair. We have relationships with our pets and those relationships can sometimes be life-giving and warm and fruitful but all of us know to one degree or another a relationship with a pet is not like a relationship with a human being, a relationship with something that is as smart as you, as something that can esteem you, something that can engage you. If God does not have a degree of conditionality with us, if God is in fact this warm and loving senile grandpa where you come to him and he says, oh isn't that nice? I love the scene in the Princess Bride when Princess Buttercup is about to be married to Prince Humberdink and she's against it and she pleads to the man and says, after I marry I'm going to take this knife and kill myself. And he just looks at her and says, that's nice dear. Is that the kind of God we want? So we need this conditionality. But at the same time we can't handle this conditionality because meaning well isn't enough if you've really harmed someone or if you've really failed someone and you come to them and said, but I meant well. Often that isn't enough. You may have meant well, but the consequences of your behavior still created enormous loss. The other way we can't handle this conditionality is our moral credit score, like Israel, is too low. We are a bad bet and so if in fact God just gives us justice, if God just gives us karma, and if someone else is deciding instead of our own self-biased perspective, we will get what we deserve and that won't look good. The other situation is that our circumstantial divination is biased. So this man who says, I gave up on God, well, do you know the children of Lake Wobegon? What are they? They're all what? Above average. And all the children are above average. I had a friend who was an elementary school teacher and he taught kindergarten and he said the first parent teacher meeting was always crushing because the parents came in and they're all exciting because this was their first child and look at all these things my child can do. He can color. He can count. He can say his ABCs. He can say his 1, 2, 3s. And they come to the teacher meeting and they're thinking that they're going to hear this glowing report about how their child is top of the charts and someday we'll go to Harvard and we'll save the world and the teacher says, oh, your child's doing fine. Fine? What do you mean fine? Your child is average. As a pastor, I'm the recipient of a lot of people's religious chatter. And they'll come to me and they'll just be chattering on and telling me about how good they are and what a good person they are and how they've done well and I just watch this stuff go on but I hear the people around them complaining about them and I think our biggest problem is that we can't see ourselves. And so why is it that when tough times come to us we say, well, I deserve better. Really? Why? Our pride, our insecurities, there's the other group that considers themselves too low and it's all of their insecurities play out. The one group when bad circumstances come they say, God is being unjust to me. The other group when bad circumstances come around they say, God is just punishing me for my awful sin and I look at them and I think, you're a lot better than the person complaining about God. And this is how we are. So we have Leviticus 26 and we have the book of Job and we say, how does God work? And the truth is, as the book of Job is pretty clear, we don't know always why God makes the decisions he does. I think the best analogy of this is the most common one, which is the parent and child. The child does not know the decisions the parent makes. And the problem with all of us children are that all of our parents are equally as imperfect and so sometimes the parent makes good choices, sometimes the parent makes bad choices and the children either benefit or suffer or sometimes they suffer from the good choices and even benefit from the bad choices. This is how we are and this is how life is and we're not always sure what God is doing in a difficult situation. But one thing I do know is that if you're not getting anything by running to God, you're certainly not going to get anything running away from him. Because the saints that I have known, that though they endure hardship, though they endure difficulty, though they endure loss, sometimes at great cost, if in fact they continue to trust in God and hold on to him, I find that their suffering does not make them bitter. I find that it's amazing what they can endure. I find that in the context of suffering, God can turn regular people into amazing saints. But the way we do this is a context of trust. Because without trust, we fall into despair. And while I read the story of this man who says, God doesn't work, I think, has this worked for you? Really? Are you happier now that you've given up on him? Actually, the context of this little bit that I clipped was basically, he was asking on this forum, what am I going to tell my kids? What am I going to tell my kids? I used to tell them that God was looking out for you. I used to tell them that God was looking over you. Now I'm going to say, there's nothing looking out for you. There's nothing looking over you. You should be scared, very scared. He doesn't want to tell his kids that. But if he tells them God's looking over for you, what are you going to say when they're 20? Oh, God's like Santa Claus, I told you a lie. That doesn't work either. So the truth is, in our miseries, we walk by faith, not by sight. We don't know, so we trust. Last week we looked at Leviticus 25, and what you saw in Leviticus 25 was a progression. Basically, it said, if a guy gets into trouble, he sells his crops. If he gets into more trouble, he sells his land. If he gets into more trouble, he sells his children, has servants, and himself as a slave. And if he gets into even more trouble, he gets sold off to foreigners. But the year of Jubilee comes, and this man will go free. And in fact, Leviticus 26 has the same progression, because it says, I will bless you, but if you turn back from me, I will give you hardship. And if you keep turning back, I will give you more hardship. And if you keep rebelling, I will give you more hardship. And if you keep rebelling, I will keep on you. But when you get to the end of the passage, what's made clear is that all of this pursuit is also a strange expression of love. Because I will tell you something, the one thing harder to deal with than hate is neglect. Look at children of bad parents. They would rather have a beating than to be abandoned, because at least when they're being beaten, they're worth something. In the cross, the debtor is too deep to be forgiven. And so Jesus comes to us and says, there's almost no way sometimes I can break in. And so I will pursue you, no matter how dark, no matter how despairing, and I will come to you and around you and I will rescue you if you will only stop and look to me. Your rescue is available just as. And all of those amazing songs that we sang at the beginning of the service, that's essentially what they say. The picture is that we are blind in our own sin and we are so set on our own path, we can't find God if we simply disregard him. And so the message is when Jesus comes, you can't save yourself, so I came to you. In the cross, the debtor in too deep is forgiven. And in the resurrection, the moral failure to dead is raised again. We are always saved by grace through faith, not by what we accomplish. So you're saying God comes to us with conditionality and we need to progress and unconditional love? In a way, yeah. We need God in some ways to play this role in our lives, to keep stopping us and calling us back. But beneath it and behind it is always the sense that God does love us first. And again, consider the parent who has a rebellious child and the parent talks to the child, the parent pleads with the child, the parent encourages the child, and finally at some point the parent puts the child out. But like the father of the rebellious son, he longs and waits and he looks down the road and even when the son comes back to him and the son has in his mind the speech of Pharaoh and he's going to try and duke his father, the father will have none of it and he throws his robe around the son and he says, come back into my house. Gratitude avoids making God our tool. Gratitude invites us to be like God, a benefactor who forgives, gives, loves, and can create mercy where there is despair. You have to read Leviticus 26 in the context of the rest of the Bible and what the message is is that you are rescued by grace because you cannot work your way out of this. You will stumble and fall. He disciplines those he loves to perfect us and to lead us to the joy of giving grace like he does. The struggle is short compared to the glory to be revealed. Let's pray. Lord, I know that there are sufferers in this room. I know that there are men and women whose knees are calloused because they have been seeking you not just for hours, not just for days, not just for months, but for years. I know, Lord, that there are lovers of you in this room that even though they have suffered tremendous loss, they will not give up on you and they will, in a sense like Jacob, continue to cling to you and say, bless me, bless me. And I believe, Lord, that as John Calvin said of your fight with Jacob by the stream of Jabuch, you fight us with one hand and you support us with the other. So, Lord, I know that it is easy to despair. I know that it is easy to give up. I know that it is easy to turn away and say, he is of no use to me. I will be out there on my own. Well, if you never were, then we've always been on our own and that's not a guarantee of anything. It's only by your spirit, Lord, that you draw us to you, that we begin to trust you, that we hold fast to you even when it seems it doesn't work. Give us that grace. Give us your spirit. And whether you're giving us blessings that we can see or hardships that we must endure, make us your own and make us like you. In the name of Jesus, amen. What would you say? What would you say?