https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=K7ViEed4iIg

 Hunky! Look at good ol' George Reeves over here. I always wondered why Superman wears his underwear on the outside. He's just out of the belt, too. But yeah, he's more hunky. Why is that? What happened? What's that? He evolved. He evolved. Okay. Superman evolved. The Men's Journal a couple of months ago had a very interesting article about this. It said, Getting there takes effort, vigilance, and the dedication of the elite athlete. High intensity training, strict diet, supplements, and hormone replacements. If that fails, there are always drugs. Today's actors spend more time in the gym than they do rehearsing. More time with their trainers than with their directors. Isn't that interesting? Here's James Bond then and now. Since 5% body fat is nobody's natural condition, fitness plans were geared to peak on the days of sex scenes or shirtless moments. To prep for these days, trainers will dehydrate a client like a boxing manager sweats a fighter down to weight. They often switch into a low or a no sodium diet three or four days in advance to fade out the carbohydrates, brew up diuretics like herbal teas, and then push cardio to sweat out water. All to accentuate muscle definition and for their key scenes. I know this disappoints many of you. I'm thinking of Reggie in particular because he had aspirations for this lifestyle. But I just want to let you know, Reggie, what this will take. So let us know what you're up to. What does all of this say about us? We all understand that in many ways, no pain, no gain. That if you want that Hollywood physique, that superhero stature, that you're going to need to work for it and you're going to need to work hard. But this doesn't just go for having a sculpted or yoked body. This goes for almost everything in life. If you want to succeed at your career, you know where a doll at 40 hours just isn't going to cut it. That you have to be hungry to survive. We are filled with good intentions, however, but the truth is that for the most part, like these Hollywood guys, you can only sustain this for a little while. Remember this guy? Oh, I'm glad you could make it, Curtis. We're just putting some pictures up of you. I don't know which one you tend to emulate or maybe you can tell us. I think the one on that one is more like me. Now why am I talking about male bodybuilders? Probably because pretty much we can say the same thing about women in Hollywood, but if we put their bodies up and everybody gets a little more uncomfortable, that's a little safer to talk about. We all have these great intentions, but you know what? Even Arnold, who at a time wowed the world with his physique, well, history does what it does, doesn't it? And we all run into this thing with good intentions. We've been walking our way through the book of Exodus and the children of Israel are around Mount Sinai and the Lord has come down and the Lord has thundered to them. And then last week we saw how he set a table on the mountain and invited the leaders of Israel to actually eat with him. And he's given them the Ten Commandments and the Book of the Covenant and when he's told them everything he wants from them, they all say, yes, we agree, we'll do it. But then what will happen? You know, I look at Arnold here and say, yeah, I wouldn't mind looking like that, but I look more like the guy over on this side. Because you know, when it comes right down to it, sacrifice, eating right every day, getting the exercise, doing everything it takes, well, I'd just really rather sit on the couch and eat some chips. And that makes you look more like this than like this. But I don't care. The story of the world in Genesis 1 starts with this refrain. At each step God makes something and says, it is good. It is good. And a lot of scholars have kind of wondered, what does he mean by good? And then probably one of the best ways to figure that out is to look in chapter 2, because after all of the it is good, it is good, it is good, it is good in chapter 1. When you get to chapter 2, we hear that something is not good. And the thing that is not good is for the man to be alone. And so we wonder, well, what is this good that we've been talking about? John Walton, who's been doing a lot of work on this and writing on this in Genesis 1 and the early chapters of Genesis, notes that these verses about it is good. This verse has nothing to do with moral perfection or quality of workmanship. It is a common concerning function. The human condition is not functionally complete without the woman. What does that mean? What do these early chapters mean? What does it mean to say that God made the world good? It means that God made the world to function as it should. And when the man is without a woman, humanity and the world and what God is seeking for, which is glory, cannot fully function. So the woman needs to come in. And then, do you remember what the man says when he sees the woman? He sees the woman, bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh, and he's filled with the appreciation of glory. It's funny because when we see these Hollywood men who have been, you know, taking all of the water out of their system and pumping up in that article, there was one scene where Brad Pitt, before a scene, presses down in front of a bunch of extras and Quick does 25 push-ups. And everybody says, oh, you know what, is he so vain that he's trying to impress us? They say, no, he's just trying to get his muscles in optimal condition for this one picture. So we have this picture of these men and we imagine that this is what creation is supposed to be like. But the truth is, have you ever watched the World's Strongest Man on ESPN? Do they look like Arnold? No, they don't. What do they look like? Me? They answer, they look more like me! Sometimes they have a big God and they're just kind of big. What does it mean? What does any of this mean in terms of our imagination of what is good and what God is trying to do and what it means to sacrifice? God calls the nation of Israel out of Egypt and brings them into the desert and wants to live with them. But he knows full well that when he says, this is the law, they say, yeah, we'll do it! But he knows full well that they say that on Sunday morning, but as the evening gets long, all of their attention tends to drain away. And so the Lord says they're going to need something more tangible in the creation. Humanity had a key functional role in how and whether the creation would achieve its goal, its purpose, which is glory. In my adult Sunday school class at 930, we've been talking a lot about glory and I've been sharing with them about Isaiah 5 or going through the book of Isaiah. And here in Isaiah 5, you have this parable, this Old Testament parable about a vineyard where the Lord takes a fertile hillside and puts in a wine press and puts in the vines and says, Israel, I want you to make wine. And you wonder, well, that doesn't sound very good. The Lord wants him to make wine. The purpose of the story is that the wine is all about glory. But what Israel does, in fact, is takes this thing, which should be glorious, and turns it into suffering. The portrait in the garden is one of glorious fruitfulness to begin, but then in Genesis 3, the man and the woman say, yeah, we've got a better idea. God wants glory, but we think we can make glory without him and on our own terms. And so, as you remember in the story, they take the tree, they try and grasp that power, they lose their innocence, and then God lays down some curses. And to the man, the field is cursed because in that culture, the field is the man's area of fruitful productivity for glory. And now his efforts will be painful and frustrated. So the woman, her womb is cursed, and whereas Lucas, excited for his new baby brother or sister, mom knows something of the travail she will have to endure for the glory of this new child to be revealed. In that culture, the womb was her area of fruitful productivity, and now her efforts will be painful and frustrated. And so God calls Abraham to begin the process of undoing the rebellion. And the goal is for humanity and the Creator God to be reconciled so that the good of Genesis 1 can be realized. What does it mean for a holy God, a righteous God, to live in the middle of a rebellious people? Have you ever noticed the strangeness of us where on one hand we don't want to be alone, and on the other hand we can't stand to be with each other, and when we are, we fight? Have you ever noticed how universal this is? I heard a good quote from a man who became a widow or a widower, and he said to his sister-in-law, I'd rather be lonely than miserable. Very telling comment. It is not good for the man to be alone, but right away when the man and the woman rebel against the God, what happens right away? Who's the first one to throw the other one on the bus? It was that woman that you gave me. And so what God intends to do is start living in the midst of people like us. And what won't we do when things start getting a little bit sideways or backwards? If someone cuts you off in traffic and doesn't touch your car, why are you angry? Did you get hurt? Did you somehow lose money? What has been offended? Our pride. We're sensitive, aren't we? The Lord said to Moses, Tell the Israelites to bring me an offering. You are to receive the offering from me from everyone whose heart prompts them to give. Notice right away, even in Israel, Moses doesn't lend you the children of Israel to bring something to the Lord. First of all, it's a voluntary offering. It's a sacrifice. These are the offerings you are to receive from them. Gold, silver, and bronze, blue, purple, and scarlet yarn, and fine linen, goat hair, ramskins dyed in red, and other types of durable leather, acacia wood, olive oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the fragrant incense, and anachstones and other gems to be mounted on the ephod and the breastplate. Then have them make a sanctuary for me, and I will dwell among them, and make this tabernacle and all its furnishings exactly like the pattern I will show you. What is God doing here? God is saying, in the moment of passion, Israel says, we'll do everything you want, and the Lord says, okay, I will live with you. You need to make a space for me so that they will see me in their midst and know that I dwell with them. Now, if you were an ancient, you would have understood very well what this whole thing is about, because it's actually all over the world. If you look at it, what's this picture right over here on the left, we're talking a little more familiar with that, what is that? What? What's that? The Parthenon. And what would you have in a Greek temple if you walked in? A statue, a giant statue of the God. In Hinduism, that practice continues, if you go into a Hindu temple, you will see lots of statues of the gods. Well, what is this building for? What is this temple for? What is this tabernacle for? This is a place where you house your God, and you put up the statue and you bring in food because the God needs to eat. Now, everybody knows the statue doesn't really eat, but everybody understands that this is where we house our gods. What is different about the Hebrew situation, though? If you go into the Holy of Holies, what will you see? No statue. What's that? It's an empty room. After later, the temple, the new temple, the second temple, after the ark is gone, all you find when you go into the Holy of Holies is in fact an empty room. Because the Lord begins by saying, you shall not make for yourself a graven image of any likeness in heaven above or earth below or anything under the earth. Why not make a graven image? Because the Lord says, you cannot imagine me and anything that you've ever seen. And you cannot contain me in any works of your hands, and I will not be defined by you. I will define you. But yet the Lord says, how will they know I'm living with them unless I make a space? They're living in tents. My tent will be in their midst. And in this tent, they and I will relate, and we will begin to undo the rebellion that happened in the garden. If you remember Genesis 3, the man and the woman rebel, and the Lord makes some clothing from animal skin. The animals already are beginning to pay for our rebellion. And then the Lord does what to them? And exiles them from the garden. What scholars have noted about the tabernacle that is designed is that the tabernacle is full of all kinds of imagery. We can read chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 in the book of Exodus where the Lord goes through exhaustive details on all of the elements of the tabernacle. But the point of all of this imagery is basically this. The tabernacle is a recreation of the garden. And the point of the Lord living in the midst of his people is he's saying, you and I together are going back into the garden. But there will have to be sacrifices made so that we can continue together. And you're going to have to obey some boundaries because if you get too close to me, you'll be destroyed. It's very different from imagining we can go right up to a statue and do things to it, and this will somehow transact our relationship with the Lord. The Lord says, you can't even get close to me. You don't even really know what I like, but we're going to begin this process of getting to know each other by living together in a covenant framework. This is a part of the process to restore the proper function of creation. In fact, if you read closely Exodus and Numbers and Leviticus and Deuteronomy, you'll see all kinds of promises that if they follow the covenant, the Lord won't let their shoes wear out and won't let their clothes wear out. What's all of this stuff about? It's basically the Lord is saying we're going back to the garden and creation work as it should. And when our relationships were all in line and functionality will be restored, God would live in the midst of his people and God would care for his people and they would obey God. Covenant plus living together equals marriage. What's the difference between living together and not being married and being married? Anyone? Commitment, a covenant. If you're just living together and you're not married, what you're basically saying to the other person is, I'm going to try you out. And as long as you and I are together on the same page and this thing works for me, it'll be cool. How is marriage different? You call all your friends together and you stand up on this stage and you say the most unrealistic, audacious thing to the other person. You say, I will love you when you look more like Arnold today than when you looked like when he was full of his muscles. And I will love you even if you have a stroke. And I will love you even if you have Alzheimer's. And when we say I will love you, we don't mean, oh, I'll feel all warm and gushy about you. It's like with a child. Your child can be driving you crazy. I don't know what started buzzing here, Raj. Your child can be driving you crazy, but loving your child means I will continue to do for you and care for you and feed you and act towards your behalf. The difference between living together and being married is you make a public commitment and you say, I am here for your welfare. Come what may. And any of us who has lived in that kind of relationship knows that none of us are up to it, whether we divorce or not. But this is what the Lord does with Israel. He moves into their midst and says, I am here for you. Come what may. And as we go through the rest of the story, you'll see that Israel is a very bad spouse and will betray her Lord on many occasions. God, in fact, has a terrible marriage. Israel can't sustain her side. Living together sometimes breaks out in domestic violence. God will work the relationship for years, but later on, as the book of Hosea will illustrate, the Lord calls Hosea into to marry a prostitute. And the Lord says to Hosea, I want you to redeem her from the slave traders. And I want you to be married to her still. Because that's what I do. Matthew 1. The virgin will conceive and give birth to a son. They will call him Immanuel, which means God with us. Matthew 2. So he took the child and his mother during the night and left for Egypt. There they stayed until the death of Herod. So it was fulfilled what the Lord had said to the prophet, out of Egypt I have called my son. What you begin to understand if you read the New Testament and the light of the Old Testament is that Jesus is Israel. John 1. And the word became flesh and did tabernacle among us. John in the Greek takes the word from the Greek translation of the Old Testament and says, What Jesus did in our midst was tabernacle among us. And he's evoking this picture of the Lord establishing this tabernacle in the midst of an unholy people. And we beheld his glory, glory as of the only begotten of a father, full of grace and truth. And what in fact the apostles will paint this in the New Testament is begin to say, As you come to him, the living stone, rejected by humans but chosen by God and precious to him, You also like living stones are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, Offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. Did you know that what you are doing this morning is tabernacling? And that the Holy Spirit in your midst right now is tabernacling among us? And that it is not these walls or these ceiling fans or the projector or any of the stuff here in this building that is the church, But it is in fact you that are the church. And that what we are doing this morning is exactly what this garden of Eden tabernacle in the desert was pointing to. We get two sides of misery with this. On one side you can't look like this Hollywood stud unless you embrace the misery of sacrifice. And on the other you can embrace that misery of sacrifice all you want. Look at all the sacrifice Arnold did and look at where it's brought him. He was governor of California but where is he now? The truth is in this world everything will be taken from you. That always happens in the age of decay. There is no stopping it. But Jesus comes and tabernacles in our midst. And as the book of Hebrews says, the law is only a shadow of the good things that are coming, not the realities themselves. For this reason it can never by the same sacrifices repeated endlessly year after year make perfect those who draw near to worship. Sacrifices offered to the Lord are in fact confessions of our imperfection. And I don't care how much money you put in those little red bags, none of that will make you perfect. Otherwise they would not have stopped being offered. For worshippers would have been cleansed once for all and would no longer have felt guilty for their sins. But those sacrifices are an annual reminder of the sins. It is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins. And so what Jesus does is come in and says all the sacrifices that you have made have been pointing to me. And I will spread myself and offer myself as a sacrifice for you to accomplish it. When we talk about grace, sometimes people say, well grace makes us lazy. Are you telling me that there's nothing I can do to add to the forgiveness that God gives me? Yes, that's what I'm saying to you. Well won't that make me lazy? I didn't, probably were lazy before and you look like me. Do you assume fear and guilt are the only consistent motivators? We're awash in fear and guilt in this world. Is it changing us at all? I've been reading To Kill a Mockingbird. I've completely gotten into audio books. How many of you have ever read To Kill a Mockingbird? Good bunch of you. Beautiful book. Jen, the little boy, has to read for an old woman. The reason he has to read for her every day is because as he and his little sister are walking down the road, this old woman, she was a bigot. And she was saying things about their father that made Jen angry. So he took the baton that he had just bought for his sister and he cut it in two and he whacked off all the camellias from this old woman's garden. And his father, who was being berated by this woman for standing up for a black man, told him to go and read to this woman. And Jen could not understand it. Why should I read to this woman? Unknown to the boy, the old bigot was trying in fact to beat her own addiction to heroin. This is out of his pocket. She was. She had her own views about things a lot different from mine, maybe, son. I told you that if you hadn't lost your head, I'd have made you go read to her. I wanted you to see something about her. I wanted you to see what real courage is. Instead of getting the idea that her is a man with a gun in his hand, or maybe a man who's been dieting and starving himself so he can look like a superhero for a hot scene in a movie, it's when you know your lips before you begin, but you begin anyway and see it through no matter what. You rarely win, but sometimes you do. Mrs. Dubose won, all 98 pounds of her. According to her views, she died beholding to nothing and no one. She was the bravest person I ever knew. That bigoted old lady with her Confederate States of America pistol. What's the point? Why do you strive to sacrifice? You might work all that striving and accomplish whatever it is that you want. What are you looking for? Are you looking for your own glory? You are fighting an enemy that you won't beat. What is real courage? If you know you won't win, can you receive the victory that he's given you? And once you receive it, can you imagine that in fact all such fighting, all such loving, all such sacrifice, all such giving contributes to a glory that you haven't earned? You see the resurrection is pure gift, just like the crucifixion. It is a good world restored. It is a relationship made whole. It is the fulfillment of all our joy based striving. It has begun in the risen flesh of Jesus. You have just a little while to wait, some of you less than others. But can you in fact live out your life knowing this glory, loving this glory, pursuing this glory, receiving this glory? Can you in fact love the person that there's nothing in it for you to love? Can you give money to a cause that you know will not finally endure apart from the resurrection? Can you love your neighbor who does not deserve your love, but you give it because the love that has been given to you? This is far more glorious than bulging pecs and a dehydrated body. This is in fact when we do it, God tabernacling in our midst because we reflect and receive the gift that Jesus has given us. And the irony of this is that all of these Hollywood stars have great DNA that most of us don't have, but the access to this kind of love is so utterly common and all over the place. You don't have to look any further than the person sitting next to you or your next door neighbor or in the cubicle, one over. Will you learn to love those who don't deserve it? And will you learn to enjoy the glory of hopeless causes for the God who gives because we need? Let's pray. Lord, you tabernacled in our midst and you saw our foolishness up close and we treated you worse than you would dare treat a spouse in the state of California. And yet you died for us and you forgive your enemies even as they're killing you. May we see this glory and this beauty and may it change us from the inside out, not because we're greedy and trying to grab grace for ourself, but because you're beautiful and we want to be beautiful like you in ways that are way deeper than our skin. Give us your spirit, Lord, because without your spirit we can't do it. And make your glory common in our midst so that we may be your tabernacle on Florin Road, in Sacramento, in California and to the world. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand?