https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fd1lPMBz2lc

 Well Lucy, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Sure, so I'm Kiwi, about 45 years old, give or take. I'm currently over here in Australia at the moment, in Newcastle, which is about two hours north of Sydney. Okay. That's, yeah, I suppose probably about 150,000 maybe, maybe 300 in the wider area. It's sort of a university town that's on the coast. It's really lovely actually, I'm loving it here. Oh, wonderful. Might be a few years before I'm back in New Zealand, maybe. Okay. I'm all interested in Australia now because I'm planning this trip in March. I've never been to Australia and so I'm going to take a week of vacation before I go down to Melbourne. And I'm really excited, I've never been to Australia, I love to travel, but so I'm really excited about it. It sounds like a beautiful country. It's lovely. Everything in the country is designed to basically kill or maim you in the most creative way possible. That's what my wife is concerned about. Snakes, spiders, and that's not even mentioned in the locals. So, yeah, but it's a big change from New Zealand where we've got, I think, one poisonous spider that is quite shy and secretive, but here everything will actively pursue you, given half the chance. So, yeah. We just came back from Melbourne actually. We were down there the weekend before we went to the tennis, which is sort of my partner had wanted to do for a long time. It's a lovely city. I think you'll really enjoy it there. Okay. I'm looking forward to it. Where else are you going to? Well, I'll go up to, I'll see the reef a little bit in the week before with the family and then fly back down to Melbourne and I'll be speaking at a conference and I'll be preaching. So they've got a pretty full slate for me there, which I'm excited about. So what's the conference? It's a conference on Jordan Peterson. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's what they're, a number of months ago, they contacted me and said that they'd like me to go and do a conference for them. And I thought, really? They're like, oh yeah, very much. So, so we're doing it. So it's wonderful. Oh, well, I think, who's organizing it? Is it like a church thing or? A church down there. Now someone just knocked at my door. Hold on. This happens sometimes, but just be patient. I'll be right back. Hi. There you go. I totally meant to get to you last week. The babies will do that. Oh my God. I thought pregnancy rating was bad. New mom rating, so much worse. Well, they don't ask for permission. They just tell you what they need. Yeah. Well, they don't really tell you what they need. They just cry. Right. You got to figure it out. That's right. I need something. You figure it out. Sorry about that. That's going to become a meme in my videos when I have to get up and answer the door. That's all good. Does your travel take you past Sydney at all? Well, I think we're just touching down in Sydney and then flying right back out again. So I'm not going to spend any time in Sydney. Oh, that's a shame. It's almost as nice as Melbourne. Well, I've, you know, who knows? The tickets weren't crazy expensive. They weren't as expensive as I thought. So who knows? Maybe I'll come back again someday. Who knows? Sure. And what will you talk about at the conference exactly? Like the whole thing in itself or your involvement in it or what you've been doing? Just about everything. I'll talk about, I'll probably talk about what I think, why I think Jordan Peterson is important to this moment in Christianity in the ways that he, I mean, it's a kind of a shocking thing that he, that so many people have been moved by him to once again be interested in Christianity and the groups that have been moved to be interested in him were groups that weren't, were quite resistant to the usual ways that Christians try to attract new people. So that's what drew me to this. And I've really spent the last year and a half trying to learn why is this happening? What are the historical roots of it? What can the church learn from this? What, you know, how can the church continue to do its mission to, to do its mission in the world now learning what we are from Jordan Peterson? So I think that's, that'll mostly be what I talk about. Well, it's certainly been fantastic having your videos. I think I discovered them. I think fairly early on I was probably searching for Jordan Peterson videos on YouTube and I came upon one of your, yeah, one of yours and obviously had that in the title and I've been following ever since. And the job I do involves quite a bit of driving. So it's been great having put them on podcasts and also with university studies having it in the background. It's, yeah, it's been, it's been a great ride actually. I've really enjoyed the interviews you've had with other people and also how you've sort of integrated into the Christian story, especially with C.S. Lewis. I haven't quite managed to get into the abolition of man. That's, I'd probably have to sit down with a notebook and pen to slowly work my way through it. But the other stuff, I've been a bit of a fan of Lewis, especially the screw tape letters and the great divorce. Yeah, I've really enjoyed seeing that connection. It's certainly something I've found I can relate to definitely. Well, thank you. Thank you. It's been tremendously fun. And I've, I've, I've really enjoyed the conversations like we're having now just because it's, well, it's unexplored territory. There's always someone new out there who's got a new idea and a new angle or different life experiences. And then to integrate that into my learning has been just wonderful. So I guess I've got a couple of questions or I can go a little bit more into where I've come from and where I'm at, whatever you think would be. It's up to you. It's your time. So lead us where you will. We'll be riffing fairly freely, I think. Okay. Showing where the spirit leads, I believe. Okay. So I'm here in Australia studying at the University of Newcastle and I'm doing a degree in natural history illustration, which is basically painting and drawing, but essentially artistic representations of the natural world, often with a very scientific focus. But it does let you go into things like animation, medical illustration, children's books. So it's kind of a split between the science and more artistic creative side, but it's all linked with like a natural history focus. This is, I think, the only place in the Southern Hemisphere that does a degree course in it. And there wouldn't be any in the world. It's a real sort of an oddity. So if you want to do it, you essentially have to come to Newcastle. So I moved over here about three years ago. I was in the Air Force back in New Zealand for probably close to 19 years, I guess, working as a photographer. It was a great job, best job in the world. But all good things have to come to an end. This was something even better to go and do. And there was a real sense of calling in it as well. So even though it's certainly a lot of work, and I think the more I do, the more I feel I still have to learn, which kind of mows Christian, I guess, the spiritual walk, I suppose. So I've kept that rising quite nicely. So I think I mentioned in the emails or the things we exchanged. So in about 2010, I transitioned from male to female. My claim to fame is I'm the first person in the New Zealand Defence Force to do it. So if that's the one, I'll probably make a great picture. And I think the only thing I'll be claiming support for. And that went very well. I was very well supported by the workplace, friends and family and everything. And I suppose that was what got me interested in, it was like the first thing that interested me in Jordan Peterson in the sense that I must have heard a snippet on the news or something about some professor in Toronto not using the transgender pronouns or something. And I didn't really pay that much attention. I guess it had gone or have gone so well that it was like, you know, you kind of sort of shrug your shoulders and it's like, you know, who cares? There's other things going on in life to focus on. But it must have kept cropping up in various news sources online. And then so I think I went and clicked, looked almost reluctantly, went and looked on the YouTube and saw the protests. I was hooked within a couple of minutes from hearing him speak. I understood exactly where he was coming from. And I think to make it even more compelling, I thought the people that were protesting against him were doing it in very bad faith in the sense that they weren't, even if they didn't agree with what he was saying, they weren't listening to what it was. Yeah, if I'd been there, I think I would have been compelled to cross lines, I guess, from, you know, my tribe and inverted commas to supporting what he was saying. Even if I thought there were still some questions about, say, intersex people, where I think you can make a really good case in having no one, no one went fairly well when I was back in New Zealand, that, you know, there is some scope for developing a sort of gender neutral pronoun for people that just don't fit neatly into one box or the other. But yeah, I really felt that he, even if he didn't agree with what he was doing, his reasoning behind it, I guess, the potential for too much control over speech mandated by the government wasn't a good path to go down. And yeah, from that point on, I was, yeah, like most people, I guess, I came for the scandal and stayed for the content. Worked my way through all his lectures while I was doing my studies, which is great, because you're sitting in the lab drawing and you've got the headphones on and just free education on top of what you're doing. Yeah. And yeah, I guess followed the controversies. I say there is a sense, I guess, that it's very much like the Truman Show, even though I've benefited a lot, I think, in certain areas, maybe facing up to a few resentments, I guess, that I was nurturing, the sense of being trying to be a bit more organized, which is a constant struggle, but also to just getting a better handle on what is meaningful and how best to pursue that as opposed to, say, what is expedient, I guess. So I suppose my first question would be, how do you think it will all end? No. I was, this morning I was watching, so I've been doing more work on John Vervecki's stuff lately. And so then I dug up a video that I had tried to watch a while ago of Peterson talking to Vervecki, and this was from 2015. It's about the same time Peterson did the first Transliminal interview. And what was sort of delightful about it is this was before the status rocket for Peterson, and he was kind of relaxed, and he could say what he wanted to. He didn't have to be careful. And so as I watched that, I was pondering the ways in which his own transition has changed him. I don't know how this will end. There are some end scenarios, and when I say end scenarios, I mean ways that he can step off kind of this crazy wave he's riding. One of those might be Dr. Oz and daytime television. You know, Jordan Peterson has his own daytime television show. Yeah, that, you know. I think you saw my comment about the staged intervention we'd be expecting you to lead. You know, the difficult thing is that it's very difficult to ride a wave forever, in that he's been on this crazy ride for two years now, which is, you know, it's kind of a crazy ride. I started reading a biography of Napoleon, and you know, Napoleon had about a 10-year crazy ride. The difficult thing with Peterson is that he's in a sense so out there, away from institutions, kind of on his own. So it's really hard to know, will he, you know, will he, will something inside of him change so that he's just not as much fun anymore? Will people get tired of him? Will he not be able to refresh his content? And so he kind of becomes a one-trick pony. Or will he, does he have further to go? A lot depends on what the next book is and how that goes, and whether lightning can, in a sense, strike twice with a new biblical series. So I think in the next year, 2019 will be an important year to figure out whether 2020 will also be an interesting year for Jordan Peterson, or if he'll just kind of land. That's somewhere, so when Ron Dart and I were talking, that's kind of where we agree that if he's going to have staying power, he's going to have to either do something else, or really start to build an institution that gives what he's doing, you know, really, really staying power. Yeah, I had mixed feelings about the announcement of the second book. One, I think, you'd made a comment, I think, in one of the previous videos some time ago about, you know, oh no, not enough, the 12 rules. Part of me, yeah, has that sense of why there's probably a lot of good stuff that could be developed and having listened to his Q&A where those rules are mentioned, I think. There were certainly some, and I can't think of them off the top of my head, where you could really probably mine quite deeply, draw on stuff in his lectures and bring out, you know, bring out some kind of new content or package it. But I guess there is that risk of it becomes almost too much, where perhaps something that went in a different direction, maybe saying looking at the scientific issues, say, in what you might call the grievance study courses or really, maybe really interacting, say, with feminism in such a way that you can both highlight some of the issues. And I think there are a lot of issues that need to be exposed a bit more, perhaps, especially with the academics kind of thing, but also try and build something positive in dialogue with some of the sort of the leading woman commentators out there that comes up with perhaps a new way forward, maybe a new way of looking at things, something that's positive and constructive in addition to drawing a line under some of the old, the excesses of the old stuff. And I guess I'm not just saying that because of the transition, maybe I've got that view. It's more, I think that would be really new and interesting. And there'll be lots of good content that could be created from that with people like Kamil Paglia, Heather MacDonald, Janice Fiamenko, people like that. And I guess there's probably others on the left that would be equally of goodwill and good intent that could really create something quite new. And, you know, I think, yeah, maybe that's more than another 12 rules. But I'm sure, you know, I think there's a risk that which comes, as you say, a one-trick irony. It's like, here's my second set of 12 rules and now here's my third set. And, you know, that might be, or would you say a new, another biblical series? And it sounded like he was talking with N.T. Wright, I think, or is he at Cambridge, going to be there for a couple of months getting into the scriptures? I had that feeling, but I might be wrong. He said he'd be at Cambridge talking to scholars about the Bible. But talking to scholars is kind of like saying talking to college professors, the breadth of people studying the Bible, along how many axes is so broad. So it's, I don't know. So one of the things that we got at one of our meetups is someone printed out based on the on his question and answer his next 12 rules. And at our meetup, we said it should be, you know, you should 12 rules for life. His next book should be 12 rules for death. That could be interesting, because if you have 12 more rules for life, then it's like 24 rules for life. But it's like, well, 24, 36, 48. You kind of get lost with those lists. So, yeah, it becomes almost a bit too, not dogmatic, but there's almost too many rules. So maybe that was one of them, but don't have more rules than you absolutely need to. To be fair, I think there'll be a lot of good stuff in there. I think he would be able to develop something. Yeah, the next 12 rules, you know, they're not bad. But I, again, it's that you've got the chaos order thing. Well, you know, you don't do enough new stuff and the order gets boring. And so, or you just keep the sort, you know, kind of like you just always do the same chaos. Well, then that gets boring. So it's it's hard to he's in a he's in a difficult spot, especially because so the book tour has gone on and on and on and on. And that's supposed to that's supposed to end when he started this. I talked to somebody who was in publishing and he said, yeah, about 18 months is about what you can do a book tour for. And that's that's what he's planning on. But his book tour isn't really a book tour either. It's something else. And yeah, but who knows? Who knows? I think another book and another book tour would be probably just pushing it. From my perspective anyway, maybe a little bit too much. But yeah, something new like a new biblical series or further development in that or again, going off a completely new tangent, I think would certainly. I think it would have more merit, but I'm not advising him. So he will go where he goes, I guess. And I'm grateful for what I've got out of him. Definitely. I think it'll be certainly. Yeah, really. Yeah. Both, I guess, confirmed a way things should be or a way you can position yourself in the world, but also attended to a few things, I guess, in things like the shadow side. That's been quite a little bit of an education, actually, just facing up to a little bit of that. That's again, something was always there, but it finally had a name to it and to actually look at it and see it for what it is. And that's yeah, that's quite I do have a shadow side, I think, discovered. Well, and I think part of what's been interesting, part of what the gift of Peterson has been is that he's left a lot in his wake. I mean, certainly I'm there, but you look at Rebel Wisdom and Jonathan Peugeot and and you know, what a lot and the meetups that we've done and those meetups have happened in different places. So, you know, in many ways, the content, yeah, we came for the scandal, stayed for the content. And what's followed has been a movement of men and women all over learning philosophy and learning psychology and cleaning up their rooms. And so really, in my opinion, that what's come behind him is at least as interesting as he is. And to advise him on what to do next is always a little stupid, in my opinion, because none of us had the idea of doing what he did. And it kind of happened to him anyway. And so who are we to know to tell him what to do next? It's it just doesn't, you know, he's he's been right more than, you know, nobody else, everybody else who doesn't have the status that he's gotten. So he's going to do what he's going to do. And we'll all watch and we'll continue to watch The Truman Show and see where it goes. And I think it's important to separate from having, you know, as someone that's sort of seen as a leader or, you know, to be too invested in it, I guess, having seen the old Benjamin, I think, when the Kavanaugh thing, you know, I think you can get too invested. So being able to step back and go, yeah, this book's been really helpful. These lectures have been helpful. What you're doing at the moment isn't. But I'm finding this person over here is maybe Jonathan Peugeot, maybe someone else, maybe Paul Van Declaver or whatever it is. Like you, you, you. I don't know, maybe that turns us into the consuming zombies you mentioned, which is a risk, I guess. But I think the benefits of it, I guess it's consumption of something that's positive. And good rather than just saying mindless entertainment or the white noise of. Most of what's happening, I guess. Yeah. No, I think so. And he's, you know, again, so I was listening to him and Vervecky. And again, I've been listening to Vervecky more lately and appreciating a lot of Vervecky stuff. So it was fun listening to them. But Peter, there's so many layers to a human being. And so that conversation with Vervecky. Peterson's just Peterson. He's talking too much and he's stepping over him and he's, you know, talking too long. And Vervecky is being patient with him. And but Peterson's just Peterson. And that's what we love about him. He just is who himself. And it's, it's been fun. But yeah, the Owen Benjamin thing just got at some point you want to sit Owen Benjamin down and say, Owen, take a deep breath, get a grip of yourself. The world is big. People will disappoint you. Doesn't mean they're monsters or animals. It just means, you know, just relax a little. And no, Owen, Owen has gone off in this direction. And it's like that's. I haven't been following it much, but I saw the start of it. And yeah, I suppose something you mentioned, I think, in one of the more recent ones that the polarization thing, maybe there is a risk it becomes sort of like the us of them. I think that's a risk. I suppose if it's depending on how it ends, in the sense that if it was to end with like a hit job, you know, one hit job, too many in the papers, I think there'd be something in there that would be, it would be pretty upset because there would be a sense that something, something underhand and wrong had triumphed, as opposed to say, someone making a misstep and taking themselves out because and maybe that thing with the, the, I think, Tauwha was talking about, I mean, that to me, and again, not knowing the full story, but like, coming from, I guess, there's a sense of, you know, it seems a standard of it's strange, but that could be, you know, that's, but has the look of like a potential misstep or at least miscommunication. And I guess that's a mistake that someone can make, and you can get rightly taken to task for it, as opposed to being maliciously misinterpreted and misconstrued to the point where that becomes the only message. There's a real, a real difference. And I think one is what it is, and the other one is something that, there's a sense of something that's quite fundamentally wrong, Yeah, I don't know. That's, yeah, I wouldn't want to see it end that way. I guess that would be my thought. That would be, that would almost signify something quite serious and not well with the world of hit pieces were I able to take someone out. At the, so I went to his, you know, as I reported on his book tour in San Jose, so that's the, that's in a sense the second official book tour thing I've been to. I've been to a pre one that was in San Francisco before that. You know, he's talking about what he eats in terms of beef, salt, water, and not salt water, but beef with a little bit of salt on it and water. And part of me looks at him and thinks, I hope, you know, I, and looking at his schedule, and I think, gosh, that schedule is demanding. And I hope, I hope too that it's not a health thing. It's, it's, it's, it really is a fascinating, fascinating, I am, you know, and that's the thing, that's the thing. It is a fascinating, fascinating, I am, you know, and then I have to, I have to take a step back and say, why am I so fascinated by this? But I've been doing videos about this dude for over a year now, and I'm not tired of it, and other people aren't tired of it, but it's, it's also not ever just been Peterson. And so, for example, at our local meetups, our conversations range all over the map. Peterson is kind of like the, he's kind of like the catalyzer that, that brought us together and gets things going, but then we will talk about whatever it is that interests us. So in that sense too, he's, it's, it's not just him or what he's said or done. He's become an opportunity for a lot of good other things. And so again, to me, it's like, this is, this is just a gift from God to us, and I say thank you. And that's how I approach it. And we're ready exactly. That's right. The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away. That's the way the world is. So while it's here, I'll say thank you, and we'll keep, we'll keep doing it. But you know, a lot of people, you know, in the media, we forget that a lot of people rise and start because of certain incidences, and then they continue to go on and do things. So we'll, who knows where this will go. Two years from now, you know, maybe we'll look back on this conversation and say, how, how could we have known? Yeah. If there was one person I'd really want to sit down and talk to, actually, it would be Tammy. I'd be really intrigued to have a chat with her. And I'm sure she's, she's probably pretty hard case, actually, which, you know, in Australian terms is like that makes you a good person automatically if you've got a bit of character and a bit of personality to you. I think, yeah, she would be a fascinating person to talk to. I agree. If she ever, if she ever emails me and says, Paul, let's me and you have a conversation. I'm moving stuff, you know, I'll forget, I'll forget all the equality stuff. I'm going to move my schedule, say, okay, Tammy, because I'd love to, I'd love to hear your take on all this craziness. You need about six hours, I reckon. Probably would. But no, I agree with you 100%. I have no idea who she is or how she is, but what he said about her and, you know, because I watch her, I watch him and I'm used to watching people. And my sense is, yeah, this is a guy that in some ways, even though he's hard as a rock in some ways, in other ways he could be a little fragile, can be a little testy, can be irritable, can get grumpy, because he's talked about that himself and you see it sometimes in his videos. And he keeps saying she's his stability. And I completely believe it. She's probably, now Jordan, you kind of, you know, she probably fine tunes him regularly and he takes it, which is an amazing thing. Yes, yeah. And it's probably all the better for her, I think, she would be, yeah. I have her to speak, I think, she introduced him nearly early on, I think, at a speech he gave somewhere and she talked, I think, for about five minutes at the start of it. It's sort of been probably been the first two or three months, I think. I might be wrong of the Bill C-16. Yeah, it was interesting. Just a little brief snippet about introducing her, I guess, but you learned a little bit about her as well. Yeah. Yeah, she would be very fascinating to talk to, I think. Yeah, no, she'd be, so Tammy, if you're listening. This is an open invite from the audience. This is an invite from the... That's right, I'm here to talk, I'm here to talk. The mic will be yours, you can say whatever you want. I'll post it on my little 10,000 sub channel. LAUGHS I think she could get much bigger platforms than mine. LAUGHS I'm sure she'll take the opportunity. One, I suppose sequoiaing on from that, you know, how the Jordan Peterson thing is, I suppose, how would you see Christianity progressing? Because I listen, fairly, God's snack, like, well, to the Greta Vosper things you were talking about with the church. And when you played that clip of the people singing the song to science, I fell off my chair. LAUGHS Really? Why would you do that? I just don't understand. So there's part of me that almost sort of sees a split, and I'm probably reading this completely wrong, where you've got, kind of reminds you of like vegan bacon or something along the lines of like, we don't want church, we absolutely hate this thing, but let's create something that looks almost identical and just call it, I don't know. The Mayan, the Mayan Bibles, it really does. But, and again, maybe using the LGBT thing as a bit of a marker, you can almost split, well, I feel like you can split between churches that, say, really accepting of that, and potentially maybe progressive, I guess, accepting of a lot of things, but almost seem to sort of go too far in one direction where it's like, we're just like the culture, at which point you become increasingly irrelevant because, well, we've got the culture, what do we need the church for? There's no point of difference. And then you swing to the other side where it's still very traditional and dogmatic, but isn't perhaps open to things like, say, gay and lesbian marriage. I don't know, there doesn't seem to be an odd, maybe, and again, I don't have that big picture, monarchical version, I guess. I kind of see snippets here and snippets there, but yeah, I don't know. Is there a middle ground, or is it either heading towards complete irrelevancy because it just is exactly the same as everywhere on the outside, or isn't open to moving, moving with a tide, I don't know if that's the best way of putting it, but you know what I mean. Yeah, yeah. Is there a middle ground? So I, before I ever found Jordan Peterson, I was reading Rod Dreher's blog for a while, and I was really wrestling with, well, the Christian Reformed Church, along with just about many, like many other denominations, the Christian Reformed Church wrestling with same-sex marriage, LGBT issues, and trying to sort that out. Now, when I say sort that out, I mean a lot more than just figuring out how I feel about it, or figuring out what I think the church should do about it or not do about it, because here's the question. The church has to deal with change, and the church can't lose the thread, and that's been a dynamic in the narrative thread, and that's been a dynamic in church history all the way from the start, and it's a good thing, we probably wouldn't have had the New Testament if it hadn't been for the Gentile question, and can and the circumcision question, because the circumcision question is a pretty binary question, either you're circumcised or not. There's no halfway in that. My little grandparents. That's right. And that is a really, there are no texts in the Old Testament that would suggest that this covenant of circumcision would be laid aside, and so the initial fight between, as Paul calls them, the Judaizers, and the circumcision group, and those like Paul that were baptizing uncircumcised Gentiles, that is a pretty major fight, and it leads obviously to the Council of Jerusalem and the Book of Acts, and right there you have this increase in Christianity at the beginning. You have this paradigmatic moment where how is Christianity going to deal with the narrative thread and change of circumstance? You had that in Peter visiting Cornelius, and Cornelius, Peter seeing the gift of the Holy Spirit giving to Cornelius, and so on and so forth. So when it comes to the church and dealing with this same-sex marriage question, these LGBT questions, you have a situation like that where there's, the church is going to have to, the church can't ignore this, but it's, and it's going to have to work through it, and it's probably going to need a few hundred years. Yes, yeah. It's not, yeah, something, that's it. Yeah. And we, in our culture right now, we don't, we don't now know how to manage a decision-making matrix or a decision-making politic or institutional framework that works at that speed. No, we're far more instantaneous. Right. It is or it isn't, you can change something now. Yeah, and I should say at this point, you can say anything on the topic. I'm not going to be the least bit offended or try and trip you up or anything. I probably should have said that at the very start, that this is not something that, open dialogue is, I guess if I learned anything from Jordan Peterson, is that, yeah, to be able to say what one thinks without fear of recrimination or, you know, if you know what I mean. So that, I'll put that out now. Well, thank you. And I'll be honest with you. I mean, I, you know, YouTube is a place with nothing left to lose for people with little to lose. And so, whereas I, there are things I could lose by saying the wrong thing on this subject for me. And I have to be a little sensitive to that because unlike Jordan Peter, well, Jordan Peterson, I guess, is technically still a professor at the University of Toronto. I, you know, I am, I am under, I am under the oaths that I've given to my God via the Christian Reformed Church. So that, you know, that is a part of what I have to do with this. But I, but I, but, you know, what I said is, is for me the best, when people ask me about this question, it's a question you get as a pastor fairly often. That's always how I frame it because people say, well, well, surely this or surely that. And I usually say, well, I don't know. And I'm okay not knowing, and I'll probably not know my whole life long. Now, when you ask me for particular actions or votes at a synod or decisions or takes, my take is, this is very early for a decision like this. And when I watch, when I watch people, let's say to, in the mainline church, just simply declare, oh, obviously, I say, no, not obviously. This is something that is, that there's a lot to wrestle with. And I don't think one particular generation can actually do this work. I think there'll be many generations. So, and that's, and so when you ask the question, is there middle ground? See, this is where, in a sense, the different speeds of different traditions within Christianity begin to manifest their wisdom and their liability. So the fractiousness of Protestantism means that, well, that's what it is, means that all these little different denominations are going to be experimenting and trying these different things. And the phrase that is just barely a year old, the meme that is barely a year old, get woke, get broke. Well, this has been true of a lot of mainline denominations for a while now, a little while, because that's all it's been. But you look at mainline denominations that, just as you said, they're ready to embrace whatever the culture is feeding them. And at some point, people say, why do I need the church when I have the church of the culture? So it's the conservative churches that, in a sense, get the institutional wins by resisting the culture. So then people that I know who are, who want to practice traditional Christianity, but are also pursuing an affirming lifestyle or something like this, well, then they're kind of stuck in a mainline church, and then they complain about some of the other aspects of mainline, and it's like, well, I'd like to have a church that's a little bit more like this, and okay. The church of me, essentially. Exactly, that's where we go. It's the church of me. So the Protestants are playing that game. The Roman Catholics, obviously, they've got a bunch of other games going, partly because of the child abuse scandals and all of the stuff that's been going on in there. We don't know much about the Orthodox. They've been, you know, the Orthodox have been hidden in the Middle East and in the Eastern Bloc for all of these years, and so those of us in the West are just kind of starting to get our heads around the new Orthodox that are coming out. So in my opinion, this is all just very early days in this whole discussion, and it could be that 20 years from now, we won't even be talking about this one way or the other. We don't know. It could be that we'll continue to ruminate on it, but this is the kind of thing that it takes the church centuries to work through, not years or decades, and that's how I approach it, and it makes some people grumpy because I don't come down dogmatically on one side or another to say, ah, you're a fence sitter. I said, no, I'm not a fence sitter. You know, the Christian Reformed Church is not an affirming denomination. I'm comfortable with that. Those who want to push it. See, part of how I got into this whole Jordan Peterson and thing was before that, I was thinking about what today I would call woke religion before I was calling progressive liberationism and saying you've kind of embraced a different religion, and it's different from Christianity. I think it's a version of Christianity. I think it's a version of Christianity that breaks the narrative thread, so that's, and so then, and these are people even within the Christian Reformed Church who are working in this, and so I would say, even though I've always been on the left of the Christian Reformed Church, so I've been on the left of a very conservative denomination, but, you know, and so these are the kinds of conversations I've been having. So then when Jordan Peterson arises, it's like, hey, there's some stuff I can learn in there that will help me in my project for figuring out what's going on religiously in our culture, because, you know, now I haven't, today I've been really, I've been trying to get out some more videos on the hoax paper guys and this, because that's very interesting for me, because that's very much the stuff I was working on, and. New religion that Peter Bogotian was talking about, that it is, and yeah, I think that's a pretty good analysis. There's very comparable aspects to it, that idea of original, you know, the original sin, that, you know, that, yeah, that's, you can see churches going in that direction, and in the sense I have is that they're not the ones surviving or at least that finding it hard, because after a while, like, why do we need to meet, you know, one hour a week when there's nothing different to the outside anyway. And I mean, I was born and raised Roman Catholic, so, you know, I guess I find myself in a very strange spot where I have a lot of affinity, I guess, for the tradition, the traditions, the, I don't know, I guess, the sense of awe in the buildings, the, there's something, or the sac, when it says something, having, I guess, that structure, I find, I guess, I'm probably having looked at the, understand yourself thing, I do tend towards that more conservative side, despite having, I guess, enough openness to be creative. When you think about the scientific illustration, it's still the most angrily retentive side of art that you could possibly have, so that conservative side still comes through. Even if the, you know, the whole sexual abuse scandal, I think, shaken, certainly my faith in the institution, there's still something about that tradition and that continuity, I suppose, that's, I don't know if reassuring's the right word, but it is very, I don't know, yeah, I'm not sure how I would describe it, but there's a sense of being at home within that, I guess, but knowing that an organization that large takes a long time to move in any direction, like a large ocean liner, they don't even know if I necessarily want them to change, which is weird, even though, so that I do have a partner, we have talked about getting married, yeah, I don't know if I'm all that fast, if they were to say, we still don't agree or accept it, as long as they don't beat you out of the door, I guess that's something, at least. I don't know, yeah, it's a weird one, you can understand people looking at it and going, this is something that's so obvious, it should be an easy change, but you can also understand that sort of, and I guess, you can see both perspectives, but yeah, maybe most people probably tend to come down hard on one or the other, it's, yeah. Well, recently in the United States, so Mike Pence, his wife, before he became vice president, she was teaching in a conservative Christian school that is not affirming of a bunch of the LGBT changes, and so she, again, took a position in that school, and the Washington Post hit that hard, and it became, for a moment, because Trump dominates all the rest of the headlines here perpetually, it doesn't leave any air in the room, but for a moment, that then was, how can the wife of the president, of the vice president of the United States hold a position in such a bigoted school? And you want to pause and say, let me remind you that in the 2008 election, Barack Obama was against same-sex marriage, and Hillary Clinton was against same-sex marriage until 2013, that's only five, six years ago. Now, you're demanding that all of these institutions just change overnight, it's, and so then I was listening to David Brooks, I used to listen to David Brooks every Friday, and while David Brooks then first said all of the kinds of things that someone now in the media would have to say, well, I myself would never work for such an organization, but, and then he at least had the awareness to say, you have to understand that these institutions, these religious institutions and organizations and communities work on very different, my language would be very different clock speeds, and if we're going to have the kind of society that gets very tyrannical very quickly on certain sacrosanct issues, that society is going to become unhinged, and that society is going to have difficulty maintaining its own equilibrium over the long haul too. It's just a failure to understand how communities, how pluralistic communities work. So this, and your comment about, there was a man who worshiped in this church for many years, he was a founding member who, he was a, by all external appearances today, he would very much be assumed to be a gay man, was, you know, when I came here to the church, he would only come when his mother was in town, and his biggest beef with the church was that the church had changed since what it looked like in the 1950s when he grew up. That's really what he wanted. And so here on one hand, to me this is just knowing so many people of so many different backgrounds to just imagine, well here's this one slice of your life, which is your, let's say your sexual orientation or even expression, that now this tiny slice of your life has to dominate and colonize everything else in your life. And when I see that in a human being, I say there's something disordered about that. And that's why, you know, people are complex. If you don't understand that people are complex and have tensions within themselves, you don't know people. So let's allow people to be that complex. And when we stop allowing them to do that, people get hurt, and in many cases needlessly. And so that's what really bothers me. So, and again, in that sense, I am sort of like Jordan Peterson in that I'm an individualist, but I'm also an imago dei Christian that says every person that I come across at one layer or another, I need to offer them the respect of being an image bearer of our God. And therefore, despite all kinds of things in their life that I might consider problematic, I first must regard them as an image bearer. And I think that as Peterson, I think is correct on, that's one of the foundational elements of our society. And if we lose that, we're a very short step away from a lot of bad things. Yeah. I found that's been one really good way of trying to sort of integrate the shadow side, I guess, is seeing people as that image bearer of God, no matter how much I might disagree with them. And that then should regulate how I interact and how I think and more how I brood, I suppose, is probably one of the best ways of thinking about it. Had a train of thought and I suddenly got off the track. I only happened about four or five times a day. The first question I think I wanted to ask on behalf of the rest of the world is how a nation of what, 60 million people in America? In the United States, 350 million people. 350 million. I think myself and the rest of the world would love to know is how did Trump and Clinton rise to the top of 300 million of you? Surely there must be someone better. I shouldn't laugh. In Australia, they change politicians, they change their underwear. It's like they've gone through, the last one just got rolled in a leadership coup about five or six months ago. The previous party that was in power, they chopped and changed so they kept stabbing each other in the back. And then at the end of last year, half of them were ruled ineligible because all had dual citizenships in other countries they didn't realize by virtue of marriage or dissent or something or other. So half of them, well, a fair few had to leave parliament because they were no longer eligible to be there until they were announced as citizenship. But even with that, still the question remains about America, it's like, really, those two? I think I was listening to, I think it was Neil Ferguson, I think, this must be before the election, I think described it as a selection between a snafu and a foobar. Being from the military background, I can completely understand that. And I think that's a pretty good, it's a nation of the two leading contenders. So, well, we wait with interest. Well, 2020 is going to be a very interesting election all over again, instead of seeing 12 Republicans fighting it out and having Donald Trump rise to the top, we're going to have a whole bunch of Democrats fighting it out and have who knows who rise to the top, maybe to compete with Trump, maybe there will be a, maybe Trump won't even be in office come 2020, maybe there will be a Republican challenger. It's crazy, but then again, if you look at world history, history is crazy. And look at the rise of how many different leaders. I think in many ways in the 20th century, the United States was graced to have so often from both political parties, some quite good leaders. But then again, also look at someone like JFK, John F. Kennedy, very smart guy, probably a sex addict, but in a different age. So, I think it's a testament to the American political system that, you know, boy, it's deeply disturbing right now for a lot of people in the United States and a lot of people did not like either of our choices, but who knows? This is why, you know, this is why I have a question. The whole process, and I never thought, yeah, Trump would be elected. I really just didn't see that happening. I didn't either. I think most of us now spend the, well, it was only the next year waiting for the world to end with a big bang. But probably, I suppose, out of that whole thing, I think the thing that intrigued me, maybe disturbed me the most was the way the evangelical church seemed to get into bed with Donald Trump so quickly. I really felt, I guess, looking at it, I thought they really sold their souls on that one. And it's funny because I know Sam Harris rails against Donald Trump quite a lot, but I've always seen Donald Trump as kind of like the ultimate, if you follow down Sam Harris' atheism, someone, there's no tomorrow, you know, there's no life after death. It's only this world. Grab what you can get, literally, by whatever you can do. I mean, that is, it's kind of like, that is, it should be Sam Harris' God, should it not? It's like, this guy is living everything. I think that atheism, unless you have to come up with like an altruistic atheism that, yes, it's only this life, so, but we should all kind of be good and kind to each other, whereas, I don't know, you kind of think if it's only this life, then basically grab what you can, it's everyone for themselves, and, you know, the devil take the high most. But I think part of the, part of the difficulty of watching politics in the United States is the filter we're seeing it through. Even the term evangelical sort of masks a rather broad and diverse community of churches. Many of, so there are, I think many who would consider themselves evangelical in America would have preferred a different Republican than Donald Trump, yet there was no way most of them were going to vote for Hillary Clinton. And Donald Trump's, but Donald Trump's, the way he got elected was in many ways so unusual in that it was just a very unusual year. Part of the difficulty is that, this stuff is so, so here's the thing, the population of, so again, I've been looking at Australia a little bit more, the population of Australia, I believe, is less than the population of California. The population of Canada is less than the population of California. The United States is an enormous, populous, diverse nation and politics gets, gets rammed into a binary choice, the presidential election every four years, that there's so much built into that, that snap judgments based on it of, of different groups of people are, should be held pretty loosely. Now, Jerry Falwell Jr. and Liberty University, that's a, that group has a whole different history. And go back to Jerry Falwell Sr. and the rise of the religious right, and I mean, these are, the evangelical is not a church. Evangelical is, in my opinion, kind of a marketplace. And there are ideas in that marketplace, there are economics in that marketplace, there's culture in that marketplace, but it is, it is, it is a very large complex situation. So many of the people, so when I think of, when I think of the people in my own congregation who voted for Trump, probably to a person, all of those people would much rather have voted for someone else, but they were not going to vote for Hillary Clinton. And part of that has to do with abortion, which in the United States has been a very big social issue and a very big issue in the church, which is also enormously complex. So. I had a feeling that was one of the driving things behind their, it almost came down to that single issue. Yeah, and Trump is not an idiot. He, you know, for as much as, I get frustrated with him, but he is not an idiot and he, he's a salesman and he understands how to get what he wants. He, I think in many ways, the left in the United States does themself a disservice by making, you know, by characterizing him and stereotyping him in certain ways. He's more complex than that. So, and whereas the places of his politics that I disagree, which are, I didn't vote for him, I voted for a third party candidate this election over the last number of years, I voted for a fair number of third party candidates. Because I am, I've, I was raised much more in alignment with the Democratic Party, but I've been so frustrated by them in the last number of elections, I often won't give them my vote. And I've frustrated by Republicans. So I, but many Americans are like that. And in a two party system, every election, you kind of give it your best shot, depending on lots of variables. So, so. Yeah, even in Australia and New Zealand, you know, the split is, it's kind of, it's close to 50-50. Like we, in New Zealand, we get by, the minor parties almost hold the balance of power because no major party can ever win on their own. And I don't think have won. No, maybe, maybe a few years ago they did without needing to form coalitions, but yeah, it is a real 50-50 split by and large. Yeah, Australia, 24.6 million people. Yeah. That's Texas, you know? And, and if, you know, if we had a parliamentary system in the United States, obviously there'd be multiple parties and then you'll have a dynamic like that. But in a two party system, in a country that's so huge and so diverse, it's, but at the same time, I mean, the American political system is a very conservative one. It's hard to get anything done. And there's some wisdom in that, which I think is in some ways serve the country well, so. What's the space? I don't know. I'm, you know, here I am. I'm an American. I live with it. I do feel for you. The United States population, 325 million, not 350, 325 million. Canada, 36 million. That's about the size of California. UK, 66 million, so. Whereas in New Zealand we've got a population of 60 million sheep, of which five million think they're human. So yeah, politics. I try not to talk too much politics on my channel just because there's so much Trump derangement on both sides that once you mention, I think Christians and just about everybody else has given Donald Trump too much attention and we'd all be better off talking about him less. That's kind of my take. Yeah, that's probably a fair call. It's fascinating to watch from the outside, but I'm guessing it's probably not quite so much fun to live with the reality. Kind of like your neighbor's bad marriage, you know? It's like, oh, he took a mistress. Oh, she threw out his clothes. Yeah. It's like a train wreck sometimes. It's horrible to look at, but you just can't turn away. Hey, but the rest of the world, they have plenty of, you know, look at the Brexit mess in England. Oh, shambles, yeah. So politics is a dirty business. And I was just telling my mother this morning, I don't want Oprah to run. I want boring politicians. That's what I want. I want politicians who are so dull that they just go to work and do their jobs. No more celebrities, please. Yes, yeah. Banish all their Twitter accounts. They'll be politicians. I think you'd get far more work done across the board, left and right, I think. But it's a function of our world right now. And so we've got to sort out social media. This is all hard. This is all hard. Yeah, I found it was interesting, I guess, coming up from the Catholic side of things and being probably a bit more, whatever the conservative trait is in the big five, I suppose, after my transition, I found myself becoming more open and more left leaning. There was a lot of good things that happened that really challenged, I guess, my perception of treating the other, saying that I kind of was the other, even though I had a very good run and I certainly can't complain. I guess it opened my eyes, I suppose, to how I could do that better. For example, I spent a year or so volunteering at a free food place. You got to meet people that weren't very high on that dominance hierarchy and probably weren't going to. But it really was an eye opener for me and it encouraged me to see that in Margot Day and others and interact with them as humans and not be anywhere near as judgmental as I once would have been. And I'm sure I've got plenty of room for improvement still. I guess, I suppose, wanting to be more open and more heading that direction, it's been a real eye-opener seeing perhaps the excesses of that left progressive side of things and then finding myself coming back almost because I see it almost being too much. And maybe you could look at, say, the turning of some of the LGBT movement where it is, yeah, I find it hard to reconcile some of the things that happen with, these are my people apparently, but I'm not, the idea of like, I don't know. If I came across a baker that wouldn't bake me and my partner who's female as well, a wedding cake, that might be a little bit annoyed, but I don't know that I would be, go to the point of trying to put them out of business. I see we've got a visitor. Yeah, hang on, Lucy. Hey, Brad, I've got you in 15 minutes. So you give Lucy and I a couple of minutes to wrap up. I'll see you in about 15. How's that sound? So why don't you disconnect now? I'll finish my conversation with Lucy and I'll see you in about 15 minutes. You don't think so? Can you hear me? I don't think he can hear you, no. He's got a beautiful place. I don't know if he's in a church or where, it's gorgeous. It's probably as well, you can't see this. I'm in the library in front of the reading rooms and it's just brick walls and it's like I'm in a cell. He's figuring it out. I forgot to, I can lock the room here and I forget to do that sometimes and then you get the next person coming in. I'll, I think what I'll do is I'll, There it just, poor man. The word, now he's really confused, I'll see him in 15 minutes and apologize. Anyway, I'm sorry, go ahead, go ahead. Then there's the eighth person coming inmat like you just saw him at the end of the day and at first introduce some reserved<|tr|> in that vlog that they're sharing on Twitter. Anyway, I'm sorry, go ahead, go ahead, keep talking. Yeah, I guess there's that sense of trying to, of heading more, I guess in a leftwards direction and being more open, but yet, suddenly discovering some of the excesses and trying to reconcile that. Yeah, I don't even know where that would place me in the scheme of things now. It's a funny thing to try and understand. Well, it's like the evangelical question. So in many ways, I'm an evangelical. I've got a conservative stance on scripture, I've got conservative stances on many things, but in other ways, I don't feel, when someone supposedly stands up and speaks for evangelicals, I think, that's not me. So it's part of these weird, it's part of these weird things that are created in the world that we, okay, well, you've transitioned, so you're part of this group, and it's like, well, wait a minute, don't I get a say in that? Especially because these groups just pop up out of the media. So you've got this media that we look at ourselves through, and then here, this is the identity you're assigned. It's like, hey, wait a minute, you know, why should CNN or the New York Times or Fox News tell me who I am? Who are they? I mean, I totally understand why Jordan Peterson got a large number of letters reporting ideas from people in exactly the same boat, I suspect. Maybe the slightly older ones that would have very quickly come down on, you know, decide, yeah, what the more activist types are doing is not representative of all of how perhaps we feel or think it's, yeah, it's a strange one. It's interesting times, it really is. It is, it is. You know, a good friend of mine who's a gay man, lives in the Bay Area, married for a number of years, grew up Christian Reformed, loves to talk about it, can't let that go, won't go to a Christian Reformed church because of the stance of the Christian Reformed church on same-sex marriage, you know, sings in church choirs, whenever he can get the chance to, loves the old music. I mean, and to me, this is just how we are as human beings, we are individuals, and our pieces never quite fit together, and we have ideas that are contradictory, yet they live in our brains, and we're always working on them. So to me, that's just what people are. And so, especially as we get older, we differentiate. Yeah. And I think the ability to hold a lot of things in tension rather than needing to have a definite answer, it's something I've certainly found more and more that even, yeah, seemingly completely irreconcilable things, you can still hold a balance between, yeah, seeing both perspectives perhaps, or not needing to always come down on one side or the other. Right. And so then people ask me about LGBT questions, and it's like, well, you know, your churches and organizations and institutions are going to have to decide through whatever process they have about what their policies are. That's what institutions have to do. Individuals are going to have to decide, just like every other individual, what are you going to do with your body? What are you going to do with your time? What are you going to do with your mind? And that as a Christian, I say, someday you will stand before your creator and be called to give an account for what you've done with the time, the energy, the money, the body, everything that he's given to you, you will stand and say, Lord, this is what I did with my life. And he is the judge of it. So that's how the world works. And so that's what we do. That thought has occurred to me. So far, the best response I've got is shrugging my shoulders and going, stuff it, I tried. And God, you know, I think, you know, if there's anything from the book of Job that when we stand before him, yeah, he knows us, he sees us. Any idea that makes God less, any idea that makes God less perfect a judge, less good, less true, is a bad idea. Because if God isn't the optimum of all of those things, then we have no chance. And so we rest, finally, what I believe Christianity says, that we rest on the goodness of God. And that's his goodness and his mercy. And that's what we bank on. And so that's what I go with. I got nothing better than that, than the goodness of God. That's pretty good. I guess we're getting pretty close. So obviously we've got someone else like that. But yeah, very keen to talk again. Yeah, really enjoyed this chat. The time has just flown by. Well, this has been wonderful, Lucy. And I sure appreciate you taking the time. I don't know what time it is in Australia, but it can't be very early. And at the moment it's 11.30 in the morning. Oh, okay. So I'm still, I can't figure out the time zone. So all over the world. What time is it where you are? Well, it's about almost 4.30. 4.30, I have the next conversation. So I will, this is recorded. I will send it to you. And then you can let me know what you'd like to do with this. And then we'll figure that out. How's that? That sounds pretty good. That'd be great. Okay, Lucy. It was a delight to talk to you. Yeah, lovely to talk to you as well. Thank you. Take care. Bye bye.