https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DSiCZLHkZXA

 Here we go, now we're recording. I don't wanna miss two stuff. Actually, I talked to Preston yesterday and we had a, we're starting to have some really good conversation. He's like, oh, I'm not recording anything. I know the feeling. Right, right. Now you just have to, you have to just record a pre-intro like Preston and say, you know, welcome to whatever. Ah, no pre, this is no fluff. This is totally raw. No intros, hi, this is Paul, nothing beyond that. Paul VanderKlay in the raw, that would fit right in. Preston, Preston's podcast. That would definitely be an audio only podcast. Nobody wants to see that. Yeah, that reminds me of your humor with Adam, Adam Frended's graphic from the other day. Or Benjamin Boyce's. Oh! Yeah, yeah. I mean, that's, yeah, it's something else. The world, I don't know. Anyway, this is Luke and Luke and I have talked before, but we didn't publicize it. So we talked maybe about taping this and maybe posting it. We'll see how the conversation goes. Luke, I got to know Luke mostly via Twitter. And so, yeah, and that's, and then we had a conversation once and back and forth tweets and DMs and all this kind of stuff. And Luke, how would you describe yourself? Man, I actually had in the notes on my phone, I made it probably, I don't know, probably five or six years ago, a self-description. I don't even know if it would be accurate anymore. I'm one of those, I don't know, I've gone back and forth and part of my kind of postmodern deconstruction, I was very, and still am, partially anti-labels because labels, anytime, I mean, you talk about this, anytime you submit anything to language, it reduces it. What was that? Explain, you plane it down. And so in that sense, I don't like labels, particularly because I'm a, I don't know, I'm just, most people are complex, confusing, but I by nature am. I don't know if you're familiar with the Enneagram at all. Have you heard of the Enneagram? Yes. So I'm an Enneagram four, and I'm a specific, and they, in general, they're the least frequent number, and they're just stereotypically hard to categorize. Okay. But you're still a four. Yeah, which is a very four thing to say. So I am, I'm a, for my friend, shout out to Amber, who will probably listen to this. She has been writing a lot about stay at home parenting, but she likes the term at home parents because of the baggage with that, but for simplicity sake, I'll say I'm a stay at home dad. And that's because my wife is in a profession that, we just decided not, we didn't want to go the daycare route, and so we had, when I started doing that, we had two kids, we added a third, and it's just stayed that way for now, so I stay at home with them. I'm, I don't know, I'm a really, I love philosophy and abstract thinking and theology, and so the Jordan Peterson phenomenon, your videos have always really resonated with me. And I don't know, probably the best description is, I mean, I definitely call myself a Christian, but I'm a weird, eccentric one, so that's probably the briefest way to describe it. Okay. I'm like, I sometimes say I'm a European, I'm a very European person who was born in rural Western South Dakota. So, yeah, that's probably how I describe myself. Okay, okay. And what kind of things did you want to talk about today? So, one of, so something I'd love to talk to you about, I have a number of things, and I'll see if I can, I tend to go on a lot of rabbit trails because my mind's all over the place, my consciousness is Congress, I got a lot of them going at once. A lot of factions, huh? Yep, and I'm always talking about things that tend to be rather esoteric. Like the thing that I'm probably most passionate about is what I describe as rationalism, which I think is something that's ubiquitous in Western culture, and I can explain why I think that is historically, but I actually think a lot of what's going on with Jordan Peterson and you, and this whole phenomenon is getting at that. It kind of explains my own personal story toward Christian orthodoxy, Eastern Orthodox tradition, but yet that's the kind of, I don't know, I think I've met, I don't even know if I've met anyone in the flesh that I can articulate to my thoughts that can understand what I'm talking about. So I would love to try to talk about that. I think in your last video, when you talk about, when you talk about your idea of the monarchical vision is helpful, I think, in articulating what I'm getting at. I think it's when a person, when one uses language or intellect or rationality as a monarchical vision, that is rationalism. That's a succinct way that I would describe it. It's kind of like, I don't know who said this, but the mind is a wonderful servant and a terrible master. That gets at it. It's something, I describe it as, it's kind of like the water that we swim in or I've heard it said that the thing that's the hardest to get people to see is the thing that everyone has decided not to see. I think. That's cool. I think in the West, since the enlightenment and kind of through the technology of philosophical advancement, we were able to abstract things to a degree that, Verbecky, I think, actually talks about this in his conversation with Benjamin Boyce and I've been meaning to re-listen to it, but I think he said it stemmed from Marx and Hegel that that was kind of the origin of ideology, the ability to, you could think of it in terms of like Charles Taylor of moving to the buffered self where you could use ideas as a technology to kind of abstract yourself from the ideas and then you use that as a means to control your world. And so I think it's easiest, it's hard to articulate, but I think it's easiest to see in its fruit. Like when, this is the way I think about it. Jesus in John's gospel said, the Spirit moves where it will and you see neither it's coming nor it's going, but you see where it's been. Yeah. And I think essentially that's like what the church fathers were talking about with God and his essence and energies. You can't ever see God in his essence, you see the energies. And I don't think you can ever see, in your last video you kept talking about, I mean, this would probably get into Adam's whole conversation with Esther and I have my own, I don't know, I don't think a conversation between Esther and I would ever go anywhere. Because I think we have, Because I think we have fundamental different assumptions. I would, it's kind of like, I actually spoke and I don't think Julian would mind me saying this. You put Julian and I in contact and we had a really one, he's such a, I love so much about his Christian tradition and he's just a wonderful young man. We were talking about that a lot of what we see rationality as, because he's trying to get at the same thing is that, it's like with Christian apologetics or like, it's what a Christian apologist debates an atheist. Both of them have a box for everything. Yeah. They're submitting everything to their intellectual, monarchical vision. Well that inherently inhibits you from seeing anything, it's circular, from anything outside of that frame that could speak into that frame and correct that frame. And Jordan Peterson talks about that in terms of like, anything, the truth that is outside of the truth that you currently apprehend will only ever manifest to you in error. Like that's the only way it's ever gonna show up. If your system keeps working, it will work. And you know it doesn't work when it gets into an error. And that gets into like the whole debate between, I've been trying to work this out with Preston too, but this gets into the whole debate between like deontological, yeah Preston's wrinkle, yeah. But that gets into the debate between like deontological and utilitarian ethics. And I really think of those things as almost like a Taoist balance, you know. It's like, because I would agree with like Nietzsche and the idea of perspectivalism and you can't ever get out of the subjective, you can't. But that doesn't mean that we can't see a better way forward and those things are always in tension with time, with the future and the past. And so that's a lot to throw at you, but it's just that general idea. And I think this is what I was trying to talk about in our first conversation. And it didn't, and I couldn't, I feel like I'm getting better and better at articulating it, but it's still hard. But to me, this is what I see as the biggest problem in the West and it's even in the Latin church, I would say. Like I heard, I know we both love Bishop Barron, I mean a little that I'm familiar with him and his most recent Jordan Peterson video I watched the other day and it was great. And I think they may be talking soon, seems like they will be. Getting Peterson nailed down can be difficult sometimes. Yeah, but it was an interesting conversation. But then toward the end, he answered one question at the end and it was from this, did you watch it? Yep, yep. And it was from this Indian guy who's British, I think he's maybe British or he's an immigrant, he's in Britain. Yep. And he asked a question of essentially utilitarian observing, it was like a utilitarian observation or a pragmatic observation of the morality of Hinduism versus Christianity. Right. And Bishop Barron's response was, ah, depressed me so much. Ah ha ha ha ha ha. It was, I've loved, I've loved so much of what he said and I think the guy's brilliant, but he went into the very thing that I would like to see in the West, that I would like to see uprooted through the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. He fell right into it. He said, well, I would say ultimately, because it's true. And here's the thing, he's like, I don't disagree with him. But what he means by that is it's true in a monarchical vision. So I'll just summarize that little conversation. So this Indian basically said that when I talk to my Hindu friends, they say, why should I become a Christian when Christian morality doesn't seem superior to Hindu morality? And Bishop Barron said, well, there's plenty of debates with that. You've got plenty of Hindu Muslim violence and Hindu Buddhist violence. Just because Westerners don't know much of that history because they don't pay attention to anything but themselves doesn't, Bishop Barron didn't say that, I'm saying. Yeah, right. So then Bishop Barron then said, well, you should tell your friends that they should believe in Christianity because it's true, not because it works. That's right. And so you have the truth versus pragmatism thing. But now Peterson also, of course, Peterson isn't one who shies away. Peterson will play that truth card often too. And even as a pragmatist, so his pragmatism is within his truth claims, he will also play that truth card too. But Barron said that, and then you mentioned that, I thought, oh yeah, Luke is gonna react to this. This is not, and probably partly because of how you grew up in your background. And when you look at the apologist game that Esther and others are big into, William Lane Craig, you and many people who follow Peterson look at that whole game and say, it's a fruitless game. It doesn't, and when I say it's a fruitless game, I mean it doesn't produce the kind of fruit that I value. Maybe someone will win the debate. So one way to look at, say the conversation that Adam and Esther had about objective morality was who won? And I played that card a little bit in my video. I thought Adam did, in some ways Adam won. That I think Adam's positions are better than Esther's, but Adam presented himself. But we very quickly turn it into a binary, an on-off. And I think part of when I listen to you process this stuff, you've got some reactivity to some of these facile binaries. And when you hear them, it's like, ooh, ooh, you're suspicious of them. Yeah, and it's not, I mean, I believe, I don't know, like even in your whole, I'm still working through what I believe on like your idea of Platonism and Lewis and the Tao and the shadows, I mean, your whole last video. I don't know what I think about that. I tend to be a, oh, I don't even know what the word is. Like as there's three options, I think philosophically of like the primary essence of the world. And it's like some form, it's either monism or some form of dualism or some form of like a potential third, immaterial material and how those things work. I don't know. I would tend to think that it's all, I don't know, like Rupert Sheldrake talks about this a little bit in like his, and I know you followed him some, but like with consciousness and is the sun conscious? And the whole idea that there are levels to consciousness. And so like material or the sun or a rock could be conscious. It's just a different kind of consciousness and a lower tier of evolution than our consciousness. And so I don't, I tend to think of like the abstraction, even when you're talking about math, like with abstraction, this is what I immediately thought of. And I haven't listened to all of Esther and Adam's conversation, but how Esther appealed to math is kind of an objective outside true thing. And I've had this conversation with Preston actually, is that two plus two is four? Is that objectively true? Well, I'm reminded of when Peter said that sometimes abstractions can even be more real than the concrete thing. He said this, I think in a Rubin report, but, and I think he was referencing to it with Christian metaphysics anyhow, so that gets really complicated, but. Well, with fiction, he was using fiction. He was saying that in many ways, fiction is an abstraction from real life. And the abstraction can be more true in that sense. Now- To play to every level. Right, and when you get, when Peterson says that, when he thinks through that, so this morning, I was thinking about my next video and I might do it with some of that Bishop Baron video, and then he gets into Lessing's Ditch, and then he gets into, then I'm probably gonna go to Paul Maxwell and NT Wright. And so, but this question of, then Boltman, what is mythology and how do we connect with, so you've got this Bible, so I just finished this conversation with a guy whose video I'll post. I'm getting kind of a backlog of conversation videos, which is good, because he's gonna be traveling next week and that way it can kind of space him out. But he was talking, a lot of people have come to, a lot of people have come to curiosity and even identification with Christianity via Peterson, partly because they saw in the Bible, they saw in the treatment of the Bible, this very narrow, well, here's Adam, and they're gonna forefront the history that, this really happened, because that's the big modernist, fundamentalist fight, this really happened. They wanna keep saying that early and fast, this really happened, this really happened. So the most important thing about that is that really happened. Now, what's interesting though, is that even in churches that forefront, this really happened, when they actually treat the text pastorally, homiletically for their people, they treat it symbolically. And it's that symbolic, sometimes mytholozzi, myth is a little bit, myth and symbolism aren't exactly the same thing, but mythology trades in symbolism. So if you listen, you can listen to the most fundamentalist preacher that will, God said it, the Bible says it, I believe it, that settles it, the snake had lips and they moved. They get all the way down there, but when they actually try to apply the verse to people's lives, they have to go via symbolism in one route or another, otherwise that historical event stays disconnected from them back in time. Yeah, it's an abstraction. Right. And I would say the reason that is, is because the myth, the mythopoetic, the symbolic, it speaks to your elephant. I mean, it speaks to the greater part of you. So here's an idea I wanna flow at you that I think relates to this. Sorry, did I interrupt the flow? No, keep going. Okay. I interrupted you. Well, we'll just constantly interrupt each other. I think we probably will. That's how people from New Jersey talk. Okay. Well, my politeness is first percentile. So. I've been trying to think about this idea and it's a little bit of a riff off of Peterson. He had a Patreon once where he talked about free will. Do you remember that? And he talked about it in relationship to time. Yep, yep, yep. And so he said, so he said like, it seems to him that no one talks about this very much, that as a decision is further away from you, you have more freedom to it. But then as that approaches you in time, up into the moment of decision, it's determined. It's bound. At the moment of choice, it's over. Like your elephant, your liturgy, your story, your circumstance, everything is trained. You cannot do otherwise at the moment of decision. Yep. And so, and I always think of that, like I talked to my kids about a choose your own adventure, because I found all these choose your own adventure books at a garage sale and I grew up with those. And so I talked to them about that. And this is why I love Peterson so much that all of your decisions have gravity, because if you take certain amount of steps up this road and not this road, it comes to a point where you can't get back to that road. And so that's what is meaningful, not what's expedient is. And so it seems to me, this is how I tie it to belief. It seems to me, now tell me if you disagree, that belief is determined. It's bound. It's a past thing. Whether or not you're consciously aware of what your beliefs are, that's a different subject. But what your beliefs truly are, how you act, how you live your life, they are determined. They are embodied. I'd be a little squeamish about the word determined. I'd say they're not voluntary. Yeah, you're not free. You're not free in relation to your beliefs because you're enacting them. They're embodied. They're already being lived out. And we know your beliefs are not subject to your will. And it's a good thing if our beliefs were subject to our will, we couldn't live. Because our ongoing navigating of this physical world requires that I actually believe I see the truck coming barreling down the street. I don't believe that truck is there. You won't believe it very long. Right, right, right. And so it seems... So this is my practical takeaway from that, is that... And I think Peterson has talked about this also, that language and language only deals in the future. It deals in potential. And what language is, is the logos. It's the meaningful thing that goes out and orders chaos. And so when we're interacting with someone, when we're talking, what we're doing is trying, in an abstracted way, we are using language to say, OK, in the future, this is how I see the world, this is how you see the world. And it's thesis, antithesis, synthesis. It's that dialectic that we're having. That's one way that God has provided as a grace for us to transcend our necessary and bound subjectivity, is we can hopefully integrate, the better that we become disciplined to that, someone else's experience, through language, through the logos, and move forward into the future. However, if your beliefs aren't subject to your will and they're already embodied, when you talk to someone who has differing beliefs to you, you're only addressing the future. You're only talking about potential. So why would you be mad? How could you be mad about that? You're dealing in the future. It should be solely persuasive. Because how can you... So to me... That's a very rationalist imagination of how human beings are. Well, that's because I don't think people believe it. This is my whole point. I think people are rational ideologues, because I think they have ideological possession. And that's... So I think what's happening is, is their fruit, the spirit that is within them, is being betrayed through their anger. You don't see the spirit, you can't see the spirit, but you see its effects. So when you become angry, when you're talking to someone about belief, you're betraying that you are not submitted to Logos, you are submitted to your ideology. You are being a rationalist. And I think Christian... You just got angry. It's not just about anger. But not... But I don't know... So I'm just... So I'm studying Luke. I'm studying the end of Luke two and the beginning of Luke three this week for my sermon. And it's very interesting because the gospel of Mark, Matthew and Luke don't have it. So Jesus is in the synagogue and there's a man with a withered hand. And again, this is... And there are Pharisees in the synagogue and Jesus looks at them and he knows what they're thinking because he's gonna heal this man with a withered hand. And he gets angry with them. And Mark includes that, not Matthew or Luke. And then Jesus also in Mark, not Matthew and Luke, says, you people in your hard hearts. Yeah. So Jesus is angry at them and their hard hearts. But he's angry... So I agree with you. But I think that he's angry with them not about their innocuous profession of belief. He's angry at them because of their idolatry and what that manifests in the world. So like one of my... I think it's related to this. One of my favorite things, and even though I don't swim in these circles anymore, but one of my favorite sections from a book is from back a while ago, Desiring God and John Piper did this conference called Think. And they had a book that came out of that. And there's a chapter on Jesus and the Pharisees. And I believe it's from... Shoot, I'm gonna forget what it's from. It's from Luke, I think. I should, I forget the passage. But it's essentially when the scribes come up to him and they say, on whose authority do you do these things? And Jesus says, well, I'll ask you a question and then I'll tell you. And he said the baptism of John, was that from God or from man? And then so then they go away, the narrators, they go away and they say, well, if we say it was from God, they'll say, why didn't you believe him? And they'll say, like, if we say from man, well, they'll stone us because they think he was a prophet. So they come back and they say, we don't know. And Jesus says, neither will I tell you. And I imagine Jesus was mad at that moment, but Jesus was mad for the same reason I get mad at ideologues because he's, and this is the chapter, the title of this section is called Practical Relativism. And Jesus goes on to say, you see the sky and you know when to harvest and you can interpret all these things right. John Piper, and I think this is brilliant, actually Jesus goes on to say, is there's nothing wrong with your deduction. Your brain works fine. The problem is, is that you're not submitted to the truth outside of the truth that you want to be true. You're an ideologue. You don't care if the baptism of John was from God. You're not submitted to the truth. You're too concerned with your own position and power and authority. You're monarchical vision. You're point about lying pastors. Yes. And this is ultimately, this very thing, this conversation is ultimately why I ended up moving toward orthodoxy. I got tired of trying to have this conversation and having it go nowhere because, because I just, it's pervasive everywhere. And I actually think, and I think it's the same, it's the same spirit that's within militant new atheism. I think it's what Adam Frenden doesn't like. It's within scientism. It's underneath most of Western culture. This, I'm just trying to differentiate what you're identifying here from common corruption because when the, it's really embedded in Peterson's rule, do what's meaningful and not what's expedient. Yeah. Now, what's, what I found is I've, and it's in the video that you're watching. That's the video I did on, on meaning as Peterson's sacrament, which you would get to at the end of the video. Because, you know, when I think of do what's right, not what's expedient, do what's true, not what's expedient, the thing that I pair expedient with is often right and true. And Peterson says meaningful. Now, the tricky thing about, the tricky thing about the meaning word as was revealed in the Verbecky Peterson talk is that meaning is both an experience or almost a feeling. This feels meaningful. Sure. And Peterson in the, in the conversation with the Israeli that I get to at the end of the video that you're talking about, Peterson backs away from that and says meaning is real. And that's why I think for Peterson, meaning is a sacrament. And what I mean by that is that meaning connects him to, in a sense, the forms. If you want to use a platonic construction, the forms. Meaning connects him to that which is most real. Now, again, if you get into Peterson's ontology, it's like, it's really complicated because of where some of the ways Peterson doesn't want to commit to a metaphysic. But there's- Does he do that and maps the meaning? What's that? Does he get into more of his ontology and maps the meaning? I haven't read it yet. Not to derail you, but I'm curious about that. No, but see, the issue with Peterson's metaphysic continues to be expressed in his difficulty with the resurrection. Because if you're metaphysically settled as a secular humanist, it's very easy to say to Sam Harris, I'm with you, Sam, most probably didn't happen. And Sam could bully Peterson into that in his conversations. That's what happened at the end of the first talk. Right. But then Peterson keeps backtracking. People keep asking him and he's not ready to close the door on a physical resurrection. So what that means, and that's why I did that video about, so you've got the metaphysical level. You're looking to Verbecky. Verbecky again and again signals I'm a secular materialist who uses Buddhism as psychotechnology to give myself meaning within this worldview. So Verbecky establishes himself in that worldview. Sam Harris establishes himself in that worldview. Bishop Barron establishes himself in a classical theistic worldview. Jordan Peterson is on the line. He keeps hopping back and forth over the line because different worldviews offer him different things. And that's why Jung is really important to him because Jung keeps going back and forth over the line. And that's why in that video that you're watching, I do read from Jung's autobiography because Jung doesn't have a problem with knowing that something's going to happen because he can feel it in his gut. In other words, for Jung, like Peterson, the world is stranger and so Jung is gonna leave room for the parapsychology and the occult. Whereas- Those are my people. There you go. So, but there is room for that. So that's why a classical theist approach is bigger than a secular humanist approach. Actually secular humanism is therefore in a sense nested within the classical theist because it's derived from it. So anyway, so back again to the point because when I talk to you, I'm always trying to figure out, okay, where's Luke's line? Where can I, how can I? Okay, he's a poor, he's not gonna like to, I'm not gonna put you in a box, but at least I wanna have you have a representation of, I wanna be able to know you enough so that I can mind read you enough so I can predict if I hear something, where's Luke gonna go with this? So your point about this meaning versus expedience and the Pharisees, you know, the Pharisees not wanting to answer Jesus, not because, I mean, if they had any guts, they should say, no, Jesus, you know, this is from man. This is you. I don't really believe that. And they don't believe that because they wouldn't put him to death. They wouldn't dare put him to death if they believed he was from God. I don't, yeah, I don't know. I don't, yeah, I don't know. I mean, maybe, like I know, I think that's possible. This is where there are, there are levels of deception and idolatry that are even worse. This is why, and I mean, whatever, you'll get to it eventually, but why I love C.S. Lewis's Space Trilogy so much is he, it's better than the Abolition of Man. I mean, you talk about the Abolition of Man a lot, but this is why he wrote it, is because it gets at the elephant underneath the Abolition of Man. So the Abolition of Man will speak to your writer. The books will get the elephant. Right, right. That's why he wrote Narnia too. Yeah, yeah. And so he, there's different characters within the book. So two of the main characters are divine and Western. And in, I think it's in Perilondra, he characterizes the difference between the two and why one degree of fallenness, even though it has a certain look, is not as deceived and is not as evil and is not as bad as the other. And I tell you what, when you read, when I read, especially this time, I mean, these are the only books I've read multiple times. This is my fourth time through it. There's been a lot of personal development and evolution. My whole intellectual journey essentially started with the Abolition of Man. I read that probably 10 years ago. Probably had no, I need to reread it because I probably had no idea what I was reading. But anyhow, in Perilondra, he essentially, there's a lot of talk between this Western character, the Unman, and the lady and the main character, Ransom. And there are times within that book that especially toward the end where Weston is saying things, and it actually terrified me as somebody who's intellectually inclined and thinks that I can't always articulate myself well, but I think I understand my own thoughts relatively well. But it terrified me in reading through Weston's debates and things because I said, I don't know that I know how to talk. I don't know that I know how to refute this guy. And a lot of what he's saying sounds really good and really close to things that I believe. And in that light, Lewis is probably doing a little bit of Dostoevsky, what Peterson talks about, like painting his characters in the best possible way. And it's hard to think through why this character is wrong about things and what's actually going on. And this is, and so I don't, what was my starting point with that? We were talking about Pharisees. And corruption and belief. Oh, and yeah, and deception and belief. And so I don't, even with the Pharisees, I think what you were saying is that they didn't, they didn't believe that this was from God or else they would have behaved differently. I'm not, I don't know. Well, that is a good point because that level of, that level of self-deception manifests. And that's where, in a sense, the pragmatic test of action breaks down. We do be, the pragmatic test of action is, in a sense, a test of knowing. How do I know what you really believe? It's by what you act. But you are internally conflicted too, which is why your actions, maybe your actions are a better guide than your words, but your actions will also be plotted on a chart. And I'll probably try and look for a trend line because they too will be inconsistent. And you know that as a parent because your children are little legalists and they are tracking you closely because whether you're allowing them to watch TV or play computer or have ice cream in the afternoon, for you that's just kind of, but for them, it's a big deal. So you deviate, they will call you on it. Yeah. They're like, I have this rule book, which is my monarchical vision that I wanna submit you to. That's right. Actually, I think, I mean, that's, don't you think that's what Jesus and Paul, like, you don't think that's what they're talking about in Galatians with law and being a pedagogue and a school teacher. Like this is, so I would throw out this idea at you. One of my, in connection with that and then see what you say to respond to it. One of the books that's most influenced me and I've been meaning to reread it because I think I absorbed about 20% of it was George McDonald's Lilith. And I've talked to you about this book, but CS Lewis has just been so influential to me. And when he said like, everything I've done is kind of a weak homage to McDonald, I was like, why am I not reading George McDonald? So I read his book, Lilith, and this is probably why it's so influential to me and why I relate to Peterson and Jung and everything is that book is like a psychedelic dream trip. I mean, like good luck keeping your orientation. I mean, it's a little Alice in Wonderland, a little magician's nephew, a little Dostoevsky philosophy and just all intermingled in a weird way. And it's why I really liked the idea of the dream. But in that book, so with, oh God, derailed myself again. In that book with, what was I talking about with belief? Chuck's, nevermind. Oh, Lilith, you were talking about Lilith and Lewis and Jung and it's a dream. Right, and I was gonna throw this at you. So, oh, belief, Chuck's own embodiment. So, yeah, oh, so like little children, got it. Found it, found the thread. So- Another George McDonald. Right, or Flannery O'Connor, right? He talks about the thing. Have you read The Princess and the Goblin to George McDonald? Parts of it, I haven't worked all my way through it. Read it to your kids, they'll love it. I read it to my kids, they loved it. But anyway, go on. We're really bad for each other because we really do interrupt each other it's just one rabbit trail after another. Right, and my mind is all- Lilith, children, Jung, Lewis. So in Lilith, the kind of, almost like the vision of what people should be are characterized by these people. They're called, what are they called? The little children or something? But there's essentially these people that are little people but they're not, and the main character runs into them and thinks they're children but he realizes they're not children, they're just small. But it's just, I think it's McDonald's idea of kind of within a story encapsulating what Jesus says, like let the children come to me and you must become like little children to enter the kingdom of heaven. And one of the ideas that I love from the Bible that I wanna, there's these little really short sayings that really pop out to me. You say, why do you pay attention to what? Do you pay attention to? There's ones that just pop at me. Saliency, verveci. One of them is, wise as serpents, innocent as doves. I think about that a lot and what that means. And then in connection with Galatians and law and monarchical vision and what law is, what I think of, I'm picking it all back up. What I think of with all those things is that the law is there as a pedagogue. So Paul says it's a school teacher. It keeps you in line. It's a heuristic, if you will, to keep you pointed to the good, true and the beautiful. I think we tend to think of it in platonic terms, but I think that's a modern eisegesis on the text, maybe. And then I think what wise as serpent, innocent as doves is, is that I think within Christianity, I would say, I think there's a calling not to transcend in a way that just completely disregards it that then is antithetical and antimonian against the law, but I think you're supposed to surpass the law in a way that is no longer submitted to the law in itself. I say it this way, tricks are for kids, laws are for kids. If I'm having to tell my son when he's 20, don't hit your sister, I have failed as a parent. Like you don't want your son to not hit his sister when he's 20 because, oh yeah, Papa says don't hit your sister. And I don't know with the legal kind of dualistic, platonic, rationalist thinking that I'm talking about, I don't know that true virtue and lovers are even possible. Yeah. You know, it's so interesting. So I was listening to NT Wright this morning, going back through some of the Gifford lectures. And so I'm thinking about Boltman and Peterson, and then Bart comes into, Carl Bart comes into the conversation. And then thinking about Nadia Bolz Weber recently wrote a book on sexuality and it's like, well, anything between- Technically sourced porn. It's right. Anything between consenting adults, no animals, and you know, no kids, no animals, everything else. A-okay with God. And of course she comes out of the Lutheran tradition, where one of the people sometimes said, what's the difference between the Lutheran and the Calvinist? Now again, when it comes to application, contemporary 500 years after these guys, there's gonna be a lot of fusion and mixture, but I mean, Calvin of course has the third use of the law, where the law is a guide for grateful living. In other words, the law informs us of God's mind and God's desires within context, of course. And therefore it helps us express our gratitude for the deliverance that we've been graced with. And that's helpful because part of the difficulty we have with dealing with Galatians is, you know, the Protestant Reformation deeply tries to address corruption in the Latin church and does so in just some limited areas of Europe. And that forces a reformation for the rest of the Latin church. But you still, there's that doing that kind of surgery that late in the game is gonna be messy and the Protestant Reformation was messy. Now with you going all the way back, let's say to the Orthodox and kind of the more, the more, you know, it's interesting because one of the things that you've talked about quite a bit too has been, I don't remember, I can't think of the, I can't think of the labels that you're using about the positive versus the negative. Oh, apophatic and cataphatic theology? Right, the apophatic. You know, there's something about that that's right in terms of freedom, where it's ironic that it's in a tradition which is very prescriptive in terms of the liturgy. I mean, when you go to church on a given Sunday, you know, 95% of what you're going to be doing, you'll know beforehand and everyone else will know if they're attentive to the liturgy because the liturgy dominates. And if you listen to Jonathan Peugeot, for example, he'll say, oh, that's a really helpful thing because you can have a, you can have a, you have clergy that's an idiot. And at least unlike a Protestant church, you're not gonna have at least 30% of the service dominated by the ramblings of that idiot. You know, off the cuff or whatever, you know, it's a sure container in some ways. Yeah. So there's an interesting contrast between the, you know, kind of the openness of the tradition that says we're going to elucidate what God isn't. More than what God is, as opposed to the Latin. And really Protestants are part of the Latin tradition. That's always important to remember that they are Protestant Catholics. And that's where the Orthodox is such a strange new entry into the church scene in North America because neither the Protestants nor the Catholics quite know what to do with them. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, that is the Orthodox church in America is an interesting, it's an interesting phenomenon on a lot of levels that I don't, and I've gone into it fairly wide eyed. Cause I don't, I mean, I think I'm just not super old, but I've lived enough life. One of the sayings that always used to plat, Christian platitudes used to rub me raw all the time was just, well, there's no perfect church. And if there is, don't join it. Cause then you'll ruin it. Anarchical vision. Right. Yes. If you hear about it, don't touch it cause you'll contaminate it. Right. You know, but I mean, the sentiment behind it is true. I think is that all churches have their faults. And so how the Orthodox are gonna play out in America is interesting. And I know that in the, because I know that most of the people that go to it are like, that's what's funny. I've talked, I don't know if I spoke with you about this, but most of the people that go to the Orthodox church, even though they're kind of within their own little subcultures, like the church that I am is heavily Russian, Slavic kind of. And so they, those little cultures have been maintained with their own uniqueness to a little degree, but they're also very American. So I mean, individualism, autonomy, the same kind of rationalistic thinking that I'm talking about, that's their elephant. Just as much as me. So even if in the official theology and thinking and history of the church, the thing that doesn't trigger me isn't there, it's still gonna be there with the bulk of the people. Yeah. Yeah. And so how that's gonna affect the church, I don't know. I mean, I don't know. That's a really good question. Yeah, it is. And I don't know. I mean, the Orthodox church, like you've said this before, they're never gonna become super popular because there's just, it's not, there's nothing sexy about it really. I mean, it's a slog and it's really uncomfortable. Like if you're, I mean, to it, it deprived, I say all this, it depends on your temperament, I suppose. Like I'm finding it really freeing and great in a lot of ways. It doesn't bother me at all, but that's also because I'm very comfortable with being uncomfortable. I almost feel most comfortable with that because I'm just a weirdo that way. This is why my categories and your labels and you're trying to figure me out where I come from, it's probably hard. I was saying this to Julian is because Julian was telling me, I don't think he'd mind, but he was saying he doesn't, like when he comes across something where he's wrong about something, like that's uncomfortable to him. And I said, like, I eat that up. Like when I find out I've been wrong about something, like I love it. It excites me. I get pumped because I truly believe the thing that Jordan Peterson's talking about, that's a greater chance to align with the true good and the beautiful. I see error as a chance to improve and grow. So, I don't know. One of the interesting things is that you're, when I listen to you talk in this way, I also hear resonance with a lot of contemporary American culture. And again, in terms of the millennials don't want to be categorized, don't put me in a box. I mean, there's definitely that spirit in the culture too. And so, it's interesting. So now, see, I know something about immigrant churches, because of course the CRC is an immigrant church a few generations back. And so, you as a non-immigrant coming in, you can see probably better than many of the Russians how American, how quickly American they are becoming. And it's a much more intrusive culture than it was for the Dutchman before World War II. But it's also interesting how this, this great empty frontier of options and freedom leads Americans back into, gosh, everything is just so open. I really want an enclosure. I love the beginning, the book of Pi, the beginning of that book talks about lions. And we go to the zoo and we look at the lion in the cage that's got free healthcare and three square a day. And we look at the lion and we think, oh, it's not the noble lion out in the Serengeti. And the author of the books makes the point, well, let's take a human being and throw them out in the Serengeti and see how happy they are. You know, they can answer a questionnaire. And so, a big part of American culture, I think about Rebel Wisdom did a video with Jordan Greenhall and I think that's his name, and Akira the Don. And there's a cool part in this video where Akira the Don says, having a being faithful to your wife and raising your family is the new radical. And the reason is because Madonna can only get so naked. And this progressivism that keeps wanting to, okay, so Nadia Bolz Weber, the church is always a little behind. Okay, so the new church rule for our new cool church is that anything goes except for kids and animals. But I was watching, I mentioned that similar conversation with Preston Sprinkly on that podcast. You know, so I was watching the Netflix Umbrella Academy. And of course- I've been watching that. Yeah, so of course it's like, okay, who's gonna be the gay character? Because you gotta have a gay character because you gotta represent. So, okay, there's the gay character. Happened, yeah. Oh, okay, so there's the gay character. But then you've got the sexual tension between a couple of the adopted siblings. And so the thing about progressivism is you're always looking for where the line is. And how do you know where the line is? You're looking for that which is forbidden. So now we're at Philip Reif and his, you know, Rod Dreher is the one who introduced me to Philip Reif. And okay, so you can always track the culture by that which is forbidden. So now, okay, so okay, no dogs or no animals, no kids, but what about siblings? Ooh, there's the new gray line, you know? Yeah. And so at some point, because we're not dumb, we're always thinking, okay, well, what is the game? What is the game? Well, then we figure out, well, the game is always just transcending the next line. So then you flip all the way back with a cure of the dot and say, well, now the game is living within the lines. Yeah. Yeah, that reminds me of, I think you've seen this or you told people to watch or you talked about it, but who was that? There's alliteration, M.M. with a bug. What is that one? You remember what I'm talking about, mole bug? Oh, yeah, Menchus Mole Bug that I got from the distributist. So I watched that and what is interesting, so this is an idea I'd love to talk to you about and I think it relates to all this stuff, Adam and Ed, Esther debate, even this progressivism and those lines and how do those lines work? But in that, it was funny. I mean, it's an interesting, it's a powerful graphic when they're laying up like the conservative from 1500s to the conservative from 50 years after that to the conservative after that and after that. And you realize it keeps going up. So like up here, Ben Shapiro, the conservative of today, compare him to the conservative in the early church. I mean, they would have freaked out. That's right, Ben's an observant Jew, but he's not, he's not Hasidic. Right, well, and even within, say you don't even go outside of any specific tradition, within every tradition that's happening. And so, I mean, this gets into eschatology and different debates somewhat within the Christian frame, but then what, are you familiar, have you ever heard of spiral dynamics? Yeah, yeah, yeah, the integral people talk about the spiral. Yeah, so I mean, I think it's a powerful tool to see things. And I mean, essentially, spiral dynamics is just like, if you think of a DNA helix or something, it's just the circle, but it's going around and around and ascending and depending on your frame of reference, it can look like the Nietzschean circle that's just like it goes back and loops on itself. But there's slight degrees of- Now it's three dimensional. You're right, but there's slight degrees of progress or evolution or however you wanna look at it. And I mean, and when you do look at history, I think on a really big timeframe, almost no matter what metric you use, it seems like there is a progression, a positive progression to some degree. And so, and then how that relates to laws and differences, I mean, this gets into the whole debate, which I think falls flat in a rational frame, rationalist frame is of like Old Testament laws. And then you put it in these categories, well, that's mosaic law, and then this is this law. And that's, okay, no one cares and no one's buying it. But like, is there some kind of a, I mean, some people buy it, but that's where I would say, I don't think you really buy it. You just want to buy it. Because this is where I maybe tweeted a while back, you maybe saw this, but I think not to derail this, but I think sometimes I find that intellectual atheists or agnostics, I think are almost intellectually closer to an authentic Christianity than sometimes rationalist, fundamentalist Christians. Because- How so? Well, and a lot of you- I'm not disagreeing, but I want to know what specifically you're thinking about. I think they can be, not all of them, but some of them can be submitted to the truth that's outside of the truth they currently apprehend. And so they maybe came from a narrow tradition. Like I've heard a lot of people say, Tim Keller says this, Rob Bell says this, tell me the God you don't believe in, and I probably don't believe in him either. But when you come from a really narrow frame, religion binds and blinds, like this is what God is. Anything else, it's not God. And there's some, and I think there's authentic, honest atheists and agnostics that say like, that's ridiculous, and that God's a joke, and I don't believe in that God. I'm on their team. And I think they're closer to an authentic relationship with God than the fundamentalist, intellectually. How that actually plays out in their life of virtue, whatever, that's a different story. Because I think there are some fundamentalists that are beautiful people. I just think intellectually it's bankrupt. I've heard Mike McCard, Science Mike, this, I don't know, he's a very progressivist Christian. I don't know if you're familiar with him. He's on, he's one half of the podcast. I don't know if they're still doing it, the liturgists. Oh, yeah, yeah. He triggers me because he's a progressivist rationalist, and he just drives me crazy. But he would say that a lot of coming out of his deconstruction where he's at, but his fundamentalist kind of upbringing. He says that all the time. There was really beautiful people within that church and people he still loves dearly. But then what's funny to me is on Twitter, he seems to forget that when he's ranting about politics. I don't know. Politics is the great tempter. It's the horror of Babylon. And Trump just raised the stakes, baby. We've got Trump derangement system on, you know, the left is Trump deranged and the right is, well, the right doesn't quite know what it wants to do with Trump either some days. Some of the right does, others of it doesn't. But yeah, yeah, well, politics is where, in a sense, politics is where your religion has to meet your pragmatism. Yeah, well. Because again, that's getting back to your, you're losing your free will as you get down to the moment of your decision. So your politics was baked before you get to the voting booth. Yeah, yeah. And I think that's largely what hate means when he's saying in the righteous mind is it's mainly temperament. Like it's already, it's not determined, but you're not free in regard to it. And we have to realize that in these discussions or else we're just gonna keep blaming people for things they don't have any control over. Yeah, yeah. You know? Yeah, yeah, well, it's complicated. Well, this has been, it's kind of gone how I thought it would. Just, it's not a bad thing. I'm not saying it's a bad thing at all. But just, you know, again, trying to, when you meet somebody, you try to figure out who and what they are. And, you know, I can't put a label on you, but this is who you are. I don't know. Yeah, that would, so before we end, that would be a, I wanna hear, I always love these questions, but how would you describe me? And feel free, I give you, so your whole conversation with Lucy, I know you're somewhat of the negative, you're not a people pleaser, but I assume you're probably like a nine on the enneagram. You're very agreeable. Like you're not gonna offend me at all. I'm just very, I would be very interested to hear how I come across and how I'm perceived by you, because neither of us think our opinion is the monarchical vision, so let's have it. Well, I, you know, I, you know, somewhat what I said in terms of I see you, I mean, again, my resolution of you is necessarily low because, you know, a couple of online conversations and a bunch of tweets. But I do see you in the light of your, of many in your generation who grew up in an evangelical situation. And see, it was very interesting when I was talking to Ron Dart and you really enjoyed that conversation. Tell him. And, you know, Ron was, Ron was, Ron was making the kinds of noises. And again, I didn't check him and then people have get nervous because well, Paul, why isn't Paul checking them? So then who is Paul is, you know, and when I'm doing an interview like that, my goal isn't to correct the person I'm interviewing, to ideally, you know, present with as much clarity, I'll push back on some things sometimes, but more in terms of trying to understand what the person I'm talking to is saying, okay? And so when Ron Dart is making his, making his comments about evangelicalism and evangelical appropriation of C.S. Lewis, Ron Dart is, has a real point there because a lot of evangelicals embrace Lewis with both arms and many have written about this before. There's a lot to Lewis that is not very evangelical. Yeah, for sure. His lifestyle, I mean, he loved, he wasn't an alcoholic, but he loved to smoke, he loved to drink, you know, his situation with Joy Davidman, again, from the bio I read, it's like, wow, he tricked a priest into marrying them in the church to break the rules. That was not above board. And you know, that was just wrong what Lewis did to that poor priest. Yeah. It wasn't right. Yeah. So Lewis is a complicated man. And Lewis's relationship, I mean, Emmett with in the last battle with, you know, you know, is he, it's not full blown McDonald universalism, but it's not closed door evangelical. Yeah. It's an Achilles heel. It's an Achilles heel of their embrace of him. So, you know, you to me strike me as someone who is working through all of those kinds of issues. And so it doesn't, Molly Worthen wrote a really nice book on evangelicalism, the history of neo evangelicalism. Let me look it up. I read it a few years ago. What was it called? Apostles of reason. Boy, that'll hit you. Apostles of reason, the crisis of authority in American evangelicalism. And one of the things that she wrote was a previous waves of evangelicals have become enamored with the Orthodox for many of the reasons that I hear from you. And so I see you in that light. And whereas you might see yourself as of course, my view of you is much more low resolution than you've ever yourself, obviously, you've known yourself for all your life and I've just known you for a little bit. But I do see you in a sense, because I have to somehow integrate you into my map. You're right. See you in as these evangelicals, these people who are raised evangelical and some of the built in inconsistencies with evangelicalism and narrownesses, and I'm sounding like Ron Dart, but I agree with him with some of this. You had to break out. And so one of the things I said, if you go back and listen to my conversation with Father David, one of the things I noted about him, I said both you and Peugeot grew up evangelical. And you bit hard up to Jordan Peterson. I dare bet the Russians in your church, they wouldn't have any fascination for Jordan Peterson. Yeah, it's interesting. And so then talking to Father David about that, I mean, the people in his church, it's kind of like the people in my church, Jordan Peterson, they don't know, Paul's making videos, strangers show up, people send the church money, it's all good. What Paul does with a lot of Paul's time, we trust him, I'm sure he's doing king work, but they're not gonna watch my videos. Right. So I see this bigger trend of people like you dealing with many of the same kinds of issues. So I talked to Preston yesterday and I think we might do another conversation. I should interview him for my channel next. Yeah, I'll do that one. And Preston too, as I said, is I'm trying to figure out what you do. Are you like a celebrity evangelical? He's kind of like, oh. He's B-list. Sorry Preston. Oh. I mean, he's not, no, Preston's very well known out there and he's an awesome, I mean, I obviously love him to the nth degree, but I mean, he's not like as famous as Tim Keller. No, no, but he's also in some ways like you in that he's kind of a misfit. Oh yeah. And he's always trying to figure me out and he says, well, he sounds like you're kind of a misfit in the CRC and in some ways I am, partly because Northside where I grew up was very different from most people's CRC's experience, but I went to Eastern Christian, that's very similar to people's CRC experience. I did mission work, now I'm out here in California. So in some ways I'm a misfit, but in other ways I feel zero desire to leave my tribe. Well, maybe part of that is because I don't think my preacher is an idiot, or at least he's an idiot. I love being me. And most of the other pastors I've had in my life were my father and Dave Beal in that Madison Square in Grand Rapids, Michigan, who is another man that I deeply respect and deeply love. So those are the only CRC ministers I've ever had. But I see you as very much on a journey and the contours of your journey are reasonable and understandable to me given all of the stuff built into American evangelicalism and the other things on the menu. And I thought, so actually Molly Worthen's book you would probably find interesting because it maps out this history of neo-evangelicalism and all of the crises kind of baked into that that get expressed in the fracturing of the, you get one way is fracturing, fracturing another way is diversity of the American evangelical scene. And increasingly the orthodox are, I know if you're orthodox that might just really rub you the wrong way, but once you come to America, you become a piece of it. And once you start saying, we're gonna take the likes of Luke and welcome it into our church and have it become a part of our body and the likes of Father David who grew up evangelical, went PCA for a while, was in the CRC in South Bend with my friend, Land Van De Zee and now in the orthodox. Orthodox is gonna be open to people like you and Father David and Jonathan Peugeot. The orthodox are gonna be dealing with evangelicalism but they're gonna deal with it in their own special way just like the CRC has. So that's kind of where I map you onto my map of American Christianity. Yeah, that makes sense. And I wanna just add this on the end if I may quick. I think a lot of this, I think through my own evolution, I've come to really understand that this is really, to me this is really a, it's a strictly intellectual thing. So like back to my whole belief in relationship to time, I really see it as a problem within Western Christianity and its worst, probably our most obvious manifestation in evangelicalism and I think my goal for forever was to not leave. I didn't wanna leave the evangelical church in ways I still don't. But I just found that there wasn't ever, like if I were at your church, I probably wouldn't have ever left. I mean, I'm serious. Oh boy. A lot of people left my church. Well, I know and for whatever reasons, but you, the thing that I saw as the problem, I don't think that you have. And so it was more, it was more at like the higher levels because like Jonathan Peugeot has said, or Ron Dart was saying in that CS Lewis thing, you have to be able to rub shoulders with people that aren't intellects, that don't care about this stuff. I mean, like my father's this way. I talked to my dad about things or me and my mom would get together and start talking about theology and my dad, he'll just sit there and he's like, I don't understand a word you just said. But what's great is like, but there are people, I've known many people like that who couldn't talk about theology at all, but are incredibly godly people. So like I'm not, I don't think you need to understand this stuff in order to be holy. However, I see it as a systemic spiritual principality kind of problem underneath the whole thing that I really think most of the pastors and intellects within that system don't see and they aren't addressing. So they keep saying like, why do we have atheism? Why do we have all these people leaving? Why do our kids grow up and go to college and then leave the church? I know why. Like I think I know why. But I don't think you wanna hear why. And that's kind of my, that was eventually my big frustration is there just wasn't, there's not, at least yet, there's not a culture or a tool to be able to bridge that gap of the thing that everybody within that culture has decided not to see. And that's what I'm hoping Jordan Peterson is honestly, what you are, like this is why I turn everybody onto you because I'm just like, I told press in this before too. I'm like, you're a gateway drug for people. I mean, that's a negative way to say it, but it's a- No, that's what evangelists wanna be. Open your mind. Evangelists want to, the point of an evangelist is not, I want you to be a disciple of Paul VanderKlay. Sure. Point of an evangelist is I want you to be a disciple of Jesus Christ. Follow me as I follow Christ. That's right. If I'm helpful to you, that's exactly my goal, but I am not important in this because I am not your savior. And if you have me as my savior, as your savior, pour you because I'm not even a savior for me. Hey, next time let's talk about Jordan Peterson's soteriology. Oh yeah, yeah. I have lots of fun. Preston already talked about that. Preston said, you know what's gonna, he's got a Augustinian anthropology. I said, yeah. And he says he's got a Pelagian soteriologist. I said, yeah. See, I don't, yeah, I don't know. I don't think so. He's got a theosis. Well, that's definitely what we should talk about. Well, I don't know that it's, well, see, again, it's unfair to talk about Jordan Peterson as Pelagian because that's not really his frame. You're right. But at the same time, there is a similar, Jordan Peterson does not have, because of his metaphysic again, he's not a fully Catholic, not a fully classical theist metaphysic. He's gonna have trouble with Jesus as savior. Now, maybe you can try to embody the archetype of Jesus and in that way be saved. See, if that's not unchristian, that's the difficulty because, and. That gets into all those words that fudge, savior, union with Christ. What do you mean by that? Ask people in different Christian traditions. No, that's right, that's right. And there are, I could throw a bunch of books written in the last five years that continue to, it continues to get at this question of soteriology because, I mean, here's the, and again, it's all right there in the sacramental aspect because when Jesus says, take up your cross and follow me, that cross becomes sacramental that you take up and you are joined with Christ. And as Paul says, you are, in your body, you are making up for the mysterious passage. What's lacking in Christ's afflictions? What's lacking in Christ's afflictions? Take that and do your systematic theology. Well, I'm a Protestant, I've got to always, my systematics is always tested by the Bible. And so, theoretically, I'm a confessionalist, Reformed, Christian Reformed pastor, but part of that confession is we keep going back to the Bible to recalibrate and refine and we do that in community and so. Stumper reformanda, huh? That's right, we, because, and the problem is. Yeah, yeah, we'll have to save it for next time. I keep baiting you. I'll throw things out and bait you. Oh my, get me kicked out of the ministry. Not really. All right, Luke, this has been wonderful. Thank you, it was fun. Thanks for taking the time. Yep, we'll talk to you later, buddy. All right, bye bye.