https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QuUYpLhypUk

 Well you, since you have your own YouTube channel, do you do it, do you have kind of a bio video at all on your YouTube channel saying anything about who you are Matt? Should I call you Matt or Matthew? Which would you prefer? Matthew. Matthew, okay. No, I'm still in the process of my autobiography and I don't really, I put aside autobiography because I don't know what that means and I'm not trying to sound pretentious when I say that. I just, I don't make the videos to talk about myself. I'm very much philosophically bent. So the videos constituted trying to unbend and make straight thinking or at least my own. But you, did you, did you, now you visited an Orthodox Church recently. I watched that video. Did you grow up going to church? Yes, extensively. I was brought up Lutheran. Oh, okay. So I have Protestant conviction running through my veins and that over time got, like there were doses of steroids put in when I went to college and found a very rigid and rigorous tulip following Baptist denomination. And tulip obviously is code word for certain persuasions of the extent of God's sovereignty as you know, things of this nature. And then quickly I left that, became an atheist in meme terms. I became a doomer for about four years in a place called Lincoln, Nebraska. A doomer? What's a doomer? Oh, that's a meme. So on the internet there's a kind of Trinity that is used to explain anthropology, like how people get through their 20s. And they do, it's secular but it's, and it has its roots in 4chan and things like this. Things which I don't take part of but I know where it comes from because I have friends that did it. Anyway, short, in brief, this is the Trinity. You start as a Wojak, right? You're just a blank tabula You are what you are. You're some fusion of nature and nurture. And then as you age and progress, your development looks like this. You get disenchanted with the world and with systems and everything you're brought up with. And that disenchantment is seen as a darkness and a giving up of hope. It's like Neo waking up in that little pink pod in the movie The Matrix but not having an Ebenezer or an Nebuchadnezzar to find him. No friends. After he's been red-pilled, he just wakes up in the pod. Without Morpheus. Without Morpheus and he has to climb down that tower himself. And so what they do in this meme war is they go to 7-elevens, they get cigarettes, they get beer, they go in front of a computer at night in a huge apartment complex that there are no numbers for, there are no people with relationships in, and you just live out your existence earning a wage. Then you get beyond that if you're lucky to become what's called a bloomer where you see the other side of the coin, that the stone has been pushed out of the way and you are resurrected into a fully integrated Jungian archetype of the sword sheep. Now all of that is interesting but to me it's paper-thin because it doesn't have, to use one of your words in the last video I saw, an ontology, innervating it. It is simply folklore, internet folklore. That's all it is. But it borrows from, and I don't want, again I don't want to sound pretentious, but it doesn't give credence to its ontological presuppositions. But it's not enough to say, because I'm not a presuppositionalist, that it should give credence to those things because if someone bends their knees their heart might not be soft. And Paul talks time and again about illuminating the eyes of your heart and I have no idea how to convey that to someone who isn't already convinced. So there's an inherent paradox in Christian apologetics that I think we're starting to feel and see but there is no way to re-energize what happened in the latter part of the 20th century by just putting some really smart people out there to regurgitate or reinvigorate arguments from first causes. That's not going to do it anymore. People hear it and then they say, oh that's great, I like conversation. What's next? What's deeper? And it comes to a faith statement but that is so difficult to articulate without doing it in bad faith. And I want to hear your thoughts on that. What do you mean doing it in bad faith? You mean is that what Peterson is talking about when he dares not say he believe in God? You know what, I think so. Would you elaborate where you're coming from with that? Well it's, I mean some of this stuff that you, this internet folklore that you just laid out, this is fascinating. I've never heard any of this. Being an old guy that myself who knows how to use the internet but I'm not really familiar with 4chan or the dark web or any of that. I do have a, I just did another conversation with Jem who I talked about, well I talked with, posted a video with him a few weeks ago and he's very much in the same place as Peterson in terms of he dare not say he believes in God. He, he, and so what we did in the conversation with him yesterday was we kind of dug into a little bit this question of belief and in reading this this book on Erasmus and Luther lately, one of the things that I've been thinking about is how, how psychological faith became with this transition that happened with Luther and and I think part of what you know Luther and the Protestant Reformation was kind of a turning point. It was really the beginning of modernism and now we're at another turning point and and many people, by no means all, because many other people don't have difficulty feeling faith or experiencing faith psychologically but for those who for whatever reason don't or can't feel faith psychologically, what does discipleship then look like moving forward and I think in some ways it looks like acting as if they, they believe because I think when Peterson says he doesn't believe he's talking about a psychological state so actually, yeah go ahead, can I jump in real quick because I only have 30 minutes so I definitely want this to be a wrap or two back and forth. Yeah so this morning it kept coming into my mind that I wanted to bring forth to us and this will tie into what you just said in terms of psychologizing fidelity, because again he asks, he asks for the eyes of our heart. He doesn't ask for motor movement and locomotion and everything that got drilled into American consciousness with the Protestant work ethic which I really do see as a working out of the you in tulip of unconditional election. That was a horrible in my opinion fissure of what it means to walk with God because it gave up, it became agnostic to the idea that you can know what you are and when you give that up all you have left is what you do with your day and so the idea of you will know them by their fruits gets plucked out of the context of false teaching and put in the soil of what it means to be in relationship of God. How can you know you're there? Well you know you don't know you're there because you don't know what you are. All you can do is say a little prayer and do a lot of actions and it just so happened that capitalism came around that and so that is a nice magnification lens of action over being and anytime we want to talk about being because we're so enmeshed and entangled in capitalistic presuppositions that just seems like socialism and communitarianism and surveillance and no work no effort laying around. Politically people are talking about the freedom dividend by Andrew Yang and they're saying well here's a true blue-blood Democrat he just wants to give people a thousand bucks a month so they can be more human and of course I'm just I'm characterizing this but I hear in that the whisper of you're meant to work and people even take the Garden of Eden and say well we were before the fall meant to work but I do think if we're not careful we rely on a kind of work ethic that isn't native to the ontology that Christ gives because I'll admit I put my cards on the table I'm one of those people I believe in the resurrection like I believe that all the work the significant work has been done and so now into your point of discipleship it's about exposing the mystery it's about the mysterious tremendous it's about taking the shoes off in front of the fire and experiencing and growing and really having a sense of no guilt now obviously there's virtue involved education coming out of the dark there's work to be done but it really has to do a turn pre-modernity and I don't think post-modernity and being ironic and going beyond is going to help us so in Kierkegaard my favorite saint said looking back at the Greeks trying to be Christian post-Luther he looked at the Greeks and he said now remember Heraclitus that great philosopher he said you couldn't step into the same river twice his disciples thought they were doing Heraclitus a favor by going beyond him and said no you can't even step into the same you can't even step into a river let alone step into it twice and he said that was a that constituted their foolishness and not understanding the masters teaching and ironically instead of going ahead of them and furthering his theory they degraded it into a kind of decadence and I think that movement can also be had with Christ and his disciples and I don't know what I'm talking about I'm just sharing with you and I want to hear your thoughts back where we can almost take we can do that move with Heraclitus now what are your thoughts what are your thoughts well you know the open the eyes of our heart this if memory serves me is a prayer that Paul prays at the beginning of the book of Ephesians and it's it's not in the book of Ephesians that the nature of the prayer that it was a request by the Apostle Paul is that this is a request made of God that God would do this for us I think your I think your contrast between working and being is is one that has a long history in the church with respect to our telos because there yes there tends to be you know Dante in the Paradiso has the beatific vision so and that's in contrast to much more of a Calvinist train you're right where the the the end is kind of a return to the garden and I remember the first job I ever had was cleaning a bakery and it was an old Dutch Christian Reformed baker that was in his last years and I started my job in the first day at work he started in on a theological discussion with me and he said yeah work is part of the fall and I said I was 16 I said no work is that reformed catechesis I said work is part of the cultural mandate be fruitful and multiply and fulfill the earth very well so you know that tension in terms of our you know what our what our final destination is is it is it the beatific vision or is it this this fruitful stewardship now the the prelapsarian Adam unencumbered by sin now obviously in New Jerusalem and let's say further up and further in but in a and and the work issue gets involved with meaning too because there's something deeply there's something deeply connected between work and meaning if it's meaningful work where you're not just moving sand across a concentrate let me ask you this so I'm working through orthodoxy and I don't want to be I tend to be an enthusiasm go or little o orthodoxy big o is Orthodox Church little o is just Christian Orthodoxy although they Orthodox Church they wouldn't have that distinction but as a Protestant you say you're looking into orthodoxy in terms of the Orthodox Church are you looking into Orthodoxy general within Christianity I don't I don't want to not be where the sheep Chris Christ sheep are so I want to say little o right now I find myself physically finitely in capital O and I'm an enthusiast like I go I go up and in so I'm even contemplating like the monks like and because I've always been about these theological matters but I know I also just like philosophy and I know I'm a believer in these things but I don't want to I don't want to move prematurely in other words I want to discern the call so that's what I'm working through in those two senses so it is a both and not an either or but in terms of the capital O so I've been to two services and they they were paradigm crashing for me like a chandelier falling to the ground because I was used to Lutheran services Baptist services hour-long sermons this sermon was 15 minutes and then an hour's worth of chanting and looking at icons and then this last time bless her heart but one of the ladies who welcomed me said I could burn a candle in front of an icon hmm and trust a thousand questions come to my mind and then I just say out of nowhere that that picture over there looks quite good I kind of feel as the words kind of jump out of my mouth sometimes I said I feel like a synchronicity with it thinking of young and of these other people what I just say these things I don't really I don't mean anything necessarily by them but uh she's like oh that one that's John crisis stone it's kind of a big heavy weight they're like maybe I'll burn a candle to him next time so I looked at the icon which had Mary depicted I said give me time give me time because there was this deep sense of reverie and veneration that I haven't felt before and I don't know if that is mere difference talking because there were no guitars playing there was no speaker system so I don't know if it's the mere difference and honeymoon phase or if it's emblematic of something that is being shipped over from the Atlantic and is beginning to emerge finally from the soil because orthodoxy capital O has been spread across the United States for quite some time and I don't want to confuse my personal idiosyncrasies with larger structures but I wonder if people are talking about Russia for a reason I wonder if Eastern Orthodoxy is making that emergence for a reason in the capital C church what do you think oh I very much think so as I you know as I'm thinking about these big movements about moving now past a very psychological faith faith has gotten so psychological people want something that they can see and touch and taste and so I I very much think that we're going to and it's been around for a long time see much more of a sacramentalist approach to a neo-sacramentalism and so it makes complete sense to me that there's a tremendous amount of interest in see Roman Catholicism has been around in the states for a long time and in a sense it's been tarnished by the pedophile priest scandal orthodoxy is brand new okay and so I I completely understand the newfound interest in it the question will be how enduring will that interest be because if if there's anything true about the Orthodox faith they are a patient tribe and you know they are not resurrection Paul I think part of it is the resurrection like they sincerely I'm not speaking broadly but in my own heart they since we sincerely believe in the resurrection so we have an infinite patience yeah and it'll be interesting to see how that matches up with American ADHD precisely in this material lack of attention span in this materialism like it goes back to that work ethic we we we have it backwards like we associate things with being and we forget that we cannot relate to the world we relate to God like the pastor doesn't face us in service he faces the icons which sounds like blasphemy he faces icons and venerates them people kiss pictures there people kiss the book I'm I was a novelist and then but the moment I saw a woman kiss the golden book after we read mark I was like Tom Sequinas and everything I had written and all my dreams of publication burned away like like straw and again I'm not trying to sound like an idealist that's just the reality I thought the books already been written what I was doing with those books and with narrative in general was trying to anticipate this joy now I say that not from a psychological perspective nobody sat me down and articulated a formula that would allow me to say that I confess that to you I just saw it and when you look at it it's kind of a silly thing to look at a person kissed a book big deal you see you can go to a play in Broadway and see that but it wasn't the same and so in Kierkegaard talked about the virtue of the absurd so he gave this great I know you watched that video that I made about existentialism and I think a great gateway drug to this eternal patience call it capital O or lowercase o orthodoxy that cap that eternal patience the gateway drug to that I think is Kierkegaardian existentialism not Jean Pulsar existentialism of bad faith where let's look at the waiters let's look at the blue-collar workers of the world and see how they are eternally struggling with the forces of capitalism or whatever class struggle you want to put it in Kierkegaard he was an aristocrat I grant you that but he was he was a deep intellectual he saw that chivalry was an outgrowth of the eternal patience because here's the premise and I'll be quick with this because I want your thoughts in his book my favorite book I call him st. Kierkegaard now because I think I think he's up there with with the Saints he hasn't been recognized as such but I think he was doing martyr work back then because similar in Copenhagen they were asking themselves what does it mean to be a Christian is it the cultural mandate or is it you don't read newspapers because journalism was just starting and they were deciding what populace was what the mass audience was and Kierkegaard thought that was a sin because no people are in the mass he used it ironically of course he knew his Catholicism he said there is no he was Lutheran I mean this is this is my son Mark precisely and Kierkegaard unlike Luther never came down from the dark tower I would argue hmm that's interesting Kierkegaard was a he was a strange man oh it's a very strange man and and his life was you know I read a biography that came out three four years ago fascinating guy it's it's gonna be interesting yeah the the advent of the Orthodox Church in America will be I'm going to be interested in watching how that plays out and especially with so I there's a few people in my that I know via the meetups here in Northern California who've been involved with the Orthodox Church and and I'm just curious about long-term how it's going to go I'm just curious and that isn't to say I just I'm just curious because I don't know I'm I'm curious too Paul my proclivity is individualism partly because I'm an only child I don't know how green the grass is on the other side but part of it is I think the Americanism of do your own thing you're a free individual and then also I found Kierkegaard found me I don't mean to sound romantic about this but I was 12 o'clock in the morning at the library South Dakota State University I was supposed to be studying mathematics because I thought I was gonna be a theoretical physicist and I walked upstairs I walked by because I was used to walking alone among bookshelves I've always loved to read I was walking there they were the place was about to shut down I knew all the janitors because it stayed late I never read what I was supposed to I just read randomly and then for some reason I went to the philosophy section I bent a knee and picked out this old yellow leaf book that had been checked out last time in 1962 and it was fear and trembling I had never been gripped by an author before and I thought could this be and this is just when tulip was getting planted in me I had a girlfriend we were both thinking about how to teach our kids to live total depravity unconditional election limited atonement irresistible grace well here regard was irresistible to me like I heard this translated English of his eccentricities but but it anyway he talked about those two nights so he took the chivalry idea you have an individual and this this goes to your point of what will orthodoxy look like in 50 years take your typical Orthodox give them give them a coat of arms call that coat of arms the current cultural milieu Ohio Alaska Florida doesn't matter that's their coat of arms you don't see their face they don't have faces like CS Lewis till we have faces you just see all their commitments their vows their prognostications you put two up against one of you know that movie timeline Oh a night's tale were they okay all about years ago yeah where they have the thing on their arm and they're on the horses and they have to run out one of the jousting jousting thank you so imagine two nights and jousts they're both under Christendom the one night is the night of infinite resignation and the other is the night of faith according to Kierkegaard's conceptualization they both have the Christian milieu they might have different Christian millions they both agree in the propositions of the church what differentiates them who will win Kierkegaard he was always writing pseudonymously he thought he didn't have faith he had a God that for him was lyrical he was a feeling God whenever someone in the world brought him down he could pray to this good feeling that was cultural appropriation of theology that constituted the night of infinite resignation God was an antidote to chaos he wasn't the God of Isaac Abraham the God who fulfills promises the night of faith you take off his armor he looks bourgeoisie according to Kierkegaard there's all the normal stuff nothing exceptional about him not and I love this line from Kierkegaard not a little note of white shining through that armor eccentricity and idiosyncrasy and weirdness it's all plain but in himself is that faith of Abraham that says even though there's a divorce even though I'm bankrupt God will restore it and he smiles without quivering how can he do that it's absurd it's literally unspeakable Kierkegaard thought that was authentic religion and the only kind of religion that would make unique the Christian confession as opposed to all the other religions that can double as a metaphysic Christianity for Kierkegaard wasn't a met wasn't ornate metaphysics it was it was that thing you can't see in two nights who vow that they love the same woman the same way under the same conditions what are your thoughts I know I just said things that I think you and I both well actually I don't know I just want to I don't know I I I'm trying to remember if I read fear and trembling it was a lot of years ago and I spoke about it recently with with dr. Jim from Idaho and and that was and it was quite interesting getting into it but I I don't really feel like I can comment on what you just laid out but whatever you want to say well you should take some time on your channel to go through fear and trembling I think that would be a good exercise and and part of part of what I think helps people with channels I can't never kind of the the woman that's reading Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance can never remember you know I think yeah I think that's a that's a good way to to that's a good thing to do with a channel because you you really have a focus and unlike my ADHD channel where I'm all over the place you really have a focus and you can really dig into something and and create a community around a body of work but I what happened today was weird because everybody signed up for half-hour slots I think somebody started it and then everybody just had these little half-hour slots I usually and I wish I had an hour to talk to you but I don't and so the next guy's coming in a minute so but anyway thanks for coming on keep making videos and I'll send this one to you thanks bye Paul