https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aEv-Xl3EkCw

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday where I walk through this current status of my sermon for this Sunday. If you want to see the sermon itself, you can catch it on my other YouTube channel, which is the church channel, Living Stones Christian Informed Church in Sacramento, California, and I've got most of the sermons up there and Sunday school classes. And I think a lot of you would probably be more interested in the Sunday school classes, but this is Rough Draft for Sunday. Last week I read the book of Ecclesiastes and I talked about alpha males and how in many ways things certainly have changed since the ancient world, but other ways things haven't changed in the ancient world. You know the old saying, the more things change the more they stay the same and in many ways Donald Trump is kind of like an ancient potentate in terms of his values, in terms of the things he tries to emulate. The only difficulty for Donald Trump is that in the ancient world he could easily have a harem and that would have been socially acceptable today. Not so much. And I even noticed an opinion piece in the New York Times that drew the connection between Donald Trump and King Cyrus and I thought the choice of ancient monarch was quite interesting, especially given the fact that King Cyrus in the book of Isaiah is called the servant of the Lord, which is a pretty high statement in this because Cyrus sends the Jews back to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem, even though this opinion piece on Donald Trump was not terribly positive towards either conservative Christians or towards Donald Trump. But the point is that these things don't change. I'm old enough to remember back in the Reagan years after Ronald Reagan, after an attempted assassination on his life, Nancy Reagan got concerned and so started seeking help from an astrologer that she had met on the Merv Griffin show and that of course eventually came out and came out in the papers, Nancy Reagan's astrologer, How I Ran the White House, and Donald Reagan, who was chief of staff at that time, said, No, you don't, and out she went. And even Nancy Reagan, who had a tremendous amount of power in the Reagan White House, they wouldn't tolerate astrology. Just last year in January, usually it's around the turn of the season that major publications post sometimes their more religious articles. The Atlantic posted a piece last year, The New Age of Astrology and a stressful data-driven era, many young people find comfort and insight in the zodiac, even if they don't exactly believe in it. And the question is, well, do they or don't they believe in it? And horoscopes and fortune cookies have been around a long time and we we look at that and we play with them, but there are many people, I think something near 30% of Americans read horoscopes and at least pay some attention to them and quite a bit smaller percentage pay a lot of attention to them. And I broadened this out to talk about one of my favorites, who is Verizon Lisa. Now Verizon Lisa appeared in a LG Lucid smartphone commercial a number of years ago, and Verizon Lisa is talking to the universe and the universe is telling her to buy a smartphone and the universe is telling her that her outfit looks good on her today. And this is this is the kind of things we as human beings do. Now is this projection or is this receiving? Now, until the secular age, belief that the heavens, God or the gods, governed the earth was simply assumed and it was nearly universally assumed across cultures, across languages, across people and this is part of the reason that astrology was nearly universally practiced all throughout the world and the Bible actually has a very nuanced take on it when it comes to heavenly signs and predicting earthly events. The Israelites were exceptional in the ancient world in that they actually had a pretty rigorous, pretty rigorous stand against a lot of this. The Mosaic law makes practicing magic and divination a capital crime, which of course adds a lot to the story of Saul visiting the witch of Endor. Israelites, however, Israelites like everyone else tracked the sun, the moon and the stars for timekeeping and seasonal planting and all these kinds of things. The Israelites, like many people of their age, had a lunar month. But yet you can even see on Jesus' tongue signs from the heavens. Immediately, this is the little apocalypse from the Gospel of Matthew, immediately after the distress of those days the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light and the stars will fall from the sky. These are symbolic imagery of the day of the Lord, which is a theme that I've talked about in the Old Testament prophets that is quite prevalent and Jesus picks up on this and these themes are picked up on in the crucifixion accounts. What as NT Wright notes is quite unusual, however, is that the the resurrection of Brown's accounts don't have similar embroidery as NT Wright calls them. Then will appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven and then all the peoples of the earth will mourn when they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. And so quite clearly the entire frame of the Bible is in fact this story about the divorce of heaven and earth and the reconciliation of heaven and earth. Now if the heavens govern the earth, one of the things that this time of year, especially here in Northern California, we pay a lot of attention to the heavens, not quite as high up as, at least in our minds, as the Sun, the moon and the stars, but the patterns of the clouds because just like we now look over the Pacific to see what weather will be coming our way from the Pacific oceans, the ancients looked up into the heavens to see what events are coming to them dictated by the heavens. And so if you wanted to understand what was coming next, well, just like modern economists, you try to predict the future so you can anticipate it, so you can react to it quicker than the crowd, so you can be ahead of the game. And this is why in the ancient worlds it was standard that court officials would be astrologers and they would do divination and they would read the signs because they were always dependent on what the gods would give them and so they'd look to the heavens to see what was coming down the pipeline, not unlike meteorologists in California look over the Pacific to see what's coming down the weather pipeline if we're going to have a drought again this year or if we'll have enough rain, and what will that mean for California that is a pretty dry state? Now there there have been long-term skepticism about this and Augustine in his City of God picks up on this. In fact, he has a couple of sections in City of God where he mocks horoscopes, where he talks about what would to us seem like science, where he takes twins and he says, well, these are born the same day, the same moment, but they're born under the same sign and they wind up being very different people and so this astrology stuff is ridiculous, Augustine says. But this is pretty much common throughout the world and very common throughout world history. And right here at the beginning of the story we find some strange visitors to Jesus, Jesus in Bethlehem. When King Herod heard this he was disturbed and all Jerusalem with him and you know what? I messed up my slides. So that's why we do rough drafts. Hang on. I gotta fix it. Okay, here we go. After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea during the time of King Herod, that's Herod the Great, Magi from the east came to Jerusalem and asked, where is the one who has been born King of the Jews? We have seen, we saw his star when it rose and we have come to worship him. Now, if you go to a planetarium about this time of year, you'll almost always see some story about the star of Jesus and some people will note that in 7 BC, which is pretty close to the time frame when people imagine Jesus was born, there was three times in that year the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, Jupiter being the kingly star and Saturn being the star of the Jews. Some people think it's that, some people think it's a comet. You'll find these, you'll find a lot of prognostication about what in fact might have been the star that these Magi saw. When King Herod heard that, heard this, he was disturbed in all Jerusalem with him. This gives us a little insight into King Herod. King Herod the Great loved building buildings and was one of the most successful under monarchs during the Roman period that governed over Judea and he in fact had pretenses for being seen as Messiah, which is part of the reason he rebuilt the temple and he made Jerusalem a place of splendor. He also rebuilt other cities and built palaces for himself, but he never was really accepted by the Jewish people. He was always seen as a petty, bloodthirsty opportunist that the Romans put in power over them and he was hated and resented and so in fact before he died and he knew he was dying, he filled an arena in Jerusalem with a lot of the religious leaders and the elders of the people and he had orders that on the day that he died that these people should be butchered so that at least there would be mourning in Jerusalem even if it wasn't mourning for him. Fortunately, they never carried out that order, but that gives you a sense of the kind of man that he was. When he had called together all the people's chief priests and teachers of the law, he asked them, where is the Messiah to be born? In Bethlehem in Judea, now there's layers to this because when he does this he has to admit that he isn't the Messiah. They replied, for this is what the prophet was written, but you Bethlehem in the land of Judah are by no means leased among the rulers of Judah, for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people, Israel. Then Herod called the Magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared. He sent them to Bethlehem and said, go and search carefully for the child. As soon as you find him, report to me so that I may go and worship him too. And of course he imagines that these wise men, these foreigners, these people coming into town will imagine that Herod is just simply so magnanimous that he would welcome them to his house. He's simply so magnanimous that he would welcome a new rival to his throne. I don't think hardly anyone believed that that was honestly the case. After they had heard the king, they went on their way and the star they had seen when it rose went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was. We have no idea what that verse means. When they saw the star, they were overjoyed. They were overjoyed on coming to the house. They saw the child with his mother Mary and they bowed down and worshiped him. That's actually the key phrase of the passage that they worshiped him. And right away you have the beginning of what will be a sequence of things and a sequence of phrases in Matthew where, what do you mean they worshiped him? Because you would bow down and do obeisance to a monarch. But for Jews, this was filled with quite a bit more importance and significance. And so here you have these high status wealthy, they would be scientists of their age, they would be the intellectual elite coming now to this house in Bethlehem and worshiping before the baby Jesus. Then they opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh. Now this is a tremendously rich passage that you can preach on time and time again because it connects up with so many other things in, so many other passages and themes in the Bible. The Gentiles coming to pay homage to Israel's Messiah as King of the World, fulfillment of Isaiah 60 and the promise of God to repeat, redeem his people from captivity, broader section in Matthew of Jesus and, this is part of a broader section in Matthew of Jesus and Joseph, fulfilling Israel's mission. This is the message for Israel. Israel gets messages, spoken word, angels to shepherds and Gentiles get signs. And in fact the Apostle Paul makes a reference of this in 1 Corinthians. But why are they called kings? Well, that's partly because of Isaiah 60 and the pagan kings returning Israel from captivity. Why three kings? Well, that's because there are three gifts and in fact this becomes a very rich story in European history. But why bring expensive gifts? Now as I began by saying, things don't change that much. And if a new regime is coming down the pipe, if a new king is coming into town, well, what do you want to do? Well, most kings like their egos stroked and they like people to say flattering things to them. And they really like if you bring expensive gifts. And that's, well, never hurts to win the heart of a king. And suitors have been doing this to their beloved and servants have been doing this for their kings. This is what happens in the world. Now part of what's interesting about this story is the question about how fussy is God? And part of my assertion is that God is always more than. And this is really hard for us to figure out because we like to see things in terms of balance and tension. But there's a both and-ness to God that I think this story really reveals. God is more demanding than we see as being reasonable. And we see this maybe at the capital crime of divination. That sounded like a tremendously brutal law that's coming out of the Mosaic law. But God is also more gracious, tolerant, and risk-taking than we see as reasonable. And we see that as God entrusting his mission to people. And God gives human people amazing power over this world. And what we do with it, well, we kill each other, we oppress each other, we make each other miserable, we destroy the planet. Just look what we do with the power of God that God has given us. And a lot of people turn that around and say there can't be a God because no good God would entrust us with this kind of power. The difficulty is that we usually turn that right around and we imagine that we can think and see better than God. And that if entrusted with this kind of power, we would do well. But then go back around and we see in fact what we've done with the power. But what we see is that God is on some counts more fussy than we think he should be. But also more liberal and more giving and more risk-taking and more... Some of us might even call him negligent in terms of how he liberally gives out the gifts that he has to give. And I think we see that in this story. Jesus receives pagan astrologers bearing bribes. That's one way to look at this story. Tribute, bribes, kind of the same thing. This is what you offer to at the inauguration, at the first new days of a first new power because you want to get in on the ground floor and you want to be his friend and you want to be on the right side of history. And we see something of Jesus' remarkable breadth here. He's notoriously demanding. Have you ever read the Sermon on the Mount? He's incredibly demanding. There's a terrific piece that was in the Reform Journal in the 1980s by a woman who was teaching English at Texas A&M, Virginia Stem Owens, who was actually a terrific writer. And she decided in her English class to, without any description, hand out the Sermon on the Mount to her class, many of whom were in the Bible Belt. And handed it out without telling them where it was found and wanted to get the impression from her students of what the Sermon, of what they thought of the Sermon on the Mount. And for the most part, students didn't recognize it and they hated it. They thought, who is this guy demanding, you know, such crazy things of people, things that are so remarkable you can't, you know, what is it, if you say you fool to your, to someone that you're in danger of the fire of hell? I mean, who would be so petty and who would be so scrupulous about one's thoughts and behaviors? Yeah, Jesus at the same time is refreshingly open-handed. I want to doctor this slide too. Hang on. So on one hand, Jesus seems petty and demanding and he asks completely unreasonable things from people, like turning the other cheek, like giving away all your possessions and all those kind of things. And on the other hand, he's refreshingly open-handed. And this is the Jesus that people more popularly know and say, oh, that's exactly who Jesus is. Jesus is nice. He eats with sinners and tax collectors and because that's not our culture or we like that. But if Jesus would eat with or say anything approval or associate with an out group that we despise, that we think should be banished, that we think should be marginalized, that we think should be put into concentration camps, well then Jesus should go right there with them. But this is Jesus. This is what he does. He eats with sinners and tax collectors. And one of my favorite parables in Luke 16, where Jesus praises a dishonest manager who's basically stealing from his boss. And I love it when some like coffee break winds up in this, winds up with this parable and right after the beloved parable of the prodigal son, they read this parable and it's like, what on earth does this mean? Does this mean that God, God admires shrewd, ruthless cheats for being so shrewd? And yeah, there's something to that. And this is, again, what really disturbs us about God. He is more than, he is more demanding than we think he should be. And he is more generous than we think he ought to be. We do not like the Sermon on the Mount because we do not trust God. And we love the thought of Jesus being gracious and kind and accepting of us, but we don't much care for the idea of Jesus being kind and accepting from those other kinds of people and fill in the blank, that you think he should throw into the fires of hell. This is how we are. And does this say something about God and Jesus? Yeah. Does it say something about us? Yeah. Sovereign and surprising are remarkably hard to distinguish. Basically, it says God does what he wants. And often we don't get what we want. That doesn't sound like much fun because we want what we want. Right, Woody Allen? The heart wants what it wants. So we always look to the stars in order to predict the future because we want to be in control. And not just to the stars, but to the stock market and to government forecasters. And actually today we have all of these sophisticated things. I was just listening to NewsHour the other night and it was talking about the fact that the government is shut. Now the stock market is so uneasy because the government shutdown means that all these wonks and nerdy officers who keep producing all of this data that most of us never see, that the stock market watches because they want to get a sense of where is the economy in China, where is our economy, where is the manufacturing going, all of this stuff. We're terribly aware of, and these in a sense are the magi of our age. And we want to know, we need to know what's coming down the pike because the more we know, the more we can get ahead of the curve, the more we can outcompete, the more we can control. But our inability to trust is expressed by this desire to control. And God is more demanding than we fear. And God is also more loving than we hope for. And we can't put these two things together in our little brains. And so this all seen, and this is all seen in the incarnation ministry, sacrifice, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus. It's all of that packed into this story. What we really don't want to know is how dramatically not in control we really are. And so we think, yeah, you know, one good asteroid hit and boom, did in the dinosaurs maybe. What will it do in us? Well, we should really fully fund NASA so they can go up there and keep watch and track these things. And yeah, we should really fully fund NASA until we want to either have health care for everyone or tax cuts for everyone or something like that so it doesn't happen. And then if you watch a bunch of other red sites, I say, yeah, all we need is a gamma ray burst in an area of the galaxy not too far from us and that could wipe out all life. Or the mega volcano that's under Yellowstone or the next pandemic, H1N1, the great virus that wiped out, that went, there's a worldwide pandemic in 1918, 1919. That one's a foot today apparently. We are not in control. We are laughably not in control. And even as individuals, we are not in control of ourselves. Genetics and health, you know, how long are you going to live? It depends who your parents are. You didn't pick them. Economics, war, birth lottery, all over the place. We are dramatically not in control. And we're not even in control of our own behavior. And Jesus says, who of you can add a single day to your life by worrying? But why do we worry? Well, we have, worry gives us the illusion of control. And some people know quite rightly, well, it's people who worry that, you know, they get away. I remember a Doctor Who episode where they're trapped in this terrifying hotel, nightmarish hotel, and one of the guys, he was a coward. Well, cowards live. They run away from everything. Unless, of course, they, in their process of running away, they fall into a pit. Here's the thing about this king. This king gives gifts. And so at some point you have to ask yourself, well, what king do I want? What king will I worship? And will I give my gifts to this king out of motivation for bribery and to curry favor? Or will I give my gifts to this king out of gratitude?