https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8hY1sBYGMtY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. And I'm doing this on a Friday evening again, so hopefully the sermon's a little more mature. It usually changes a little bit Saturday and then Sunday morning you can find the final draft of the sermon at Livingstone's church. And right now that means pretty much online at LivingstoneCRC.com or on the Livingstone's YouTube page and the link to that is below if you're curious about how the sermon ends up. So this week we're taking a look at a very famous story in the Bible. It's often called the story of the three wise men or the story of the three kings. We three kings of Orient are when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic. All of the children didn't wait for Christmas to open presents. They waited for King's Day, which was this Wednesday, this epiphany, January 6. Why is this story so memorable? So here's a Christmas tree ornament for those of you who are watching on the video. And you have three guys on camels and we three kings, we wander afar, Freddie's favorite hymn. It's not a long story and a thousand Protestant sermons have noted it's been embroidered over the centuries and these the Magi who we'll talk about, they got names and it was decided there were three. Some traditions had way more. The manner that they got there, where they came from, the story has just grown and grown and grown and grown from this small story in the Gospel of Matthew. Well, why the fascination with this story? Well, in a lot of ways it's actually a very important story and quite complex. There are really three intertwined, meaningful assertions about just about everything built into this story. The Magi, last week we talked about and those of you who saw last week's sermon will note Psalm 19 and John 1, both of which appeared in last week's sermon. The Magi, Psalm 19 says the heavens declare the glory of God and the Magi of course see star in the east and the star they believe is associated with the king of the Jews. This gets into questions about nature and general revelation, which theologically is a term that's often used for how we can know God and how anyone can know God by looking at the natural order, looking just with eyes to see. For those of you who follow my YouTube channel, I'll say the Arenic God. What do I mean by that? Well, the God of the Hebrews is in some ways both agent and arena. Most pagan gods imagined sort of implicitly lived in what one scholar calls a meta-divine realm, but the God of the Hebrews is both Arenic and agentic. We see that in quotes that I often use to illustrate that, in him we live and move and have our being, which Paul quotes from a stoic in the book of Acts and in the book of Isaiah, Holy, holy, holy, the whole earth is full of his glory. So I usually split these two aspects of the Hebrew God in that way. So the Magi clearly are the subject of the story, but the Logos that we talked about in John 1, through him all things were made, a special revelation, the revelation of the word of God or the Bible, the agentic God, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. And then the third element of the story is the empires of the world, which when confronted with this God usually have three options or a menu with three items on it, to worship, to wield or to kill. After Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, during the time of King Herod, Magi from the east came to Jerusalem and asked, where is the one who has been born King of the Jews? We saw his star when it arose and have come to worship him. It seems like a very simple little story, right? Well, who are these Magi? Well, it's not really a lot of disagreement about who they are. They're court astrologers from one of the more major empires. The Roman Empire, of course, was dominating at this point. But historically from, you know, every court would have court astrologers in the book of Exodus. They're often called magicians. The book of Daniel, Daniel was in that in that case, a wise man from the northeast and kings and emperors relied upon them for anticipating significant future events. They would have been economists, consultants, members of the intelligence community. I mean, these these Magi did all of this kind of thing. And like I said, you can read about them in the books of Exodus or Daniel. And well, they looked up in the sky because now there's a lot of layers to this in terms of worldview because the world was not to them as the world appears to many of us. The story of the world and the matter of the world were of a whole in that way, sort of the agency and the arenic aspect of the world, nature and and agents or persons was a much closer thing. And my YouTube channel, I often talk about Owen Barfield, who was a very close friend of C.S. Lewis, who talked about original participation, loss of participation and final participation. And sometimes we talk about it as the disenchantment of the world. And Barfield noted that the same word and you can find this in the Bible, both in Hebrew and in Greek, the same word for wind. The word is the same for wind and spirit. Well, we would think about the wind as simply this physical phenomenon that happens. But you'll notice this, for example, this day of Pentecost, when a wind, a penuma blows through the blows through the room. And that's the spirit. And so we don't think that way, but ancient people thought that way. And of course, this kind of thing I pay a lot of attention to on my own YouTube channel. You have the same thing with stars and spirits when they looked up in the sky. Well, they were stars. Now we can play with language a little bit. And it's interesting how this language holds because many people look to the stars in Hollywood to know how to navigate their life. They look to the stars in Hollywood at the Academy Awards for fashion. And so even though thinking has changed quite dramatically in a popular level, at least at a surface level, a lot of these things remain. And so these Magi were court astrologers and they saw a star rise in the east and they're going to look for the king. Now recently we saw this star, this conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and that got everyone excited and I just caught in the news that Mercury is getting into the act. And so, well, this was very exciting for people. And even Christians now who generally are not given to astrology got excited about it. Why? Well, the Logos story feels a little bit more real because it feels arenic natural to them. Well, that sounds like some some really complicated words. But one of the things we're always trying to do when I talk about the story verse, that's all the story that we see happening around us and the matter verse, the stuff of stuff around us. When this comes together, when the heavens declare the glory of God and things sort of line up according to the stories that we understand and believe in, we get excited. And so when this Christmas star, this conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, whether this was or wasn't what the Magi saw, we're not really sure. Any planetarium you go to at this time of year will have a presentation on the Christmas star and they'll run through a bunch of the different options that people have postulated. But even today we get excited about this. It's partly because we're always sort of trying to figure out what's what's the relationship between the story verse, which is kind of analogous to mind, and the matter verse, which is analogous to our bodies. Now it's very interesting that in the apocalyptic vision, well what's an apocalyptic vision? It's a vision where sort of the curtain is drawn back and there are alarming day of the Lord events, not dissimilar to the day of the Lord event that we saw in Washington, D.C. this week with the Capitol and the protesters going into the Capitol and taking selfies behind chairs and getting into senatorial and congressional offices. This was sort of a shock to people. Well, the book of Revelation is like that and the book of Revelation opens with this revelation of the Son of Man, which of course is Jesus, but it's Jesus as the emperor of the world. And one of the things that you might note in chapter one is in his right hands he held the seven stars. And a lot of Christians sort of blaze over that. Well, I don't know what the seven stars are. Well, the seven stars are actually still around with us because they track according to the days of the week. And so here's a little handy chart. Sunday is the day of Sol or Helios in Greek or Sol in Norse or Sune in Saxon. So that's Sunday. Monday, Luna is the day of the moon, the moon day. Monda in Saxon, and I've got a little chart on the slide for those of you listening. Tuesday is the day of Mars or Aries. And the Germanic names were a little bit different. Wednesday is the day of Mercury, Hermes, Woden. Thursday is the day of Jupiter or Zeus or Thor or Thunar. Thursday, Thursday. Friday is Frig's day. That's Venus and or Aphrodite. And Saturday is Saturn's day. And you probably, you know, all of you know, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday. But you never thought about these being actually connected with the seven stars. Well, what are the seven stars and why would the sun and the moon and the planets be counted as stars? Oh, because these were the they were called the wandering stars. These were the lights in the heavens that didn't follow the way all the rest of the stars do. And they can be seen with a naked eye. So each day of the week is actually associated with each of these seven stars. And you're beginning to get a sense of what the Book of Revelation was doing there. Now, C.S. Lewis, who was an expert in ancient and medieval worlds, paid a lot of attention to these things. Recently, a scholar for years, people have been trying to figure out what's why, why the is there a scheme behind Lewis's Narnia Chronicles? And I think the best attempt at figuring this out has been done by Michael Ward, where he said, well, actually, this the seven chronicles of Narnia are associated with the seven stars because Lewis was big into all of this stuff. And Jupiter and each star is or each of the seven stars is connected with a book. Jupiter is connected with the lion, the witch and the wardrobe with the kings, the four thrones at Carparavelle. And Saturn is actually connected to the last battle. And so with a little bit of digging, he looked into these because Lewis had a real sense of of these planets as they were felt through history. Saturn, of course, some of you who understand that this time of year was associated in ancient Rome before Christianity with Saturnalia, which was a big festival. Saturn depicted here is the same divinity whom we find in Virgil's Aeneid, Horace's Jubilee hymn, and repeated throughout Augustine poetry in general, where he stands from the mythical Golden Age, which many believed or hoped was about to return. The most famous pion to this glorious Saturnalia occurs in Vigil's fourth Eclog, lines that Lewis translated as such, the great procession from ages begins anew. Now the Virgin returns, the reign of Saturn returns, and the new child is sent down from high heaven. This is from Virgil. This is not a Christian writing, but this is a classical famous writing. These lines were understood in the Middle Ages as a pagan prophecy of the birth of Christ. So in some ways, these lines from Virgil sort of parallel the Magi. And you can see all of these connections that people in the ancient and medieval worlds made. Dante viewed them as such in his Purgatorio. The adult Lewis apparently made the fourth Eclog a regular part of his Christmas reading, even though by that stage of his life he typically understood Saturn as infortuna major. In other words, it was sort of an unfortunate star rather than the god of the Golden Age. So these feelings, these associations tend to linger. Now the Magi weren't just simply religious. Religion and politics were quite a bit more joined in the ancient world because the gods were administering the life on earth. And so Magi on the political layer, political perspective, were really lobbyists. And they were making sure to be on the right side of history. So if there's a new major king that the skies have gone to the trouble to prophesy, well, you'd better get there and show up and have your gifts ready to go because you don't want to be on the wrong side of this king. When a new autocrat arrives, do your best to get on his good side with gifts. Peaceful transitions of power were quite rare in the ancient world. And most of the time when they were peaceful, it was from father to son. When King Herod heard this, so these Magi show up in Jerusalem and say, the new king is born, we're here to give gifts. And Herod is the old king and was not planning a successor. Or, you know, he had his sons, which were in succession, but his sons were not young by this point. And so he's going to play coy. When King Herod heard this, he was disturbed and all of Jerusalem with him. Why? Well, Herod, like many ancient potentates, was quite a brutal man. When he called together all the people's chief priests and teachers of the law, now sort of we have Herod's Magi, but they're not really Magi because their focus is not on heaven's general revelation. Their focus is on special revelation. So he calls together the chief priests and teachers of the law because he needs their counsel. These are like his own wise men. And he asked them where the Messiah was to be born. In Bethlehem in Judea, they replied, for this is what the prophets have written. But you, Bethlehem in the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah, for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel. And Herod feels, excuse me, they already have a shepherd and I'm lining up some of my sons so that they will take over after me. But he keeps this quiet to these Magi who come visiting. Now, for many years, Herod the Great, as he is often called, was trying to become Messiah of his people. He was an Edomite by birth, but he remodeled the temple. So the temple that we find when Jesus comes on the scene is the temple remodeled by Herod, the temple that was rebuilt after the exile. Herod gives it some significant upgrades. He remodeled the temple hoping to be received by the people as a Messiah. He wanted to wield the mob. And in some ways, these kinds of projects were also attempts to wield God. He was put on a throne, however, by Rome. And he was a very adept politician. He killed a wife and two sons in order to maintain his power, but he was quite scrupulous about his religious beliefs. Well, why? Well, religiosity is a very important thing if the gods are in charge. And so that's why pay attention to the priests and the Magi and all of the people who are in with the gods, whether you're reading the gods from natural revelation or whether you're reading the gods from general revelation. So even though he was an Edomite and married a Jewess, he would keep code of conduct. And after killing a wife and two sons, somebody remarked, well, better to be his pig than his family. At least the pig lived. So ceremonial observance, he'd better be there because, well, isn't that politics? Stay on people's good sides. When the king of a new, when the king of a nation is born, you'd better show up with gifts. Now, why would he do that? Well, in some ways, those are his stars, not the stars in the sky. And we're beginning to see general and special revelation. Does he believe them? Yeah, he does believe them. Enough to build a temple, enough to disperse soldiers, and we'll get to that a little bit later. But how is he like and unlike the Magi? Well, he's sort of like them in terms of he's trying to be a good man. He's sort of like them in terms of he's trying to wield, trying to read the signs, trying to see, well, what's going on so he can position himself to the best advantage. Now, the other Magi say, we've come to worship. Well, what do you mean worship? Because worship is a word that basically means bow down. We've come to bow down and bow down ceremonially is to submit. But are you really going to submit? Or is this merely a mercenary act fearing if this person has power, be on their good side for your own self-interest? Then Herod called the Magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared. He sent them to Bethlehem and said, go and search carefully for the child. As soon as you find him, report to me so that I might go and worship him too. Why did he call them secretly? Would he sort of wreck his reputation as an aspiring Messiah by consulting pagan astrologers from other kingdoms? Could be. Did he fear looking pagan or not holy enough? And again, we think of Herod the Great as a very brutal, bloodthirsty tyrant. But this is where things are a little bit different from the modern world where we're so pragmatic about our power. He wanted to stay on the good side of the God. And so, well, how do you stay on God's good side? Well, rebuild the temple, fund the offerings, pay off the God just like you have to continue to pay off Rome. Was this sort of a religious political virtue signaling? Herod is going to worship a potential rival? Nobody in Jerusalem will. Nobody in Jerusalem believes that. Now remember the options on the menu for empire. Worship, wield, or kill. After they had heard the king, they went on their way and the star that they had seen when it rose ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was. These astrologers are getting pretty precise apparently. On coming to the house, they saw the child with his mother Mary and they bowed down and worshiped him. Again, now it's very interesting because this word, proskaino, it depends which form of the verb it is. This is a word that sort of has, well, it's really about the physical act of bowing before. And bowing before means obviously to submit. And you bow before an earthly king. But worship, of course, is, especially in the minds of the Jews, something that, well, you worship God alone. You might have to submit to earthly rulers. You might have to obey earthly rulers. But to the degree, you know, obeying earthly rulers sort of goes up a certain chain of command all the way to God. And right here we sort of feel the political and religious tension beneath the word and beneath the concepts. Religion and politics for us is sort of like wind and spirit. We've pulled them apart. So they worshiped the baby. And then they opened their gifts, their treasures, and presented him with gifts of gold and frankincense and myrrh. And this is often why, well, three gifts, three gift bears. And having been warned in a dream not to go back to Herod, they also listened to their dreams. They returned to their country by another route. And so here we see these three intertwined, meaningful assertions about the magi, the heavens declare the glories of the glory of God. God is a renegade. God is right there controlling. He's the author of the natural order. And then the logos, the word made flesh, John 1, special revelation. We see the word of God. Herod consults the scriptures. And so these come into play. And of course, the empires of the world, Herod. Well, these are court astrologers. They sort of get upgraded as kings. Why? Well, that gets into a whole bunch of stuff that we won't go into right now, mostly into Isaiah 60. But the menu remains. Worship, wield, or kill. Now, to worship God means to submit to God at every level of your being. And bowing down is a symbolic act. But these magi come and bear gifts and leave. They don't hang out. They don't become Mary's supplicants. What's happening? See, mostly we try to wield God. And what was on the hearts of these pagan astrologers? I can't tell you. But obviously, the gospel writers see this as a fulfillment of the prophecy of Isaiah that the kings of the earth bring their gifts to the king of kings. But why? To manipulate him? To get on his good side? Can God be manipulated or wielded? Well, usually we call that idolatry. And then we try to kill the threat. We try to get rid of it. We try to subdue it and suppress it, which is exactly what Herod will do. When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. Get up, he said. Take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him. So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night, and left for Egypt. Now, all of these elements are deeply symbolic. And he's going to Egypt. And he is reconstituting and reworking the story of Israel as he goes. And he's fulfilling prophecy. So there he stayed until the death of Herod. And so it was fulfilled that the Lord had said through his prophet, out of Egypt, I called my son. And so right now we have a real strong association between Jesus and Israel. When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious. And he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity, who were two years old and under in accordance with the time they had learned from the Magi. Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled. A voice is heard in Ramah weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted because they are no more. This was a point of embarkation where the exiles were led from the land. And again, this was prophesied. And now this is prophesied to the slaughter of the innocents, as it would be called. Herod, well, worship? No. Wield? Outwitted by the Magi, in other words, then kill. Then kill. And of course, Matthew connects this all to Jesus and says, in a degree of foreshadowing, this is what they will do to him. This is what the emperor will do to Jesus. He won't be worshiped. They will try to wield him and they'll fail. And he will be killed. That's not the way the story is supposed to go. The way the story is supposed to go is worship. And of course, he will rise and he will be worshiped. Because at the end of the Gospel of Matthew, well, when you get to the end of the story, the 11 disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go. And when they saw him, they worshiped him. But some doubted. So the Magi come and they leave gifts, but they leave. The disciples come and some worship like the Magi and some doubted. Then Jesus came to them and said, all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. He now declares his kingship. Therefore, go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit and teaching them to obey. That's what bowing down is for. Everything I have commanded you and surely I am with you to the end of the age. The story comes together. Remember, there are three levels to this story. There's general revelation. There's nature. There's the heavens. The heavens, the heavens, the heavens declare the glory of God. And there's the logos. There's the word of God. There's there's the word of God as scripture. There's the word of God as son. There's the word of God as revelation. There's the arenic God. There's the agentic God and there's the empires of the world. And they're all right here. And yet the menu remains. Worship, try to wield, or kill. Usually we try to wield. Do we drop off our gifts and leave? Or do we seek his kingdom? Do we welcome his reign? Do we trust in his goodness? And do we believe in his promises?