https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pp3NoCg31JM

 Hi, this is Paul. When I first started in with the Jordan Peterson stuff, it became immediately obvious that Carl Jung was a big part of it, and so one of the things that I did was read his book Memories, Dreams, and Reflections, and one of my big takeaways from that book was when he was a young psychologist learning, he was a young doctor, and he was working in a mental health facility. The older doctors told him, well don't bother talking to these people, they're crazy, and he thought, well what are we supposed to do here? So he did begin talking to the people, and one of the key insights that he took away from it is that the story on the inside somehow relates to the story on the outside, and that there was a degree of health that could be found if you can begin to work those stories together in a productive way. This is basically about how human beings navigate the world. Stories, as I've mentioned in previous videos, stories are astounding compression algorithms. They're also enormously scalable. Fairly early on, John Vervecky had a conversation with Benjamin Boyce, and that's where I sort of first heard John's take on story. Now, we don't start out using story the way we do, but by the age of three or four, we're able to basically start some sort of autobiography that very quickly becomes a self as such. Now, why is that so important? Well, because the world is too big, and again, this is one of Jordan Peterson's main points to Sam Harris when they were having their conversations a couple of years ago. The world is too big, and so the world has to be compressed in order for us to manage it well and to interact with it productively. Jordan Peterson's main point in Maps of Meaning where he begins, you can think about the world as a set of objects, but again, there's way too many objects, or a form for action, because action, figuring out how to act, or in the case of human beings, what to say, how to speak, is really integral to us engaging productively with the world. If you want to live, you have to act. And so story, big stories outside and the story inside, in many ways, we are autobiographies. That's one of the most potent definitions of the self that we have. This is how we manage our lives. This is how we manage our world. This is how we prioritize. This is how we decide what of the myriad of things I pay attention to, what deserves my immediate attention, and how I must act in response to the world around me. And again, all of this, we, from a very early on, learn how to do natively. And these stories live in us, and we live in far broader stories. And we see this so consistently in politics right now, in that, at least in the United States, there's sort of two political parties with very different narratives about who the United States is, what its history is, and these narratives then shape all of the other input that comes to them. So they look across the aisle and they think, are they stupid? Are they crazy? Are they evil? And they just keep doing that because they've got these dominant narratives that are governing all of the input. And then whenever new input comes in, they have to sort of figure out how that fits into their framework. And all of this is done via story. And again, it's not story as such necessarily, where there's a set story together, but our minds somehow manage all of these stories and narratives and put them together and keep them in that way. Now pastors and therapists both are in some ways curators of stories. And a therapist will sit down, and this is a picture of Tony Soprano sitting there with Dr. Melfi, which is just a classic show, because that show in some ways noted the, well, some of the exposure of modern therapy, because modern therapy will ask you, well, are you feeling better? That the task of modern therapy is not so much, are you moral? And really, and so that's partly what at least some of the early seasons of The Soprano were working on, because the crisis that Dr. Melfi had in terms of, well, if she's a successful doctor, Tony Soprano will be a more successful mob boss. And so secular therapists in some ways do sort of a dead reckoning with respect to well-being. I've mentioned before that in many ways for Jordan Peterson, meaning is sort of a compass. And Peterson hints that there might be a GPS system out there that we're guided by, but secularism doesn't really afford anything outside the box. And you can see that when Sam Harris basically tries to double down with his well-being assumption, and that's part of what Jordan Peterson probed with him in their conversations. Now, religion, however, so as a pastor, certainly you look at well-being, but there's also a bigger, broader moral narrative and moral matrix that pastors are working on. But of course, religion sort of tracks all of these narratives and facilitates the conversations between them. Religions are in some ways in a constant state of recalibration and sometimes all the way up to and including warfare in order to try to determine, well, what is true? What do we know? How do we work together with this? What sources of information do we have? Do you have divine revelation? Do you have the inner movement of the spirit of God? Or do you have divine light? Or I mean, various religions have all sorts of ways of doing this, but these religions are massive mappings of the world and how we are to orient ourselves, who we are. Basically, religions tell us the basic categories of what we are, who we are, how the world works, etcetera. Now, storied communities require platforms. One of the videos that, maybe I'll get to it this week, I don't know. One of the videos that I've been thinking about is, I've been thinking a lot about platforms. Platforms that afford sort of a communal intentionality and a direction. Churches, of course, did that, but other platforms also sort of facilitate transformations. So, stories act virally between people normally because we are always, and this isn't our conscious self, our unconsciously and subconsciously, we are always mapping and comparing maps, always recalibrating, always trying to see how does the world work? Does this fit into my mapping? This sticks out in my mapping. Can I integrate it? Can I not integrate it? I'll leave it to the side for now. And then we're constantly doing this internally as human beings and religions are, of course, a big part of this, but there are platforms for this. And so, stories do spread virally, but long ago, human beings began to use platforms. And so, when you look at temples and statues and carvings and runes and cave drawings, all of this is part of sort of the creation of platforms by which human beings work together on their stories. Now, human beings are enormously social beings, and so we're always recalibrating our stories of reality one with each other. It's sort of this massive mesh network, and so we watch each other, and it's the source of a lot of our conflicts and source of a lot of our communities. But we've been doing this as human beings for a very long time. Words and books became huge, powerful platforms by which we began to map and compare stories and check back and forth. And again, all of these stories don't have to be story form narrative as such. It can be poetry. It can be just about anything that we communicate with each other. We're always checking these mappings and checking back and forth. One of the things that we've seen in the modern period is the vast proliferation of platforms, newspapers, political parties, fashion, fads, arts, radio, television, the internet. We've just had this explosion of platforms by which we're always doing this story mapping transformation, comparing, recalibration, what we're doing all the time. Now, they all convey implicit and explicit stories through which people can map themselves onto a bigger map. Rick just told me yesterday about this Gallup poll that Christianity Today is reporting on, or the Religion News Network is reporting on, saying that fewer than half of Americans belong to a church. Churches for the United States were a very important platform. Even immigrants who weren't necessarily attending church overseas, churches would then be, that was true of the Christian Reformed Church, sort of a communal buffered cultural platform that would allow one or two or three generations to begin to assimilate into the broader stories that were in the region. And now it'll be interesting to see what happens with churches as we're experiencing this new massive wave of immigration again today. But I think part of the reason churches have been receding is because there are just so many competing platforms. The categorization of religion and not religious is, I think, something that is very much going to go away because that categorization is a function of secularism and secularism and Christian modernity are deeply intertwined. Now again, this recession can take hundreds of years, and so when I say going away, well not in our lifetimes, but this is the process that's happening around us. So as if you've listened to some of my other videos, my wife tested positive for COVID, myself and my two daughters, all of whom are, you know, that's the four of us living at home right now. We all tested negative, so we don't know if it's a false positive or false negative. So my wife is holed up in our bedroom, and I'm living in my son, who is at college right now, I'm living in his room, and I was, you know, trying to have some social distance from my daughters before we got our test results back. And so what am I gonna do? Well, recently I don't know how I found it, but I sort of got hooked on this History Channel show of Vikings, and what grabbed me onto it was the reincorporation of religion in their worldview, and someone, I was talking about this on Twitter, and someone pointed, you know, said that Bishop Baron had made a video about it, and that was back in 2016. It was a little eight- minute video that Bishop Baron had made, so I watched that, and my responses were very much like his, and he commented on Charles Taylor, a secular age, before 500 years ago, everything was religious, everyone was religious, and so it was really quite good the way religion was sort of incorporated into this. And then someone on Twitter tweeted me this, which I thought was an excellent observation, Myths are well depicted in their function to orienting moral action. The force and weakness of paganism is well portrayed. It integrates better the wicked aspects of human beings than Christianity. Christianity helps better in integrating the tribes, and so I thought that was a very, very helpful tweet. It's interesting watching this compared to, let's say, I guess the reason the show took me by surprise is that so much television would focus on, okay, there's the drama between people that people pay attention to. There's the swordplay and the violence, and that's what we pay attention to. There's the sexual tension and romance, and that's what we pay attention to. But the way that religion is shaping the world, I thought, was quite interesting. Now I don't know enough history of that period, or especially Viking history, to have a sense of how accurately, there's a fair amount of bleed through. I mean, sometimes when the characters talk, they sort of sound like evangelical Vikings, but it's just watching. And of course, there's the strong female characters, and how close is that to history? I have no idea. I can't compare. But I think the show is quite well done, and at least for the first three seasons, which were the ones that I was able to watch on Amazon Prime, it held my interest, and I went through them fairly quickly. It's interesting comparing them to, let's say, The Ten Commandments or Ben Hur, these sword and sandal movies that were very big in the 1950s. Now, of course, the heroes are conflicted. The heroes in the 1950s were far more sure of themselves. You can see that even in the Lord of the Rings movie, and Tim Keller, often when he talked about the Lord of the Rings movie as compared to Tolkien, Aragorn in Tolkien's work knows exactly what he's doing. Aragorn in the Lord of the Rings movie is, in Peter Jackson's Aragorn, is always, he's fishing for his meaning and his purpose, and that's supposed to connect to the audience. And it says a lot about the time and the age. What's pretty cool about Vikings is that it's clear that there are larger stories at play, and more attention is focused on the Vikings than the Christians. You get the sense of Odin and Odin's relationship with the characters and how those work out. It also comes very clear that you have a clash of civilizations, and it's the clash of the gods, and that comes through with the characters. I've really been enjoying it. I think probably as modernity continues to recede, we're increasingly going to see the Cold War as such, that certainly it was a clash of civilizations, and maybe even the clash of the gods of these civilizations. Now that got me thinking, how many times in those Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversations did Sam Harris's fascination with superheroes come up? So I began, you can search for keywords in the transcripts, and so I began watching a few of them, and I thought maybe I'd play some from the third talk. Jordan on his channel labels them A-A-A-B and A-C, which is really a rather smart way to label them. And Douglas Murray is in this one, and I think of course Douglas Murray is quite potent in this. And I thought about this quite a bit because recently I never really gave full treatment to the Jordan Peterson Brett Weinstein talk. I had thought about doing a video with that, but often with these videos I'll watch a video, and then I'll let it sit. And if certain elements of the video keep coming up, well then it's sort of assigned to me to, okay, well maybe I should do a video about that and take a little closer work in some of these aspects. Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein were talking about the transgender conversation, and Jordan was talking about how he's been watching his granddaughter and how his granddaughter has a name that her father calls her and a name that her mother calls her, but one of her favorite names right now is that she's Pocahontas. And Jordan notes that at a very young age, his granddaughter is quite young, at a very young age you're trying on identities. And this sort of gets back to Jung, where, well where are the menus from which you try your identities from? Now of course your daddy is mapping onto you and your mommy is mapping onto you and all of that as a first draft, but obviously something grabbed her interest about this Pocahontas character, and it's probably from a movie or something like it, maybe a Disney cartoon. And then what usually happens is parents notice that, oh she's excited about Pocahontas, and so grandparents will buy a Pocahontas lunch box or a Pocahontas backpack or a Pocahontas pillow, and and it's sort of the child continues to facilitate their identity transformation and their identity. Now she will likely not be 10 years old and still think she's Pocahontas. That will pass, but there are elements of Pocahontas that will map on into her and for her whole life long, pieces of her will always be connected with the story outside. And that's again where we get back in touch with Jung in terms of the story outside and the story inside. We keep trying on identities and we match them up to the world, and that's where Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein were talking about the fact that, you know, if you're trying on identities that don't fit very well, the friction and resistance that you get from other people will be very important to help you recalibrate your identity to actually get one that fits in the world. Maybe I should pull that video up and play some of it because I thought it was rather a good conversation. Forces are in that developmental landscape has a lot to say about both the insights and the blind spots of the people who emerge from it. And so I would say that a little frustrated and I shouldn't be one to talk because I can take a far too long to say something that I want to say. But this this whole section takes a while in this conversation. Maybe this will have to be two videos because I've got quite a bit mapped out here. For Americans of my generation, I'm a Gen X, the market played too much of a role developmentally and it has created a kind of lens through which we can't help but look. It has, you know, commodified things in a way that is quite unhealthy. You were born when? I was born in 1969. For millennials and maybe even more so for Gen Z, I suspect that there is a pivot to something else. And many people, you know, Jonathan Haidt and Greg Lukianoff have certainly talked about IGEN, the internet generation. But what I suspect is really going on is that if you are sufficiently plugged into the internet early enough, there comes a point at which the your persona on the internet takes primacy. It is more important than your actual physical life. It's worse than that. It's worse than that. I would say from personal experience, there's more of me on the internet than there is in me. I guess I'm to a degree responsible for that. Are far more powerful than me. Personally, you know, and I can watch this because I've been away for a year and a half and yet. Session that as the developmental environment for children. Now, here's the connection I want to draw. My contention is that the online landscape is postmodern, right? That if we were just to simply describe it, the rules, the physics of online life are postmodern because it's extracted from the environment. Right. So, for example, living in a dictionary, if I, I was frustrated by this because it takes a long time to make the point, but I love Peterson's. I love where Peterson takes this. Decided tomorrow that I was a woman, right? I mean, and when Peterson says it's like living in a dictionary, that's such a key insight. That's such a, that's such a leap in saying, okay, so what is the internet? How does the internet relate to the rest of the world? Kind of like now, again, dictionary isn't great, but it's it, it evokes, it evokes the, it evokes something of the relationship. I could change my internet presence such that I would present in a female way. Okay. And again, I don't think Brett's example here is terribly strong, but the, but where Jordan takes it, I think it's much more helpful. I could, I have such things you can, man has ever become a woman and reproduced in a female way. Right. So from physics, for whom the real frightening, but we understand is a generically to live by what has to be true for that to be the case, right? You know, like the Google glasses that would be illegal to take off. And that will go, what has to be true for that to be the case, right? You know, I had a, I had a fantasy a long while ago that people would end up wearing glasses, glasses like the Google glasses that would be illegal to take off. And that you'd be mandated to see what people wanted you to see. It was their right to be presented to you in the manner that they chose to present themselves. You know, and I'm not saying that's a particularly brilliant vision, but it's very much in keeping with what you're describing. So. Yep. I think it's, I think it's close, but if you imagine that we could, we can all discussion if we are in those for whom the real world has primacy and those for whom the online world has primacy. And if that's not the fundamental nature of the battle. Well, I think it could be the fundamental nature of part of the battle. I mean, part, obviously part of what's going on is whatever this unbelievably rapid rate of technological transformation is doing to us. I mean, my, my daughter and, and some people of approximately her age, so late twenties are helping me with managed social media, let's say. She's noticed that people five years younger than her have advantages in understanding the newly developed forms of social media that she's already outside of. And so that process of being hooked into the web and that being the determining factor for your worldview is probably accelerating. I mean, it's going to accelerate. Obviously it's going to accelerate because the web is becoming more and more dominant and machines are becoming more and more intelligent. So they abstract themselves away from the world. And then the question is, well, what's the consequence of that abstraction? But it's funny that it's postmodern. That doesn't, there's more going on with whatever it is that's happening than, than technological transformation. But you think that's the fundamental driving factor. Well, real real used primus, but which they have to invent battle. And so my point is that that is a distortion developmentally. It misleads the mind into misunderstanding what is necessary. If you take the postmodern rules of the internet, that the, the ring of our engraved danger and our approach. And I thought, I thought about this obsession with identity from a developmental perspective too. And I thought this insistence by a loud minority that their determination of their identity take primacy is first of all, it's just, it's wrong technically, I think, because an identity isn't merely what you feel you are. An identity is way more complicated than that. As any decent social constructionist should already know an identity is a role, a set of complex roles that you negotiate with other people so that you can thrive across a very long span of time. And it can't be something that you impose on other people because then they won't cooperate with you. Now you might say that you have a right to impose certain aspects of it on other people, and you could have a reasonable debate about that, but identity is definitely not merely what you feel it is. And it's certainly not merely what you feel it is moment to moment. That identity is actually much more like that of a three or four year old child. And I mean this technically, it's not an insult. So when you're a child, you pick up one identity after another and play with them. So for example, my granddaughter, who's about three at the moment, if you ask her who she is, she has two names, a first name and a second name, and her dad calls her by her second name, and her mom calls her by her first name. So she's Ellie or Scarlett, and she's fine with either of those, but she's also Pocahontas. And if you ask her whether she's Ellie or Scarlett or Pocahontas, she will say Pocahontas. And she has said that for eight months. It's amazing. It's been that persistent in a child of that age. It's quite remarkable. But what she's doing is playing, you know, and girls will play to be boys at that age, and boys will play to be girls, and they play with multitudinous identities, and then they settle into one. So then the question is, what if you disrupt that play? That's fantasy play. And then another question might be, what if you disrupt it with technology? Not that technology itself is producing a message that's counter to that, but that the fact that children are on technology all the time means they're not engaging in that kind of identity-establishing fantasy play. And then you might say, well, maybe what you see happening in that case is that it bursts out in late adolescence. Well, and it also might be that children aren't doing this stuff directly. We don't do these things consciously. Children just do it. And so we have no idea how the technology, in fact, is playing around with this. Let's imagine because, okay, I talked about platforms. So Pocahontas, the Pocahontas that is in Jordan Peterson's granddaughter, lives upon a platform, lives upon the platform probably of Walt Disney. And that platform has videos that are out there available on the television. And of course, one of the things that we know, there are dolls, and there are backpacks, and there are pajamas, and there are princess, there are Pocahontas costumes. And so what we do with our children is we have these identities that are living on platforms, and people live into those platforms. And those stories are out there in the world, and then they get into us, and we keep trying them out. I should probably not subject you all to my fast forwarding to the places, as it's a little rude on my part and maybe a little bit lazy. But well, let's see. And the insistence there that my identity is what I say it is, is actually the scream in some sense of an organism that hasn't gone through that egocentric period of play where they are in a fictional sense exactly the way they define themselves. You can't tell my granddaughter, who's three, that she isn't Pocahontas. It's stupid to tell her that because she means it in an experimental sense. And all you're doing is interfering with her fantasy play. And so I see a fair bit of this as delayed fantasy play with the kind of pathology that comes up when you delay a necessary developmental stage. Now that could be wrong, you know, when probably is, but still it looks to me like that's part of what's happening. I'm more familiar with the, you know, the male side of this because I, you know, I went through boyhood and being a young man. But if you have a misunderstanding about how you present in the world, so you assert that you are one way, then your peers will, you know, if your peers are nice, they will poke fun at you in order to reveal to you what it is that you actually present as, so that you can adjust your self-image. Right. And that's because we can't see ourselves and that's what we rely on others for. But again, the matrix from which your peers are going to be poking front of you is all from those stories on the outside. That's part of healthy socialization. That's what happens. Once you pull out of that egocentric stage where you're playing with yourself, then you have to integrate other people into your play. And then it's a negotiation. Otherwise, you're not accepted by your peers. And so that's another thing that's very interesting is that it is precisely those children who aren't accepted by their peers that insist that their self-definitions rule. And then one of the things that's kind of terrifying about that is if you know the child antisocial literature, there's a percentage of children that are quite aggressive at the age of two. Almost all of them are male. Almost all of them are socialized out of their aggression by the time they're four. And Peterson's made this point before, but part of what's happened in our culture is now we have, as a broader culture said, well, you ought not to challenge anybody's social self-identification unless they're on Twitter and it's going to be a food fight, but you ought not challenge them to their face. And so then we get all this weirdness that we're living in the midst of right now. And in fact, what happens is they in fact do get challenged, but usually in the most unloving, unproductive way you might imagine. Okay, now we'll get to the video that I intended to play. The concern about where you might be taking us or to put it another way, if we enter the world that you would suggest. Now Sam Harris in terms of, well, everything is, okay, it's sort of a world of objects and everything is out there and we're going to use reason and directness and that's how human beings work. We work very directly and if there's a goal, we can see, well, that goal will help my well-being and I'm going to pursue that goal. Douglas Murray has some questions about that. Not everyone may necessarily come out as Sam Harris. Well, give me one way where you think it can go wrong. And again, we can't forget your caveat, which you started with. What if you're not very smart? So then you're basically saying that the stupid people need their myths. We smart people on stage don't need them. Well, okay. Well, what are these myths? Well, these myths are these stories that we live within. And so the identities such as Pocahontas or Bat Girl or Spider-Man or, and again, now we've got these platforms. Now in the ancient world, the platforms were from the religion and the temples and the characters in your town. Now we've got this proliferation of platforms where Pocahontas from a story and, you know, we're a long ways from the eighth, ninth or tenth century. And we're very long ways from, you know, the second or third millennia BC. I actually am. Look, I actually am saying that to some degree. Look, look, if you're not exceptionally cognitively astute, you should be traditional and conservative. Because if you can't think well, you're going to think badly. And if you think badly, you're going to fall into trouble. And so it is definitely the case, and this has been what would you call a cliche of political belief for a long time. If you're not very smart, it's better to be conservative. Because then you do what everyone else does. And generally speaking, doing what everyone else does is the path of least error moving forward. Now that doesn't mean that rationality is unnecessary. Nor does it mean that all conservatives are stupid. It doesn't mean that either. Right. Precisely. It doesn't mean that either. Very important caveat. But all conservative structures are not the same either. And that we have many warring and incompatible versions of being conservative. True. True. And this is exactly, this is where rationality actually does play its role. Although I don't think it's best conceptualized as rationality precisely. It's definitely the case that we, to take Douglas's point, that we need to be bound by our traditions, but we need to be judicious in their re-representation and update. And we have to do both. This is what, in the dialogue on religion, this is what Schopenhauer says. He says, he describes the tragedy of the clergy. He pretty much says, look, if they don't believe it, they recognize it's a very useful metaphor, but they don't need to believe it. It's, they tell it. And he says, the tragedy of the clergy is they can never admit that what they're saying is just a metaphor. And this is some, this is where, you know, Vikings was such a breath of fresh air because everyone there does believe it. Almost everyone. There's the king of Wessex, who is, you know, he has, you know, he has his Roman bath and he has these Roman statues and he has these fragments of the text of Julius Caesar conquering Gaul. And so he's, the modernity seeps into it, of course. And so he's, but he's also seen as being corrupt. I mean, he will, he will attempt to seduce a family member. He will, he will backstab. And I mean, he can be enormously duplicitous, but, you know, to get to this point now, Sam's about to take a shot at Schopenhauer, but this, this is where, okay. It, in, in, in many ways, it doesn't work if you don't believe it. And this gets into the, the resurrection, the physicality of the resurrection thing again. The fact that Pocahontas is a historical figure at some point might lead someone to say, well, I can exemplify and embody and act out successfully aspects of Pocahontas's identity because it has already happened once. And this is part of the difference that, that Lewis points out between Odin and, and how many dying and resurrecting gods that you find in mythology that in Christianity, well, it's only really the outliers who say Jesus of Nazareth didn't exist. That's, that's not a terribly, that's not a terribly easy point to make. Right. It was before or after he threw his housekeeper down the stairs. Look, we can all find flaws. We all have skeletons in our closet. Yeah. But that, but that, yes, that there is a way in which religion is what he describes as philosophy for the masses. And that if you recognize that most people are not going to spend their lives studying philosophy, they're not going to be reading about the differences between Leibniz and Kant, that religion has to do. And, and of course, this point is always made as sort of an elitist scalable point. And Peterson just said high and low intelligence, but I think it, it, it goes far deeper than that because philosophy is of course, a, a well-developed scaling and abstraction above life. That story isn't, I was making the point in, in our adult, our men's Bible study, our online men's Bible study, that if you, if you want to look at, let's say the subtle conversation within the, the, the Hebrew scriptures about in-group and out-group, you can look at Moabite women as an example, and you can look at a story in where the Moabite women are seducing the young men of Israel. You can look at the book of Ezra, where there's a lot of in-group out-group stuff going on in the book of Ezra when the exiles come back and, you know, the land has been repopulated and they're trying to find their identity. But then you can also look at the book of Ruth and what you find that as story is an astoundingly capable compression narrative of which we have, you know, you have your CPU and your GPU and it's my, my son is trying to build a computer and he's pulling out his hair trying to find a GPU because all the Bitcoiners are mining Bitcoin. But, but in many ways we are, we are maximized. It's like we have a GPU for story, just like your gaming computer has a GPU for graphics and we're maximized by that GPU for story. And, and so where was I going with this? So, so that's this massive compressive algorithm and philosophy isn't just, philosophy is sort of using the CPU and that's absolutely fine. Again, a computer is much more capable with a good GPU and a good CPU. And so philosophy sort of uses the CPU. It's rational, it's linear, it's, it's, it's, it's up there in that certain way, but the GPU and story that grabs us, we, you know, that's what mobilizes us, not just as individuals, but you can mobilize a nation with a story. You don't usually mobilize a nation with philosophy. You might discern some of the mobilization via philosophy, looking at it in that very CPU sort of way, but it's the story, it's the passion. That's how we group up and assemble and cooperate and mobilize and do great good things and do great evil things. Now I'm not saying that I agree with that particularly, but there's a heck of an argument within there, which a lot of people will be living their lives in. I don't think it's a good argument if you recall or just imagine what it's like to be a child, especially from the perspective of being a parent. I mean, I mean, you know, I have two young girls, and- What's interesting is that the GPU comes online first and the CPU comes on quite a bit later. But again, when you look at the brain books, which is really governing is the CPU or the GPU? They, you know, they're very smart young girls. They're smart, but you know, one of them is four and a half years old and knows almost nothing, right? So she knows what I and my wife and our society tell her at some level. I bet she knows almost nothing of what Sam directly tries to tell her, but look at what she does know. What point is she going to think for herself about these fundamental questions? And again, when he says think for yourself, he means in the CPU, rational, linear, you know, left brain sort of way, but the GPU is already there and he's about to- And I mean, she, again, she's, she's currently spending half the day dressed up like Batgirl or Catwoman, right? So if I told- And why? Well, her, her GPU, her graphics processor is well online. She's already been mapping Sam and his wife and the grandparents and the video and the TV. She's already been mapping these stories and these stories are what is inhabiting her in a very deep way. And now a little bit later with her CPU, she might learn that she's going to lose status in this way, but that's really what's going to be moving her at a very deep level. And this other stuff, well, she'll just, she'll just play secular in front of daddy, but what's really moving her is things that she picked up from Catwoman or Batgirl. And those are the things that she will act out in her life. ...that these superheroes were real. She would believe that for the longest time. And if she- They are real. You just have to ask yourself, what do you mean by real? And again, real doesn't mean merely physical because most of what governs our world is not physical. Most of our gov- what governs our world is the most real thing. And, and the things that are most real are most real at multiple levels and layers all the way up and down. If we lived in a cult that thought they were real or a whole society that by dint of its geographic or linguistic isolation managed to maintain a conversation about, in this case, Batgirl and Catwoman, that they were real and that it was absolutely important to honor them and you'd burn in hell if you failed to do this. And in some ways, this is the drama in the story of Vikings, you know, you have Athelstan and then you have Floki and, and this is, this, this is exactly what's going on in these societies. And, and Sam's kind of disparaging it, but again, you know, again, these are, these are people who are prioritizing evolutionary stories. Basically, if you look at the evidence, all of that GPU story outside, story inside, that was what created successful societies, not this other thing. And that's part of Douglas Murray's argument that, Hey, this would be, we would be meeting fully grown adults- Do you think that I- Who believe this sort of thing. But it seems to me, Sam, that you bring up the superhero thing quite a bit, so I think I'll go after that directly. So- Then I won. Okay, yeah, you bet. I love superheroes. Okay, so well, so, so you make the case in a moral landscape that there, there, an ideal is real. Because the ideal that you define an ideal is real and the ideal is whatever maximizes well-being and gets us away from hell. You said not only is that real, you also say that's the fundamental axiom. That's the claim in the moral landscape. So you do make a claim that there is a real ideal. And I would say- Well, I wouldn't necessarily put it that way, but there's a real, we are in a circumstance where things can matter, right? Consciousness is the case, is the condition in which things can matter, where there can be a range- What do you mean by things? You mean physical things? Or do you mean the things that are actually governing his daughter and governing him? Because he likes superheroes. Of experiences, some of which are very, very bad. If the word bad means anything, they're bad. And some of which are very, very good, if the word good means anything. And we are navigating in that space. We can't help but navigate or seek to navigate in that space. Absolutely. And religion is one form of conversation about that navigation problem. Let's go back to the ideal. Like Jordan rolls his sleeves up. Bad girl. He means business now. Bad girl and catwoman are approximations to a higher ideal. That's what they are. And even if you say they're approximations to a higher ideal, you're putting the ideal first when catwoman and batwoman, catwoman and batgirl are more powerful than a thing we recognize as an ideal, because the ideal would be the abstraction, like the philosophy. But catwoman and batgirl are able to pack more into them because they are storied and we're able to process them with our GPU. There's no way the CPU is going to outcompete it. Now, I've been watching some videos. I'm going to play some that are basically explaining comic books. And Jonathan Pujo explains symbolism. But it's for a long time I've been asking myself, okay, what happens when we watch a Jonathan Pujo video? A lot of what happens is that we're just doing the translation from the GPU to the CPU. We've sort of felt it and it's moved us. And then along comes the CPU explanation. Oh, okay. Well, part of the benefit of that left brain stuff is that now it's map territory and I can hold it as being mapped propositionally, which is sort of a fairly shelf stable way to store things. But that's all they are. They're not as powerful as catgirl and batwoman or Santa Claus or Flokey or Ragnar Lothbrok or all of the people in the characters. Those are the compression. They're more real than a lot of the abstractions. The abstractions are handy because we can take them down and move them around and do things with them. But we keep imagining that the abstraction is the more real. No, the abstraction is a different kind of thing. It's a very powerful thing, but it's almost like it's got a shelf life and you can just set it there. It's the abstractions, the propositions, it's all of those kinds of things, but it's nowhere near as powerful as the narrative elements. To return to this with a biblical idea, I'm fairly sure from personal experience that a lot of parents are perfectly content with bringing their children up vaguely within the story they've inherited. And at some point, the children realize that the fairy doesn't bring them money when their teeth fall out. And at some point, maybe around the same time or a bit later, they discover that Santa Claus doesn't really come down the chimney. And at some point, they realize that actually the whole religious thing is a kind of metaphor, but it's got them through the formative years in somewhere, often with terrible damage along the way, I can see that. But also with something else. And I'm struck by the number of people, and this is why I share some of what I think is Jordan's concern about the possibility of the world you're envisaging, which is, I can think of a lot of parents now, in my country and other countries as well, who I'm just very struck. They themselves are kind of baby boomer or 60s atheists, humanists, whatever. And I start to notice, for instance, that they're enrolling their children in Christian schools. And I say to them, why are you doing this? And they have fairly coherent arguments along with the lines of one I've just had. Look, I don't particularly believe this myself, but I think it's a pretty good way to bring up the kids. It's a structure of a kind. And I'm not sure I can find all sorts of flaws in that. But enough people are doing it that it's something that needs to be addressed. I would say yes, it speaks to a real failure of imagination and effort in the secular community to produce truly non-embarrassing alternatives. Exactly. And then you have to ask, well, first of all, your embarrassment, where is that coming from? And why is it so hard? Because, well, it's sort of like the reason my son can't find a good GPU on the store shelf or in stock at some place on Amazon, because everybody's buying up the GPUs. Why? Because that's what makes the world go around. Oh, but what we really need is we want the CPU to come up with something that can displace what all of the GPU is doing. It's not going to happen. It's not going to happen because how does the stuff that these parents who, well, I don't really believe, I don't go to church or believe in any of that, but I want my kid to learn it. The parents are wiser than they know. They're wiser than their CPU brain. And that goes back to Jordan Peterson's comment about conservatism. Their parents are doing what's been done. It's already been mapped onto them. And so, okay, here's the project. We're going to be very direct and we're going to, let's just tell children to be good, but they don't know what good looks like, because good looks, much more than good, is abstracted. And this is across the board. This is not just school. This is how do you conduct a funeral? How do you get married? What rites of passage can you offer a 13-year-old? What are you doing here? What are we doing here? To be the first people in history to have absolutely no explanation for what we're doing at all. It's a big moment. And that's the night. That sharpens up my concern perfectly, because to shrink back from that moment and resort to one of the pseudo stories of the past, I consider to be a failure of nerve, both intellectually and morally. It's interesting that he characterizes that as a failure of nerve, because of course, this is the CPU world you're trying to live in. Okay, well now we have to somehow create the stories necessary to replace all of the ancient ones that we've been living off forever, so let's sit down and maybe we will have a department of non-religious storytelling that will... And now we're just sort of back into Jonathan Pujol's land of his parasitic storytelling, where it's like, well, why don't you develop all of the stories that you need that are not patriarchal? All the stories that you need that are not heteronormative? All the stories that you need that are safe for the brave new world that you're trying to create? You can't make them. Why? Because where do the stories that we have come from? The stories that we have come from, again, watch Jordan Peterson's first biblical series. The stories that we have come from because we watch each other and because our GPUs are abstracting this. There's something in Pocahontas that has attracted the attention of Jordan Peterson's granddaughter. There's something in Catwoman and Batgirl that has attracted Sam's daughters and Sam, his CPU, can't figure out the value of this, but this is what we do. Let's go back to the superhero idea. One of the things you might notice about superheroes is that some of them are actually deities, right? So in the Marvel pantheon, you have Thor, for example, and so there's a very thin line between the idea of a superhero and the idea of a god, especially if you think about it in a polytheistic manner. So the modern superheroes and the Greek gods, for example, share a tremendous number of features in common. And so here's something to think about. So there's a reason that people admire superheroes, and it's because they act out parts of the hero archetype. That's the technical reason. They're obviously acting something out because that's how you can tell they're superheroes. They share some set of characteristics across the set of superheroes that makes them superheroes. Now the question might be, what is the essential element of being a superhero that makes you a superhero? And the answer, the way that that was solved historically, is that as polytheistic societies developed, and that was usually a consequence of isolated tribes coming into contact with one another, they each had their separate deities. And then over the course of time, those deities warred in actual wars with people, but also conceptually and out of that polytheistic framework was extracted something that was vaguely monotheistic as all. And I actually think Jordan Peterson is wrong about this. And the reason he's, I mean, I started out with that, but then the Medi-Divine Realm and, you know, all of this stuff that I've been doing, I don't think he's right about it. And part of it is because you wind up with analogous gods and analogous pantheons in these worlds. And I think in some ways that goes to his argument, but in other ways, it sort of cuts against it. One of the things I learned fairly early on with C.S. Lewis is his take on this. And part of what a really good thinker, how you know a really good thinker is because his idea has tended to last through various, let's call them micro-transformations within me as I've been doing all of this learning and talking over the last few years. This is from mere Christianity. The reason why it can never succeed is this. God made us, invented us as man invents an engine. A car is made to run on petrol and it would not run properly on anything else. Now God designed the human machine to run on himself. Think about that. God designed the human machine to run on himself. What is God that we run on him? He himself is the fuel our spirits were designed to burn or the food our spirits were designed to feed on. There is no other. That is why it is just no good asking God to make us happy in our own way without bothering about religion. God cannot give us a happiness and a peace apart from himself because it is not there. There is no such thing. That's a lot of Christians will, so that's one of these underlying things in the Kindle book and people are like, oh, excited about that. And why? Oh, because it's very tribal and oh, we Christians feel like we're winning. We're doing that. Okay, okay, okay, okay. But when you read that and you really start to digest it, it's very strange and it really takes a lot of thought, especially where he goes from here. That is the key to history. Terrific energies expended. Civilizations are built up. Excellent institutions devised, but each time something goes wrong, some fatal flaw always brings the selfish and cruel people to the top and it all slides back down into misery and ruin. In fact, the machine conks. It seems to start up all right and run a few yards and then it breaks down. This is where you get this Lindy effect from Nassim Tlaib that long things really endure. And so, you know, all the interesting aspects of Norse mythology just didn't finally stand up to Christianity. And now the question will be, well, will Christianity itself stand up because we've got these major religions and the conflicts that they're in. It seems they start up all right and run a few yards and then they break down. They are trying to run on the wrong juice. That is what Satan has done to us humans. And what did God do? First of all, he left us conscience, the sense of right and wrong, and all through history, there have been people trying, some of them very hard to obey it. And again, I could probably do a whole video on conscience. Peterson for a while was talking a lot about conscience. None of them ever quite succeeded. Second, he set the human race, what I call good dreams. And Lewis was a lover of all things North, as he called them. I believe those queer stories scattered all through the heathen religions about a God who dies and comes to life again and by his death has somehow given new life to men. Thirdly, he selected one particular people and spent several centuries hammering it into their heads the sort of God he was. And that there was only one of him and that he cared about right conduct. Those people were Jews in the Old Testament given an account of the hammering process. Okay. But this dreams and for Lewis, that's what these religions are. And it's so interesting in at least the first little while of Vikings where Athelstan and Ragnar Lothbrok are sort of figuring out Odin, Christianity. And for a long time, Athelstan is wrestling with himself because of course he was within Christianity, but then he gets abducted and goes off with the Vikings. And now, well, there's power here too. And what is the relationship between Odin and the Christian God? And how do these relationships work? And this is, well, in many ways what we're really in right now because of the proliferation of platforms is that we're sort of in a story multiplication supernova. Charles Taylor talks about the supernova of religiosity and all of our buffered selves. And so we have all of these stories. And so comic books, I caught this video on Nerdwriter, Nerdwriter One, about three million subs. So it's a major channel. Comic books, in 1938, well, what is 1938 close to? Well, you're getting to the end of the Great Depression in your 1939. Hitler is going to invade Poland already. The Japanese are neck deep in China and there's increasing tensions going and the Soviet Union, of course. So there's a lot going on in the world. There's a lot causing anxiety. And who shows up in the scene? But Superman. And Superman is wearing what? Green and yellow? No, he's wearing red, white and blue. Truth, justice and the American way. And basically what you have is all of these stories. Now you might say, well, well, here's what makes Sam Harris's project just looks ridiculous because we are having a supernova of stories now. We are producing stories on these multiple platforms at a rate never before conceived of in human history. And two things are happening. On one hand, we sort of feel like there's a, why can't we develop anything new? Why is it always the sequels? Why does always the same stories? On the other hand, there are two groups, let's say one, the rationalists like Sam Harris that say, well, we need to somehow devise new things for weddings and funerals and we need to do all of that work so that we can, we can, it can be clean room against religion. But then the other, we need to have all of these new woke stories. And from everything we've seen, both projects are complete failures while we're producing new stories like crazy. And some are trying to, again, go back to Peugeot's parasitic storytelling. And I, again, I think that that video is a, is a, is a masterpiece because he nicely illustrates why both other projects are failing and they are not going to succeed. And so 1938 Superman comes on the scene and I, one of my favorite Capra movies is Meet John Doe. Fascinating movie if you get a chance to see it because well, who is John Doe? Well, he's the every man. And you know, there's a deeply Christian theme in that movie. Maybe I should, I lost a member or two of my church once when I did a sermon, which was so much of, for a while, I was using a lot of movies when I was, was doing some sermons for a while. But, but, Superman stops crime. Okay. And he stops crime and then the world sort of goes back to normal. The world is set right. You get this idea of, you know, Mr. Incredible and you know, I just cleaned this place up. Why is it a mess again? But Superman just keeps doing that. And so what is, what is going on in the zeitgeist that Superman comes up? But then part of what we also know is that the zeitgeist is created, is connected to the market. And Brett Weinstein was talking about the market. And so Brett's talking about, you know, Brett's, I take his point with respect to people, but I think his point is actually rather simplistic because this has been going on for a long time and it's images like these. I mean, just look at this little picture I've got on the screen of the first Superman comic. I mean, look at the guy in the foreground like this, you have Superman with the car and you know, it's, it's very dramatic. All right. And it's clean and it's low resolution. And these are, in a sense, these are archetypal stories. But what happens in the market is that these things proliferate because suddenly Superman is selling like crazy. And so now comic books just, you know, just explode on the scene. You know, everybody can make comic books. And before you know it, Captain Marvel comes on the scene and people begin to look at Captain Marvel and he seems to be just like Superman, but well, why would they be the same? And now there's some, and so this, this video from Nerdwriter, and I'm going to play it and hopefully it goes okay in terms of the YouTube copyright stuff. We'll see. I'm always a little nervous. Jordan Peterson videos I usually don't have any trouble with, but we'll see how it goes for the other ones. But so then there's copyright dispute because at some point, Action Comics becomes DC Comics and they look over at Marvel Comics and it's like, Hey, wait a minute. You're just ripping him off. Is he ripping him off? Kind of, but it's also coming out of the same soup, isn't it? And okay, you're just ripping him off. And so, and then the Brits kind of take off where they leave off and they were making money out of it. And there's an embargo. There's all kinds of stuff that happens, but then a new writer in the eighties comes on the scene and things start to change. And now I had to learn a new word when I began listening to this video, retcon. And I didn't know what that was. A film, television series, or other fictional work, a piece of new information that imposes a different interpretation on previously described events. This is exactly what Jordan Peterson was talking on about in his classes when he said, you know, your wife comes home and says, I've been having an affair for 10 years. Boom, you're no longer living in the same marriage. This is what happens in the world. This is where we get into this narrative stuff, because one thing that happens now, boom, total remapping of my world. And it forces a transformation. And now suddenly I have to recalibrate and rewrite and my map outside and my map inside and the story outside changes who I am and the story inside. And this massive thing happens. And this is what happens with this Alan Moore who begins to redo Marvel Man and will eventually become Miracle Man. Skin decided to revive Marvel Man for his new comics anthology, Warrior, and settled on a young writer named Alan Moore to do it. What resulted changed superhero comics and superheroes forever. This is Alan Moore's Marvel Man. You can tell from the first few pages that this Marvel Man is radically different from his previous incarnation. Mickey Moran is no longer a child. He's a disheveled man of middle age, still a reporter, but financially insecure. And most importantly, he has no memory of ever being a superhero. Now this is fascinating because again, you look at the DC comics of the 30s and when you watch movies from the second world war. Now, again, if you look at a Ken Burns documentary like the Pacific, what's going on underneath is one thing, but the stories we would tell ourselves in public. I mean, another one of my theses is that, you know, okay, if the story outside and the story inside are vitally important, the connection between them is vitally important. The kinds of ways that we tell stories on the outside are vitally important. And of course, in world war II, you've got a fair amount of propagandistic storytelling. You know, the government is not going to allow certain things. And in fact, the entire zeitgeist and the culture of what radio and government and newspapers are for, you know, while even, you know, even into the sixties when John F. Kennedy, who's something of a sex addict is sleeping with starlets in the White House, you know, reporters are looking the other way. And you begin to get a sense of the world has changed. And well, so now with this Captain Marvel, it used to be, I remember as a kid, there was this cartoon Shazam and I didn't know the origins of this, but, you know, it was kind of a hip young man who turns into this adult man. And boy, you could have a lot of fun seeing through that. But now in the eighties, everything is now grimy and what's the truth. And it's so interesting because as he sort of walks through this, I can see, oh my goodness, all of this has been ripped off by other things you can find even in the Incredibles. When you look at them, you can find all of these themes that others read in this is kind of the root story and then continue to develop in other places. Though he is having some strange dreams, he has no memory of ever being the superhero, though he is having some strange dreams at a hijack. And again, the dreams, okay, well, it's the dreams. What are the dreams? Well, the dreams are sort of our way of, we're regulating the story at night. Okay. And again, it's not our conscious minds doing it. A few panels later, Moran discovers the triggering word ketoma and explodes into Marvel Man. Suddenly remembering the history of his heroic exploits, he flies home to tell his wife who he really is. And she laughs in his face. That's genius. Now what's happening here? What's with the, you know, Superman as always, everybody wants to find out Superman's secret identity and you know, he's not going to tell and he's even going to be coy around Lois Lane, especially in the TV version of Superman that I grew up watching and you know, and Batman is going to be coy about his secret identity and here I'm Marvel Man. No, you're my idiot husband. That's who you are. She points out that his backstory, essentially the basis of all superheroes where he and his friends fight colorful villains on a regular basis is ridiculous. Religion. Okay. Religion. Isn't this religion? You know, super villains, Goliath, David, all of these bigger than life characters. I mean, how many, how many times have people tried to make comic books out of the Bible, but this is, this is ridiculous. There's no backstory here. That's, you know, it's all just dreams. And if it is true, how come nobody remembers it? Where's, where's the evidence? Huh? Where's the, we're going to send the archeologists out there. Oh, I'm not, I'm not showing the, the video. There we go. Moore reveals that the entire history of Marvel Man is a lie. He and his super friends were actually created in a lab with alien technology by a scientist who was a murderer and a rapist and a former Nazi in order. And you know, X-Men, Wolverine. I mean, how many comic books haven't we seen pulled out these same? I mean, it's all your backstory is all a lie. You know, and in some ways this is what comes of, you know, Darwin, that your, your backstory is all a lie. And so now we're going to need psychology to explain where our backstory comes from. And it didn't really happen. And, you know, in some ways we're anticipating the wokesters that, well, you know, it was all patriarchy back there. So it all has to be put away and, and the history has to be removed and the history has to be rewritten. Order to give the British government a superior weapon to the atomic bomb. Their memories were dream fantasies programmed to test and control them. Isn't that exactly what the Bible has become for some people? These are, these are dream memories that have been implanted in you by these lying sacred texts in order to control you. But now. Why did more retcon the entire Marvel man story? Well, in order to- There's the word. And there are actually more videos out there like this. And I've been watching some of them. I'm just, I'm utterly fascinated by this. I pose the question that he actually wants to explore. What if super humans existed in the real world? Now, isn't this a funny question at the same time? Now we're getting into the eighties and you know, we're going to be knocking on the door of the end of the cold war and, you know, a deeply secular society. But now we're longing for something more. What if they existed in the real world? What is the real world? Well, the real world, what if our, what if our dreams, what if we start living? What if our dream world and our real world start to come together, but in a coherent, productive way? Now, realism in superhero stories is something we're very familiar with today. In fact, it's something we sort of demand. We want our heroes to have flaws, emotional depth. We want our villains to- And again, so different from the 1930s, 40s or 50s. You know, Ben, I mean, these people don't have flaws. They are sincere, determined. But well, now the point of the movie is not to show the outside. The point of the movie is show the inside and to connect deeply with us. And again, we're not, I'm not saying there's some cabal of conspiracy theorists, storytellers who are doing this. We're just doing this together. And again, look at the two groups that are most desperate to conduct new archetypal mythologies that we are to live out, the rationalist and the wokesters, utter failure. To be, if not sympathetic, then at least plausibly motivated. We want the actions of both to have consequences. We want that world. I loved it when Superman had to come into, to Congress to, to answer because of course, because the government would not allow such a man to exist. And again, if you watch my sermons, it's the same thing with Jesus. I mean, you got a guy running around, stilling storms and raising the dead. You know, Oscar Wilde points this out. Herod would not allow someone besides himself to have power like that. You must kill someone like that. Same trope comes up with Iron Man. In other words, to resemble our own common as it is today, Moore was really the first to explore these ideas comprehensively. And he did it in the pages of Marvel Man. And the answers to the questions he asked were not always pretty. In fact, they were often horrifying. What Moore suggests in Marvel Man is that power changes the world irreversibly. And if great power was embodied in individuals, those beings would inevitably look on the rest of us as we look on animals. Deplorables, the 47%. These are, well, you know, these are the people running around living paycheck to paycheck. These are the people getting stimulus checks. These are the people and they are not the titans and masters of the universe. Again, you can find this in Meet John Doe. But you know, we see it now. It was very interesting when, so Jordan, for a while was asking for conversations on Twitter and asked John Vervecky. And I thought, yeah, and that's actually come to the point of this, because what we're going to ask questions about is heroes themselves. So, and then he asked Elon Musk, and it's like status check. You know, John Vervecky is going to talk, Paul VanderKley is going to talk, a bunch of us down, you know, Jordan Peterson, you know, below Jordan Peterson on different value hierarchies. But Elon Musk, does Elon Musk have time for Jordan Peterson? Does Elon Musk have interest to talk to Jordan Peterson? Status heat check right there. They would not be subject to our laws or even our morality. And isn't that the case of the super rich? They're not subject to our laws or our morality, because when you're, when you're famous enough, you can walk right up to them and grab them in a certain place and you could just do it because, you know, or you're Jeffrey Epstein. I mean, this is, we know this is the world, isn't it? Would do as they wished. And if they wish to be cruel, their cruelty would be catastrophic. And just as we would be insects to them, they would be gods to us, incomprehensible. We will never grasp their hopes, their despair. We will never know the destiny that howls in their hearts, never know their pain, their love, their almost sexual hatred. We are only human and perhaps we will be the less for that. It's clear that quote unquote, real super humans wouldn't just fight crime like they do in the old comics. That's clear to us, isn't it? In the old comics, it wasn't clear to them. They just fight crime because well, crime, but you know, Captain America fought Nazis. Okay. But now when you look at superhero movies now, they don't just fight crime. I mean, when, when, when Wonder Woman drops in to save some random hostage negotiation, it's order or to fix, you know, some child abduction in a mall, it's like, no, this is their gods. They have to set the world right. And you've just been watching this ramp up. The Bond villains are always threatening the world. And of course, in the, in the latest justice, you know, you have the mother boxes and you've got to separate the mother boxes. It's clear that their battles would result in death and destruction. In modern comics, those things are often depicted, but after the fight is over and the havoc is wreaked, things usually go back to something approximating normal. And this is key. Things go back to normal. The story resets. There's another crime and round and round and round. And so, you know, we've seen in the Marvel cinematic universe is this multi-movie, you know, pushing all the way to Thanos and then you have this much larger story arc. But, and I've been playing with these ideas in terms of my sermon recently too. Let me see if I can switch over to the other slide. For more, the presence of superheroes signifies a more fundamental change. There is no equilibrium to return to. Marvel Man doesn't switch back to Mickey Moran once his nemesis is defeated. He gives up the weak Moran forever. The superheroes work together to alter every aspect of life on earth. They abolish money. They bring back the dead. They create new super humans. They're activists, but they've got the power to change it. Or do they? Power like that doesn't restore balance to the world. It makes a new one. And so if you caught my Easter sermon, you know, I talked about that too because, okay, Jesus rose from the dead. That's a pretty neat trick. If you believe it or not, you know, pretty neat trick. Why, why do people still die? Well, it could be kind of like, well, if there was Superman and he was stopping crime in the 1930s, why is there still crime? What we want from Superman is in fact to change the world. Marvel Man, now called Miracle Man thanks to more legal stuff it's not worth it to get into, is not perfect. Its edges are a little bit rough. More would go on to treat these ideas about superheroes more elegantly in Watchmen. But this comic is a watershed and still able to shock and stimulate even after so many copycats have desensitized us to its ideas. And again, once if you watch the whole video, the ideas are all over the place. They're in, they're in all, and I'm not a huge, I'm not by any means a comic book aficionado. I've, you know, watched comic, you know, superhero movies and the like. And once he goes through this stuff, it's like, oh yeah, this, these ideas are all over the place. And as he said, Alan Moore keeps going now with Watchmen. And I remember seeing the Watchmen movie and I watched it and I was kind of like, oh that's kind of interesting. Didn't really get it. So then, now I live in the land of YouTube and so what do I find? But Watchmen Explained, which another big YouTube channel, video out a year ago, 2.3 million views. And what you begin to see is that Alan Moore continued to explore these and really sort of establishes a menu, a menu that in very many ways is, continues to be with us today. With Rorschach, you sort of have the fundamentalist. Everything is black and white. And well, everything is black and white as he looks out. But when you look at his mask, the black and white is just always changing. And look at his name, he's a Rorschach test. You see, everything is black and white, but everybody sees different blacks and whites. He's in many ways the fundamentalist. For a world that is supposedly black and white, people see and interpret what they want to see. Child abuse, he's a person of child abuse, a horribly warped and distorted person, but a straight line who's warped and straight at the same time in a particular way. He's a moral absolutist only interested in judgment even if it destroys the world. Judgment for its own sake. And then you have Dr. Manhattan and Dr. Manhattan is the god-like figure, but he's the god within us. And you have all this Eastern mysticism nature to Dr. Manhattan. He can do anything. He can know everything. He's unlimited. The world is one big namaste, but he can't relate to human beings. He can't maintain a relationship with a woman. And eventually, why would he care about human beings at all? Because so what? They're just one insignificant species on one insignificant planet and well, there's in some ways Dr. Manhattan. And then you've got Night Owl, who's sort of the meaning crisis every man. He realizes that punching bad guys, solving crime, Mr. Incredible notes that the world, more crime just keeps happening. And so punching bad guys doesn't really fix the world either. But he likes listening to stories from his old buddy who was Night Owl before him. And yeah, wasn't it great when we just bang and I clocked this guy and it was so close. And it's like glory days. Rick's not Rick Springsteen. But now he just goes to work and has gained too much weight and does what he does, likes listening to the stories, but Bruce Springsteen. And then there's the every woman, Silk Spectre too, whose mother was abused and can't make it work with Dr. Manhattan. She climbs to the top of the hierarchy, but finds that to a God, she's how interesting is she? Can't make it work with Dr. Manhattan and souls and then finally settles for the reliable every man is co-opted into the patriarchy by mom only to realize that the raping patriarch is daddy, who really loves mommy and mommy really loved daddy in their own twisted way. And so begins to sort of be like him. And then there's sort of the Tony Stark, Elon Musk, Joseph Stalin, Ozzy Mandeus. And again, some of you are fans of this stuff. So you know this stuff way better than I do. You know, has this plot to save the world from Cold War nuclear annihilation because Dr. Manhattan is too otherworldly. Gosh, I mean, he's writing, he's writing how many narratives of Christianity in the in the 20 in the late 20th century. And so he saves the world, but at the cost of three million people. He bears the weight of the world and so maybe I'll maybe I'll play a little bit of this video to risk a little bit more copyright stuff. The Adrian Veidt, another retired hero, said to be the smartest man on Earth. Veidt is a super ambitious, super rich, super arrogant dude who wants to be like Alexander the Great. And so here we have sort of our rationalists. These are the people that are linear, they're direct, they they're super smart. Whereas in some ways, Dr. Manhattan, well does he sees everything and so he doesn't care. This guy is smart enough to see everything and he's going to fix the world. He's a super-scientist, like the Egyptian pharaohs. His dream is to unite the world under his design. Veidt realised that superheroes couldn't save the world from nuclear war, so instead he hatched a crazy plan. He put a bunch of scientists and artists on a secret island and genetically engineered a giant psychic squid monster. He kills the comedian when the comedian finds out his plan, and he uses a cancer hoax to get rid of Manhattan, and he frames Rorschach to get him locked up, and he hires an assassin on himself to throw off suspicion, and finally he teleports the squid into New York, killing- And trust me, this won't ruin the movie, because if you don't understand the story before the movie, you won't understand the movie, just like I didn't.  3 million people to make it look like aliens attacked, to scare the world into ending the Cold War, to unite- And then you can see threads of all kinds of other Marvel comics and how many other comic books have basically been feeding off this storyline. Night humanity, and bring peace on Earth. It's a crazy supervillain plan, and it actually succeeds. America and Russia are so freaked out by the supposed alien that they make a peace deal. As for Rorschach and Manhattan and Dan and Laurie, they fail to prevent Ozymandias killing millions, so much for superheroes. Ozymandias saves the world not by punching anyone, and not with superhuman powers, but by science and determin- Game B.  nation, and a psychopathic willingness to kill 3 million people. Ozyma- Oops. If you wanna make an omelette, well, seems like Ozymandias has come up with an Ozymandias saves the world at a terrible cost. So is he a hero, or a villain? Throughout Watchmen, there's a comic book within the comic book, a tale of the Black Freighter. It's a story about a sailor who tries to save his town from an apocalyptic pirate ship, but he ends up killing innocent people, and becoming just as evil as what he tried to prevent. And again, how many comic book movies have we seen playing this line out? Noble intentions led him to atrocity, just like Ozymandias' plan. At the end of Watchmen, Ozymandias has a dream of the Black Freighter, and his last panel shows him alone, separate from the rest of the world. Cause like the sailor, he is marooned from the rest of humanity because of the evil he did. But Ozymandias says that someone had to take the weight of that awful necessary crime. This pose looks kinda like the crucifixion of Christ. And we later see an ad for the Tarkovsky movie The Sacrifice, in which a man sacrifices everything he loves to prevent war. Maybe you can see Ozymandias' plan as a heroic self-sacrifice  he did the terrible necessary crime so that no one else had to. Or you can say he's just a delusional egomaniacal mass murdering psychopath, and a criticism of rich arseholes having way too much power in the world in the first place. Does Ozymandias really care about saving people, or is he just serving his pride and ambition? Philosophically, Ozymandias' plan is utilitarian  he kills three million people to save the entire world, so his good outweighs his evil. But Rorschach doesn't believe in moral grey area  he sees just black and white. So he wants to reveal the truth of Ozymandias' crimes, to punish him, even though revealing the truth of the alien hoax would destroy the new world peace. Rorschach says he will never compromise, not even in the face of Armageddon. So Manhattan kills Rorschach to keep the secret. And in his final moment, Rorschach takes off his mask and dies as Walter Kovacs, showing his humanity and vulnerability in the end  cause deep down, under the anger, Rorschach's just a broken man who's craved death from the start. Rorschach's inflexible morals can't survive in a morally complex world, and it seems that his black and white morality fails. He's the fundamentalist. Except, we see earlier that Rorschach wrote notes about Ozymandias' conspiracy, and he sent them to a journalist, who may or may not reveal the truth to the world. The last line of Watchmen is, I leave it entirely in your hands. Whatever you wanna believe. But what is a person to do? How is the every man and the every woman supposed to live? So when you close the comic book in your hands, you decide what the ending means. Maybe Ozymandias' hoax is revealed, maybe Rorschach was right, and Ozymandias deserves punishment, even if it risks nuclear war. Or maybe you believe in Ozymandias' brave new world, even though it's built on murder and lies. Or maybe you feel like Dr Manhattan  he decides that humans are too annoying and complicated, so he leaves the galaxy to create life elsewhere. In the end, there's no place for a superhuman among humans. Or maybe you relate to Dan and Laurie. Dan and Laurie don't save the world, or die for a noble cause, but they do get a happy ending. They fall in love, take new identities, and start a life together, planning to continue being superheroes. They're boomers. Or have they discovered, well, meaning. You can find meaning by dressing up. They know that being heroes doesn't achieve much. They know it's childish and dangerous. But they embrace the fun and romance of it. Watchmen is a criticism of the fantasy of the superhero, showing that reality is darker and more complicated than we like to admit. But despite that, Dan and Laurie's story reminds us that for all of fantasy's flaws, it brings joy and meaning to people's lives. The smiley is bloodied, the snowglobe broken, the perfume smashed, millions died. We grew up, but we can still have nostalgia for simpler times. It's interesting reading. Um, well that was pretty painless, huh? You know, maybe there's not such a bad idea of your mother's. Children, forget it. Not yet. You are talking about adventuring and I'm not staying home changing diapers. It's fun dressing up in costumes as heroes and punching people, maybe even Nazis, if you can find them. But ah, meaning in life. Platforms and dreams. If you look at, well, movie theaters, the movie theaters are in our homes. Those, those are the, those are the altars in our houses that we meet before and we manage the stories on the inside and the outside and we become Pocahontas and we become Batgirl and we, we, we do, we do all of this. We do all of this living within story dreams. Why on earth would you go to church when you can? Well, because when I get into my platform video at some point, if, if and when I do, churches are engrossing. You dress up, you meet people, you get pushback, you, you actually engineer and well, the stories that we have to create all of the woke stories and all of the, and all of the, all of the rational stories, well, churches pretty much only really run on the old stories. Now, I hope Jordan and John have a conversation and I hope John gets a chance to, because one of the challenges that John has that, you know, he's, he's spoken about before is the question of to hero or to not hero. That is the question. And in some ways this can fall into the, the Watchmen list of menus. What Watchmen sort of nicely does is lay out the menu. You have the fundamentalist, but that doesn't seem to be on too many people's radars. You have the God within like, like Dr. Manhattan, but eventually why care? You have the comedian who we didn't talk much about was the Nixon henchman. Nixon goes into his fifth term and, and is killed at the beginning of the movie. It's sort of the, the political hopes and aspirations, but we're not going to really take that terribly seriously. Then you've got the game be world saver, Osteamandias, the Tony Stark, the Elon Musk, the Joseph Stalin. We're going to run the world for the mere mortals and, and, you know, save it. And then maybe if it's saved in that way, the every man and the every woman get their, their nice suburban life with a little bit of dress up fun that can, that can put meaning into their lives. These are on the menu for the stories without, and they impact the story within. And do we become Rorschach or Dr. Manhattan or Osteamandias or, or Night Owl or Silk Spectre? Or are these stories actually something that can be developed? And how do we relate to the hero? How do we, how do we understand and are there GPS coordinates or do we really just sort of have to rough navigate through? Well, this feels like wellbeing now. Well, this doesn't feel terribly authentic to me. I imagine that as we're seeing the reincorporation of religion, it's because we realize that we can't live without it and the bigger questions have to be dealt with and there's really no escaping it. All right. That was quite a bit there. Let me know what you think. And I'll be interested in reading your comments because I'm sure there's plenty of comic nerds out there.