https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vhhIUUmUdb4

 Hi, this is Paul. The March Meetup Tour is almost here. Monday I fly out and I'll be down in Tucson. So Monday, March 2, we'll have a meetup and all the links, the links to most of these and most of them have meetup links. And so if you can go ahead and click on and register in those meetups, you'll get the address and notification and all those kinds of things. And that way they'll have an idea about how many people are coming. So it's free to register, of course, all these events are free. So Monday the 2nd, I'll be in Tucson, Arizona. Monday, March 4, I will be doing a meetup at Bethany CRC in Bellflower, California. The 5th, I'll be at John Van Donk's regular meetup in Chino Hills. And again, there are links below for most of these. On the 14th, that's a little wise, obviously 9 days after the 5th, I'll be in Fresno and we'll be meeting with our regular Fresno meetups. So come and join us there. In the 15th, we'll have our regular Sacramento meetup and it'll be a big one because Job is going to be with us on all of these things. So if you want to, if you're tired of seeing me and you want to meet Job, we'll come on down and you'll get a chance to meet Job there too. Job's awfully fun to talk to. On the 16th, we'll have a meetup in Salem, Oregon. On the 17th, we'll have a meetup in Seattle, Washington. We're still nailing down the location for that. So that might not yet be in the show notes. I'll put it in when it's available. On the 18th, we'll have a meetup in Burnaby, British Columbia, which is right outside Vancouver, the New Westminster Christian Reformed Church in Burnaby, BC. We'll be having the meetup there. 19th is going to be a little bit different. It's going to be more of an event. So I will be sitting down and having sort of a, calling it a fireside chat with Peter Bogosian and Benjamin Boyce. And we're going to talk about what we've been doing. There's going to be some copies of Peter's books available, signed copies if you're interested in Peter's books about how to have impossible conversations. And Benjamin will be there. I've done a meetup. Benjamin's hit one of my meetups here in Sacramento before and that was great fun. So if you want to meet Benjamin or Peter Bogosian, we will be at the Oak Hills Christian Reformed Church in Beaverton, Oregon, March 19 at 7 p.m. And the 21st then, we will be in Alameda, California for the meetup, the regular Alameda CRC or the regular Jordan Peterson Alameda meetup. And the link will be below that. That's an ongoing meetup that we've had going for a number of months. And then we don't have a meetup on the 22nd, but at 11 a.m. we'll have sort of a special service and Job and John Van Donk are going to get a chance to participate in the sermon. And it's going to be kind of a special sermon where I talk about all the kinds of things that have been happening in the meetups and over YouTube. So it'll, it'll be quite different from what we usually do or what I usually do. So it's all upon us. And so look below for the, for the notes. Some of you have asked, when am I going to do meetups in other parts of the country? Well, we'll see. I'll take one thing at a time. I am again thinking about, I'll hold off on that. There'll be of course also the event coming up in September in Thunder Bay, Ontario. And I'll put the link to that below too. So I hope to, if you're able to come, I'd love to meet you and it should be a great conversation. I'm going to try to be making little videos and not have the channel go dry during that time. Job promises that he'll help me fill up the channel with content. So there might be quite a bit of Job for this next week. And then again, there's a week off and then the third week.