https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MbYxVMFuNFg

 This is Paul. A couple months ago I announced the March tour that we're doing. It's a meetup tour. And I had a conversation with John Van Donk who has put a lot of this together, and Job who's going to be on the American West Coast. And so the three of us are going to be traveling up and down the West Coast of the United States into Canada in March. And this is the dates getting closer. The plans are getting firmed up. We will be in Tucson, Arizona at the Village Church, Rod Hugin's church, for a meetup on March 2. We'll be in the Los Angeles area. More information on that in a minute. On March 4 we'll be in Chino Hills where John's regular meetup. On March 5 we'll be meeting with the Fresno meetup, which has been going for a while. On March 14 we'll have our regular Living Stones Sacramento meetup on March 15. And Job and John will both be at that one. We'll be going up to Salem, Oregon to the Sunnyslope CRC with Rob Torrenstra who's been on the channel. So we'll have a meetup there on March 15. Then we'll go up to, or on March 16 to Salem, Oregon. March 17 we'll zip up to Seattle, Washington and be hanging out with Tripp. Some of you know who Tripp is from the channel. We'll be doing that on March 17. March 18 we'll be in Vancouver, British Columbia. We're still nailing down some details of that one. March 19 will be a special meeting because we'll actually be sort of a fireside chat between myself, Peter Bogosian and Benjamin Boyce. And we'll be doing that at the Oak Hills Christian Reformed Church in Beaverton, Oregon, just outside of Portland on the 19th. The 21st we'll do one or two events in the San Francisco Bay area. That hasn't been nailed down. And then the tour ends with our 11 o'clock worship service on the 22nd here at Living Stones. Job and John will both have a chance to weigh in on the sermon because I'll be busy that whole week doing meetups instead of writing a sermon. So two of the events we especially need help on are the events in the San Francisco Bay on March 21 and the event in Los Angeles on March 4. Now we have the event scheduled for Chino Hills on the 5th, so the Inland Empire will already be covered by that. But we're debating where to do one in LA. There are a variety of churches there I can probably get a room at. What we'd really like is for if you live in the Los Angeles area and because of traffic, because of distance, you won't be able to get out to Chino and Chino Hills in Ontario. Where in LA are you and where do you think would be a good place to meet? Leave your comment down in the comment section. John Vendonk is going to check those and he's from Southern California. So we'll see what the best place to meet in Los Angeles would be for March 4. In the Bay Area, we've really got an embarrassment of riches. So in Alameda, there's a regular meetup that's happening. And we can use the Alameda Christian Reformed Church for that meeting. But I know that there are also some people down in the San Jose area who would like to participate. So if this is something you're interested in and maybe you haven't connected up with with Mark and Anne who run the Alameda meetup or you haven't connected up with Karen in San Jose, let me know. We've looked at maybe trying to split the distance by having it in Hayward or something like that. Maybe even having two meetups that day. We could have one, let's say around lunchtime at one location and then for the evenings zip to the next location. So that would be somewhere in either the East Bay or the South Bay in San Francisco, San Francisco Bay Area, March 2021. So leave your input in the comment section or go to the Discord server. Maybe drop a pin in the map that that that's connected to the Get Started page. Contact John Vendonk, but let us know your input because we're really trying to put these last two venues together. So if you're going to be around and you can make any of these places and you want to shake hands with me and John Vendonk and you want to meet Job, Job's usually available over in the Netherlands, not too often here on the West Coast of the U.S. Consider coming by some of these meetups. We're really looking forward to it. We'll probably be doing some kind of listing on meetup.com. There'll be an additional video, at least one additional video before the events themselves so people can easily find them, sign up and and do whatever. So thanks for watching.