https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3a2YlaCkmns

 Okay, we're recording. Well Mark, you made contact with me about the same time I learned about you and since most people watching this already know something about me, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Yeah, well I used to be an Anglican priest, an Anglican clergyman, and so have got a long history of various kinds of struggles with Christianity. I said I used to be, I did a curiosity, what's called a curiosity in the Anglican church, which is like a sort of three year period where you work underneath a more senior clergy person and by the end of that period it became quite clear to me that it wasn't for me. And to cut a long story short, I've been on a kind of search ever since in a way and a crucial point in that search was discovering the work of Owen Barfield, who was one of the Oxford Inklings. I know you've talked about Paul and hence picking up the work you do on the internet because it's not that often, he's talked about certainly in any kind of deep way. It's often he gets a kind of name check, but not in any systematic way. So I was excited to see that you do talk about him, what I have done, and hence being in touch. Well, I'm very excited about him for a number of reasons. I was reacquainted with him by the fellowship, which is a book about the Inklings, about Louis Tolkien, Barfield, and Charles Williams. And then a couple of my listeners had started sending me references to Barfield in a pretty determined way and I began to see the applicability of it. And actually the further I go in a lot of areas, I increasingly see that I need to give Barfield a much closer look than I have. Could you maybe give us a little bit of background on Owen Barfield? Because again, a lot of people, they might have recognized the name, but they don't have any serious understanding of what he was involved in and who he was. Yeah, so he was friends with C.S. Lewis, first of all. So he and Lewis were direct contemporaries at Oxford in the early 1920s and began a friendship, it seems pretty much straight away. They met through a mutual friend and at some level, intuitive that they were on a parallel track through love. But at the time it was before Lewis became a Christian, so he was a pretty permitted atheistic philosopher. Whereas Barfield, in his first year or so at Oxford, he had a period of, it seems quite a serious depression, you know, with thoughts of certainly what's his life about, if not actual suicidality. He later described his life as like he didn't feel he was wearing the right set of clothing. He obviously felt very uncomfortable in his own skin and so on. And then quite quickly, over one summer, he pulled out of that. It was partly because he fell in love when he fell in love with a woman that he went on to marry. So that always makes a difference in life. But more particularly, it opened him up to felt experience and particularly felt experience when he was reading poetry. And I think his sort of genius move was not to try to explain it too quickly, but to stay with the experience itself and see how far that could take him. And it persuaded him pretty quickly that poetry opened up new worlds that as it were, were already present, but were just out of sight. And so he realized that the imagination in particular wasn't just a kind of nice to have that added a bit of color to life, but that opened up whole new dimensions of life, if you let it speak to you. And this debate, particularly about what the imagination couldn't couldn't do, formed the first really intense exchange between him and CS Lewis, which they came to call their great war. And Lewis was very much on the side at the time of reason told you what was true and imagination kind of gave it expression. Whereas Barfield was saying, no, no, imagination can reveal to you what's true as well. And you can see perhaps how that fed into discussions about poetry, about myth, about words, the evolution of words, philology, all these kind of great interests that they shared. But I think I always remembered that Tolkien had this great conversation with Lewis that precipitated Lewis's conversion. And maybe that was the kind of proximate cause. And but I think that over a long period of time, these more extended conversations with Barfield, you know, which in the way of the times were really involved, you know, involved very intricate, intense letters, discussions, a different work of English literature. That kind of prepared the ground, I think, for Lewis so that he could, in the, you know, a few years further down the line, could be persuaded by Tolkien that Christianity was this historical myth, was this kind of true outpouring of the imagination. Now, Barfield, he was such a, you know, I picked a lot of this up from that one book. He was, I mean, he, in some ways, he had some frustrations, both some great frustrations and some great passions in life. It sounds like his relationship with his wife and his marriage was deeply rewarding and fruitful. He had to work for his father, and so he couldn't really pursue an academic career fully. But his, but he became, you know, his real contribution, well, not really, made many contributions, I'm sure. But one of his significant contributions was this area of words. And, you know, borrowing this, this phrase that really caught my attention, words have souls. What was Barfield's thought with respect to what words could teach us about the history of consciousness? Yeah, so he felt that words have soul, and by that he meant quite a sort of minimal notion of soul, I think, just that they have a kind of liveliness, a vitality. They're animated, which is why they animate us, you know, a bit like now, but also that they communicate a lively life to us, and in fact can even stand in for life in the form of a novel. You know, a novel doesn't just feel like you're reading a description of a life elsewhere, it feels like you're in the life of the novel, and similarly so with poetry. So that's what he meant by words have soul. And then he made the sort of further step where he said, well, if they have soul, and a kind of life, then can we track how that life might change over time? So the words, you know, the first thing you learn as a philologist is that words change their meaning over time. So does this mean that the liveliness of words changes over time? And then does this even mean that what they can reveal and then show us of life changes over time? So they become what he also called, in a very nice phrase, I think, fossils of consciousness. That the way a word is used at different points in time can reveal to us not just how the words change its meaning, but how the experience and perceptions of life themselves have changed over periods of time as well. And so he had this sort of minimal theory about words having soul and sharing the kind of vitality of the world. But then it developed into this bigger theory, which was that they reveal a kind of evolution of human consciousness to us, and how over periods of cultural time, you know, rather than Darwinian time, he's talking over, say, the period of about 3000 years, that you can know enough about the changing meaning of words over that time to show that actually human experience, human perception of what it is to be alive, to relate to others, to relate to nature, to relate to God, to all the gods, has really quite dramatically changed. And that became this kind of big thesis, and the one that's really gripped me. Well, I, you know, I really am very excited to talk to you because this really interests me. I got started with making videos because of Jordan Peterson, and I listened to, I was watching I was just fascinated by the effect he was having on people. And that, and part of that, part of why I got interested in Peterson was I was doing a lot of thinking, reading a fair amount of Lewis and doing a lot of thinking about the strange circumstance that we find ourselves in the church. For example, going back to, you know, con controversies with respect to, let's say, Genesis and science, you read the first few chapters of Genesis, and at some point you have to ask yourself, well, what were they, what were they trying to do in terms of writing this down? What was, what was behind this? And this very much brought me into questions about why, why in the Reformation did they, why is it, for example, the Eucharist and the Lord, the Eucharist that became a central flashpoint in the Reformation? What do we mean by this is my body? And this very quickly gets you into a strange world of asking questions about truth and reference and language and how it works. And I've been following this trail back. I've been following the work of John Vervecky, and he just in a video mentioned the, you know, a transition in the 12th century from sort of a electio divina type of language to a much more, a use of language that we're more familiar with today, which is more propositional, more literal. And that got me to thinking about what words are and what words mean. And just recently I was listening to a Greek Orthodox father talking about, you know, what the book of John is with respect to what reading it is supposed to accomplish in one's life. And of course, this very much gets into questions of, of liturgy, you know, what are words, how do they function, how do they function with respect to people? And again, people started sending me Owen Barfield references, even books. And, and I very quickly saw with Barfield that he was doing a tremendous amount of thinking about about reality and appearance and representation. Can you give us a little bit of insight about what, what, at least some of the key takeaways you found from, from his thinking on this work? Yeah, well, perhaps it's helpful to, to sort of try and articulate the account of Christianity, which I've found in him. I mean, I've written this book that tries to tell the story of 3000 years of Christianity. I just opened it this morning. I got back from vacation. I'm terribly interested to dig into it. So thank you. The sort of the free view. Yes. It's 3000 years, because I think the sort of crux of it was, and I think the reason why Jesus became such a pivotal figure in the West, at least, I mean, is because his life, either in itself or then the way that people reflected upon it became this kind of pivotal moment in the evolution of consciousness as we know it now. And this is why Jesus is, has this special significance, this kind of pivotal significance. Even if you're not a Christian, you know, you can still very quickly see how this figure so profoundly shapes our lives. And it begins to unfold a few decades, a few centuries before, where in the very, say, picking up the threads from the earliest bits of the Bible, you know, they fall into what you might call sort of prehistory almost, and have a much more mythological feel in the very earliest texts of the Bible, the very early pericope. And so, you know, there's a lot of different ways. So a figure like Abraham, for example, you know, he's not nearly such a sort of fully formed person as, say, the figure of Moses. He just has a kind of different feel. And Barfield argues that's because Abraham and the traditions associated with Abraham come from a time where people didn't have nearly such, sort of, same sort of sense of what it is to be a person as we do. And in particular, their individuality, their sense of being a person didn't come from, as it were, the inside out, as we quite spontaneously feel that life moves, as it were, from the inside out. Rather, it came from the outside in. And so figures like Abraham, you know, the historicity, I don't doubt there is some historicity behind it, but it's sort of lost in the midst of time. But what, and part of the reason for that actually is because what was more important actually back then was how figures could accrue a sense of collective identity around them in the stories you told about them, even in sort of what their very names came to mean. This is what people sought and how things spoke to them. And what Barfield kind of argues is that this began to change very significantly around the time of the exiles in the story of the ancient Hebrews. And when I wrote my book, I sort of tried to return to the biblical scholarship and the recent archaeology, you know, which has even come on leaps and bounds since Barfield died in 1997. And it seems that particularly around the reign of Hezekiah in ancient Israel, so when after the northern kingdom had fallen and Jerusalem was still standing, that because of things that Hezekiah did almost that had been preempted a bit by the early prophets, the ancient Israelites began to form a sense of themselves, sort of their religiosity mattered more to them from the inside out, began to matter more from the inside out. You know, so let me be a bit more specific. I mean, the early prophets, like Amos and Hosea, had said things like, it's not the sacrifice in the temple that God cares about, that Yahweh cares about, it's the broken heart that God cares about. Now, I think at first that would be utterly bemusing, because it's not just, oh, we've got to change our religious practice and get a bit more ethical. It's trying to call forth a whole different consciousness. You know, it would have seen, what on earth do you mean? This is the time-honored way that we as a people know Yahweh and call down Yahweh's blessing upon us and know of our connection with Mount Zion and so on. But it's very much an outside in. So it starts to get unsettled by the prophets, you know, like Amos, Hosea, Isaiah. I mean, again, if you read them and try and sort of peel back some of the layers, which we now put on them as Christians, it's mostly a very disturbing experience that they describe. And Isaiah, when he goes to the temple and says, holy, holy, holy, I think initially that meant, well, on earth is going on, not, you know, I feel I understand this God, and it's got an echo of the Trinity. So this starts to unfold. And I think that perhaps one of the reasons why ancient Judaism actually managed to survive these terrible periods of exile was because, unlike, say, the civilizations around them that were still very much into externalized forms of religion, they had begun to cultivate and been able to carry Yahweh, not just in a tabernacle or, you know, going to Yahweh in the temple, but carry Yahweh within. And in fact, you know, biblical scholarship now shows, archaeology now shows that when the Hebrews could return to Jerusalem, the diaspora stayed quite substantially, actually. It took, you know, two or three centuries, really, for Jerusalem to rebuild up again in terms of population. And I guess that for a lot of Hebrews, after the exile, it just didn't really seem that necessary to go back to Jerusalem. This kind of interiorization had taken place. So this sort of is unfolding. I think that apocalyptic ideas, again, which you read in the latest bits of the ancient, of the Old Testament, of the Hebrew Bible, like in the Book of Daniel, these two are, they require a different consciousness because, in a way, what drives them is their concern for the individual. You know, what is the individual's judgment going to be? Or how is the individual who in this life seems to have done all that was required and yet still have been punished or suffered? Are they going to get vindication in another life? So apocalyptic ideas require a much more interior sense of what it is to be human. And then when Jesus is born, as it were, I think Jesus sort of comes at the sweet moment for this evolution. So that, you know, whereas Moses was said to have shone like God, like Yahweh, and people could look at him. And, you know, it gets pretty close to identifying Moses with Yahweh. You know, he's said to be Aaron's God at one point in Exodus. And then in the intertestamental material, Moses is, for example, in some of the apocalyptic material said to be sitting at the right hand of God. I think there's a text called something like Ezekiel the Tritidion or something like that. So this is in the kind of Jewish speculation prior to Jesus's birth. But anyway, the point is that with this unfolding unconsciousness, when Jesus is born, it becomes possible to see what Jesus is really about. You know, as the word, if he had been born before, it wouldn't have been even conceivable. And in particular, I think, you know, the great ancient Hebrew tradition that God is I am, that kind of comes echoing out of the word Yahweh itself. When Jesus appears, he can say, or at least people felt he was saying, my I amness too is completely transparent to the divine I amness. And, you know, so that's the moment that constellates all the brings it all together. And, you know, again, it takes time. And I think that the early Christians and the New Testament gives witness to this. They wrestle with what this really means, of course, this is what consciousness is like. But it's a pivotal moment. And Barfield sort of he wrote an essay, a rather nice essay once, but he said, you know, just by looking at the way that words change meaning, from having these outer references, as it were feeding an inner life to starting to be spoken of as if it's about inner life itself. And he reckons he could track a pivotal moment where that changed to inner life becoming more important to give expression to outer life to the first century AD. And so as it were, he talks, he said, you know, even if Jesus hadn't been born, I even if I didn't know about Jesus, I would expect that someone might have been around that would have given voice to this sense. So it was a it's a it's for me, it's been very exciting, partly because I find it very interesting. But because it after my struggles with Christianity, it gave me a way of articulating the significance of Jesus that felt sort of with no need to compromise, you know, there's something completely full and manifest in this picture of Jesus doesn't need demythologizing. You can take the Bible fully seriously with all the reasons that scholarship, as well as what it's trying to communicate at a different level. And there's a tremendous synthesis of it. So I had to begin again in quantum science. Wow, I'm very, very excited to dig into your book. One of the ongoing series I have on my channel, I call words that fudge. And what I mean by that is that we we tend to have words that we use to words like words like spiritual words like saved. I mean, I've used a lot of this probably one of my upcoming videos is going to be words that fudge on consciousness. Now, the part of consciousness has become a word that in so many different conversations is being used. And as I listen to it being used in different conversations, I always when I hear someone use that word, I always kind of stop and I listen especially carefully to try and figure out okay, what what what exactly what sense of consciousness do you mean because there's consciousness in terms of this, this, I think it's sort of a cloud in, you know, through which we see the world things come in and things come out consciousness in terms of our framing of the world. I mean, there's there's a lot of aspects to that word. So so when you use consciousness and the way you just did it, can you can you sharpen up the the resolution on that a little bit and flesh that out somewhat? No, it's a very good point. I mean, I think it it broadly means the experience of what it is to be human, you know, to be a person to be an individual. So it's how that experience changes over time. I mean, quite a nice example. That's what you mentioned before, at the time of the Reformation. It's only at the Reformation that words start getting prefixed with the word self, you know, so you have sort of self reflection, self judgment, self expression, all sorts of self words start to appear, you know, very soon after Luther and Calvin. And again, the sense there is that no doubt something had been unfolding in terms of what people were experiencing about what it is to be alive, to struggle to live well to know what is to relate to nature to God, to others. But through what happened to the Reformation is that it was where suddenly it crystallizes, suddenly it goes up, we get it. And so words then appear to express that. So it's that is that that's what I mean, you know, in my experience of what it is to walk into a woods. Now is very different from say, what someone in ancient Greece would have felt when they walked into a woods, you know, I see dappled sunlight, my experience of it is perhaps shaped by some modern art. I have a, you know, base sense of the biology, perhaps if it's springtime and the leaves are fresh, you know, I know that they're beginning their kind of annual cycle in that way. This all shapes my experience of being in the woods, whereas I think, you know, in the ancient Greek world, the first experience would have been something to do with the spirits of the place. You know, was this a sacred grove? Was this a dangerous grove? You know, what impression might be made upon me from the outside in? And I haven't just made that up. I also did a PhD on Plato. And in one of Plato's dialogues, the Phaedrus, the first like quarter of the dialogue is when Phaedrus and Socrates go and try and find a spot by a stream, by a river in the woods. And the way they choose the spot is not that it looks beautiful. They try and discern what spirits might be present. And they want to find the place where there'll be a little bit optimum for them to have a philosophical discussion because of the spirits that are present. So the good thing, you know, there are enough written records from this time that span this period of the evolution of our perceptions, evolution of consciousness for us to have some fairly robust ways of talking about it. I really love how you're framing this. I myself, so I grew up in my father, I grew up in the Dutch Calvinist tradition. But then my father pastored a church in a black community. And after that, after college, I went to serve as a missionary in the Caribbean. And one of the things that all of these different cultural communities that I was deeply embedded in, gave me a real sense of is exactly what you described, that I walk through located in a city, I walk through a neighborhood, my experience of that neighborhood built on however many different filters I have, is very different from someone of another culture coming through a neighborhood, someone who perhaps lives in that neighborhood, that, you know, we have all of this, life has all of this, this texture about it, that is kind of contra the reductional, a reductionistic naturalism. This stuff isn't material around us, necessarily. And then to figure out, okay, well, how do we talk about that? How are these layers, I love the idea of fossils, you know, how are these things, how are these things left behind, and how do they operate? So, one of the things that I recognized when I was doing a Sunday school class on the book of Ezekiel was how, you know, so here is Ezekiel in exile, you know, along an irrigation canal outside of Babylon, and he has this vision of the throne of God and the presence of God coming there, and how in the ancient world, the destruction of or the domination of Jerusalem and eventual destruction by Nebuchadnezzar would have simply been understood as the triumph of Babylon's gods over the gods of the Hebrews, and in Ezekiel, you have this complete reframing of the situation that Babylon is a tool in their God's hand, and as I was going through that book with my Sunday school class, I began to realize how revolutionary this was, and it wasn't just that here you have a crazy guy, Ezekiel, who, you know, by the, because of a bunch of the events of the book, some people wonder if he was schizophrenic because of all the things that they did to him. So, it would be one thing to have a crazy man write a book and thinking that, okay, his god somehow worked through the destruction of his people, but these people won, and the book of Ezekiel is still here, and Nebuchadnezzar and Babylon are the talk of relics, and so then when I listen to you, and I, you know, basically having learned from Barfield and what you just laid out, I find it so tremendously helpful because after I've been a pastor now for 21 years in North America and a number of years overseas, you know, I immediately began to, when you read the Old Testament or the New Testament carefully, you really do have the sense that, okay, we're reading a translation or maybe I'm working in Greek and Hebrew, but we often don't know a lot of what they're talking about, and the choices they make about what they value, how they use language, just leads you to believe that these people are seeing the world through very different eyes, and if the Christian tradition that gives the Bible a fairly privileged status as canonical, well, these assumptions that they have and the way that they view the world is very important for how the church then handles this book, and obviously that was a crucial issue in the Reformation, but this continues to be a crucial issue today, and so it sounds like Barfield has, you know, I think really needs to, a lot more people need to pay attention to at least give him a hearing in terms of what he discovered. Yeah, I mean, I think that his time really has yet to come in that sense. An area where, you know, the reading of the Bible became really crucial for me is saying Jesus's parables, so to sort of skip to another bit of it, but to ask, you know, what are these parables about? And certainly in my experience in the Church of England, parables are nearly always turned into kind of a moral tales, and I can remember for quite a long time being rather frustrated about this because some of the parables clearly can be read in moral ways, you know, like the Good Samaritan, but others of them seem uninterested in morality, if not actually unmodel, you know, like, you know, the unjust judge or the parables of talents and things like this, and again it was Barfield that really helped me to understand that if you reduce it to a level of morality, what you do is you are reducing it to a consciousness you already feel comfortable in. You know, ethics is the system that emerges from a consciousness that you're very familiar with. It's sort of a way of schematizing how to live in that zone, if you like. But what Jesus, I think, is constantly on about is opening up for people a completely different experience of what it is to be alive, to know of what it is to be alive, to know God, to know others, and you know, I think he's what he called the kingdom, and the parables are absolutely crucial to this. I mean, you know, it's a slightly hackneyed comparison, but nonetheless I think they are a bit like Zen cones, you know, they're stories that you're supposed to wrestle with and you feel you've almost got them, and that you need to almost be there, otherwise you'll just never get there, it's a whistle over the top of your head, but it's in that struggle that the potential to see the world in a completely different way starts to emerge. And yeah, you know, I think that you might be able to tell me this, but I think that perhaps Jesus's most common remark in certainly the synoptic gospels is, you know, have they got eyes to hear, have they got eyes to see and ears to hear, you know, it's repeatedly said, and I think this is the main charge which presents us with, you know, have we got the eyes to see, have we got the ears to hear. So consciousness, for me, is absolutely central to it all. Well, and part of this, and you find it in the Gospel of John, you find it throughout the New Testament that the, you know, the writers of the New Testament continue to insist that, well, you know, we're coming up on, I'm thinking about my Pentecost sermon for this Sunday, and it's a startling thing in the New Testament that the disciples of Jesus spend all this time with him for three years, experience the, you know, witness the crucifixion, bear witness to the resurrection, witness the post-resurrection teachings and presence of Jesus, witness the, witness the ascension, and in many ways continue to remain rather clueless until the opening words of the book of Acts, you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you. And part of, over the last year, as I've been digging into just whole bunches of things, you know, surrounding these types of issues and these types of areas, okay, well, what on earth does that mean? And then again, when you look at Jesus' words, you know, eyes to see and ears to hear, and you could not have said these things, you know, his talk with Peter, you know, it's not you thinking this up, seeing who I am, you know, God has revealed this to you, and then Peter comes up with, yeah, well, we're not going to do this whole Jerusalem thing because that's going to get you killed, and you know, get behind me, Satan, it's like, whoop, whoop, and so you begin to read this stuff, and you're saying, well, how do we, you know, how does this, how do we think about these things, how do we talk about these things? You look at the long history of Christian theology, you get to the, you know, for example, in the reform tradition, the Reformation, where you, in some ways, John Calvin and many of the reformers, well, this is what the Holy Spirit does, okay, what do you mean by that, and how does this get manifest? And, you know, again, I think we're at a point in time where it seems, well, certainly in England, but even increasingly in America, there's a sense that some of the fruitfulness of the ways that it has been approached are reaching their end, and there's both a need, and I've experienced in the last year or two with a whole variety of conversations with Christians, atheists, and a whole group of people, also a new openness to, okay, let's look at this Bible, let's talk about this Bible, and let's explore. One of my conversation partners has been Jonathan Peugeot, who grew up evangelical, and then joined the Orthodox tradition, and has become an icon carver, and, you know, so I listen to how he talks, and that, to me, has opened up kind of the Orthodox tradition, but yet there's still many different walls around things. Well, one of the interesting walls with Barfield, and one of the big contentions I know he had with Lewis was Barfield's interest in Rudolf Steiner, and I know something of Rudolf Steiner because, actually, my wife teaches in a Waldorf school here in Sacramento, California, and so, you know, his name has come across quite a bit. Who was Rudolf Steiner? Why did Barfield think he was important, and how do you think that impacts Barfield's view of Christianity? Yeah, well, the quick answer is that when Barfield had sort of worked out his idea about the evolution of consciousness, about he was beginning to discover Steiner, so in the late 1920s, you know, Steiner was very famous, he was very well known, and was even becoming known in Britain. He was always quite well known in Germany, partly because he worked on the Goethe archive in Germany, and, you know, Goethe is the kind of equivalent to Shakespeare in Germany, so, you know, he was quite a prominent scholar, and he started his, the second, in the last phase of his life, Steiner just sort of gave lectures virtually every night around Germany, and then he came, traveled, and came to England as well, and so Barfield discovered Steiner, and felt that Steiner had got onto exactly the same thing as him, but what I think particularly interested in Steiner was that whereas Barfield had kind of worked it out in a broadly academic setting, you know, with a lot of feeling and a lot of heart, but nonetheless in a broadly academic setting, Steiner, who too had been an academic, had seemed to have a kind of clairvoyant ability to just see these things almost directly, and I mean, you'll probably know as well as I that Steiner, you know, he first of all had this relationship with theosophists coming out of the 19th century, but fell out with them, and partly fell out with them because he had a vision of Christ, and so became much more Christocentric. He was always a sort of unorthodox kind of Christian, but nonetheless he was very Christocentric, and in particular what that meant I think for him was that we're being called to change ourselves, you know, that as it were it's not just about receiving mysterious texts or even particularly having odd experiences, and certainly not about reaching out to Eastern traditions, and there's something that's really important about Western consciousness here and now that's calling forth something from within us that Steiner got onto, and I think Barfield found that very exciting just to as it were independently someone else was onto the same thing. Now Steiner is a complicated figure, you know, I read this somewhere and it made sense to me that Steiner's work you can sort of break down into kind of three chunks, there's the chunk that you can read about and it might be quite oh gosh, but it sort of makes sense, and maybe a lot of the work that goes into the schools and his educational programs fits into that kind of camp. There's a sort of middle ground where for example he wrote quite a lot of commentaries on the Gospels, and you could you could wrestle with it and it becomes illuminating, but you're not quite sure what to make of some of what he says as well, you know so for example Steiner was quite clear that such a thing as reincarnation existed, but it's very hard to know quite how that even with an open mind to know quite how that fits in with the Christian tradition at all, you know there are various ideas of course that you can read about, but for it to feel really firmly located in the Christian tradition is quite hard work, so that's a sort of middle ground. And then there's a sort of third area where Steiner just goes off as it were into some sort of visionary domain, and I don't even know how to read what he's writing, let alone make some assessment of it. Now Barfield, I think part of Barfield's appeal is that you always feel kind of grounded with Barfield, and he's he's he's open to all this, and yet he seems to explain it in ways that are easier to connect to, and certainly in Britain Barfield became quite an important figure in Anthroposophy as Steiner's kind of group was called, I think because he was able to communicate these things in a much more direct manner. Yeah so they never actually formally met, apparently there's one incident where Barfield did go to a lecturer that Steiner was giving in Britain, and as it were their eyes met across the room, but no more than that, but nonetheless Barfield Steiner's there, and then within the struggles within Anthroposophy Barfield became quite an important figure reviewing books, writing articles, that kind of thing. Is there a particularly helpful biography of Owen Barfield that you can recommend? There doesn't seem to be a lot about him out there really. Yeah well the fellowship that you mentioned at the top, you know this kind of literary biography of the four figures including Charles Williams as well, that's pretty good. I think Barfield and Williams always play second fiddle to Lewis and Tolkien in it, but nonetheless you know I feel that the writers that understood Barfield and what he was about, but there hasn't really been a good biography of Barfield written in fact. There are biographical works that not only try and tell his story but bring to the surface various texts of his that are otherwise lost in obscure journals or whenever published, so they're kind of strange mixtures of slightly biographical, slightly anthologies and sort of slightly sort of assessments and so on. And I did wonder about doing a biography in fact, but decided that my energy was drawn more to try and to you know tell the story of the Christian unfolding through his ideas. There's a great website which is actually run by Owen Barfield's grandson, the Owen Barfield Literary Estate. He's also called Owen Barfield in fact and he's pretty much taken up the challenge of trying to get Barfield's work accessible and so there's a lot of stuff on the website that have republished all his books. So there's a kind of small but quite energetic community around him and Owen Barfield, the grandson, you know when I told him about my project we met and it's important for me to kind of almost get his blessing to feel part of that tradition. But also Owen Barfield, the grandson, did say to me that his grandfather had said you know I'm not going to be like C.S. Lewis that speaks to my time but I hope that I will speak to a subsequent time and he reckoned it might be in the mid-part of the 21st century in fact, maybe about now. He seemed to have a real sense of time and timing from what you said about his reflections on the first century. Yeah you know I think the sense of you know being on the cusp of something you know whereas Lewis's role is always much more apologetic. It's about bathing down what's already around if you like. So Barfield is perhaps just that he had one foot in the future and maybe it's our future. How did, so I know Lewis had seemed to have near zero respect for Rudolf Steiner and his work while Barfield loved it. How did that play between them? It was the constant boner contention. It was a thing that they never resolved and I think if I'm right there's any one reference to Steiner in Lewis's work which is in the abolition of man where he makes some remark about I've even heard that Dr Steiner might have something to say about it and it was a real frustration to Barfield because Barfield always said that the thing about Lewis was that before he critiqued something he read everything about it. You know so if he was critiquing an author he read all their work. If he was critiquing an idea he read all about the idea but for some reason he never did it with Steiner and it was a strange sort of block. I think it was because my sort of guess is that whilst when Lewis became a Christian the imagination took on a you know a much sort of richer meaning for him. I think he still slightly felt that it should serve ideas that could be expressed in more rational form. He couldn't quite let himself go into a sort of full-blown mythology which is why I think that the Narnia Tales for all their geniuses you know they do have a kind of allegorical feel rather than as it were the story feeling like it has a complete life of its own as you find it talking. So there's something about their kind of personal difference between them as well. Have you read Michael Ward's Planet Narnia? Yeah I have yeah. Okay I was curious because that question about Lewis and Narnia and the value I mean of course Michael Ward has his own theories about how that shakes out. Tell me so why don't you introduce your book to me? I haven't had a chance to read it like I said I just opened it this morning. I think the title might scare off some Christians but tell me about how this book arose what's in it and why obviously you don't write a book unless you I'm sure you learned as you wrote it and then why you think it's important that the world and and who do you think should read it? Yeah I mean it was a real learning process writing it was very much a struggle personally because you know you can't really write about something unless you have some direct experience of it I think and so it was a kind of unfolding of consciousness for me the act of writing. It's called a secret history you know I wrestled with the time because you do with books and because I wanted to be a bit tantalizing but you know it's a serious point too that the secrets of the kingdom is a biblical phrase is you know is a phrase that Jesus maybe even used himself and I think it's very much saying this is about coming to live from a world that's already here and yet we're not aligned with it yet so it's secret in that sense that not that it should be you know not in some damn brownish kind of way and it's secret because it's present all around us and it's inviting us to enter its secrets as it were to enter its life yeah it speaks of interiority I suppose that I think that you know the thing that Jesus really planted in the early Christian period was how richly inner life might be trusted in a way you know if in a way Lewis's struggle was with how much the imagination can be trusted I think the early Christian period was very much how can your inner life be trusted you know so and so notions like free will like conscience they start to become crucial subjects of discussion in the early church because it's all about trying to realign life with this new dispensation so yes the book the book broadly I mean it's a kind of introduction that tries to just quickly outline Barfield's ideas so you get the idea of his the evolution conscience in your mind and then it goes through um beginning with the earliest parts to the old testament through the period of exile into the apocalyptic period I do the same then with the Greek philosophers and try and tell a parallel story it's partly because it's a world that I know fairly well having done you know my PhD on Plato but I think you can also a sort of second run at the ideas um gives you a richer sense of what's being what's being got um try to try and show it that that much more um yeah then we come to Jesus the birth of Jesus and there's a kind of first chapter which talks about Jesus's teaching um and this thing about how I think what he was really onto was to try and shift people's consciousness and then um there's the period um particularly around the life death and resurrection um which is introduces I think what's a crucial crucial thing which is that if you're going to start to rely on your inner life as a kind of parallel process um you need to be able to let go of your inner life in a strange way as if it's your own possession um because otherwise your ego becomes too inflated to use a modern term um and this is why um life and death absolutely go together um in in the christian dispensation and what I call in his more mature writings we'll talk about learning to die every day um you know it's this process of as well letting go of your of a small inner life in order that it can open up onto the big inner life um with full responsibility and awareness and awakeness you might say um but this it's this dialectic um that Jesus lived um and then he absolutely had to I think so it becomes sort of completely firmly planted in the tradition um so that's that and then there's a period about what I call Christianity's sort of high noon which is and late antiquity the medieval period where this new awareness completely shaped western civilization it was easily the most dominant wellspring for people's lives and then of course we come to the the early modern period scientific revolution enlightenment and so on and I think this is another period where things are changing and things are on the move and so in the last couple of chapters of the book I might try to get a sense of where we might be going now um and and what we can learn from what's happened before in terms of what Christianity can mean going forward and because I was interested when you you said you felt both that um there's a sense of sort of slight running to the end of things in in the Christian discourse but also a sense that maybe we can approach them afresh as well there's a new kind of possibility in that and that again in that dialectic something dying but something being born feels very much where we're at now so uh I try and give some sense of that in the last couple chapters how did the book change you it helped me it helped settle me um in in relation to Jesus particularly as a figure um and and then also my own kind of sense of um spirituality really um you know I'm ambivalent about the church um uh for a lot of reasons you know church mingling is established church and that brings its own set of of things you must wrestle with um uh I I for even when I was a clergyman I felt um very unsettled about what I thought about Jesus you know I wasn't the kind of person that had a dramatic encounter and conversion experience with Jesus I was born in a Christian family it was always you know part and parcel of my life um and so I always wrestled quite with what I made of the person of Jesus I I did have a phase where I thought I was an agnostic if not an atheist but you know in retrospect it was always a passing phase um I've always felt um the presence of the divine you might say um but quite how the figure of Jesus fitted in I felt found very difficult um but I feel that has really settled now um but I feel that Jesus um he opened up a way for us all to follow um and in particular it's it's the mystical tradition um that that speaks to me now that someone like Meister Icah can say you know the most important incarnation is the one that's happening in each and every soul now um rather than the incarnation that happened 2 000 years ago and that's the type that enables us to see what's happening within us you might say um so I mean you talked about pentacos coming up and um and you know just we just passed ascension and I was thinking again you know what does ascension mean to me and then I I thought well ever since Easter the the biblical stories around the resurrection appearances it's like Jesus appears and then he goes and then I work as a psychotherapist now that's how actually am I living and and I think about this game of peekaboo you know which you play with your kids where you go where's he gone boo where's he gone boo I thought this is what Jesus has been doing but of course that's a very serious game for a child because it's about the child being able to internalize things for themselves um and not have to have the external you know visual sense of safety and I thought well maybe Jesus was doing something similar you know maybe that's what these stories mean um and the ascension is the kind of final peekaboo if you like yeah um and and I love it that a lot of the resurrection stories um sorry yeah so the post-resurrection stories um Jesus often says quite hard things I mean you know remember this speaks to your Calvinist point you know so um you know well the most famous is him saying to Mary do not touch me um you know what's that about um yeah that's you know but then he says she says teacher and and he says that's right that's all I am um but I'm ascending now to my father and your you know my god and your god my father and your father I forget the correct exactly that but nonetheless you know this is something which we now follow uh as Jesus did we've got to work out you know a poor mature poor line expression is to work out your salvation um so that's very much the kind of area the terrain of Christianity that I find myself in now and I feel I can relate to directly and wholeheartedly yeah which is great and you know it's interesting in the obviously in the in chapters in the gospel of John chapters you know the the the last supper discourse that long discourse that's in the gospel of John where Jesus says I'm leaving but I'm sending my spirit and you know there what do you mean you're leaving and I I think you I think you you said that I never thought of the peekaboo because I've I again that I read the bible and you know I've been reading the bible all my life but as a as a pastor it's my job to continue to read the bible and I have to chew on it and to present it to my people new again and again and again and so I read these things and you read them and I just I'm constantly struck with the oddity of so many things in the bible and if you can if you can somehow hold back the the instinctive immature you know dismissal of things well this doesn't fit my framework therefore either force it into my category or just dismiss it as as hooey if you can just sit with it and say okay well here it is and I don't understand it and there's strangeness to it well let's let's let's take that as an invitation to at least in my words you know let let God through his word through the Holy Spirit do something with this that maybe you know maybe he can open up my consciousness and open up my eyes and allow me I mean what is this now and not yet what is this new creation what is this new life how does how does this how does this penetrate us by this strange book called the Bible which on one hand people so easily dismiss but if you just look at just just the just what has happened around the Bible throughout the course of human history it's a terribly difficult book to dismiss this this I mean people have been reading this book profitably for for a couple of thousand years and it has it has literally changed the history of the world and and it's the it's the strangest kind of book that scholars can't get to the bottom of but you hand it to simple people and they walk away attesting that it was helpful and you think what a what a what a strange thing this is I can't point to any other book in human history that's anything like it and so and the same goes with Jesus and and how many of these things so boy I don't want to I don't want to get dynamic they're dynamic books um you know the words are alive again to go back to you know almost where we started words are alive and so that means they have a life that isn't just as a word resting on the fret on the page but read from the page and take it into the human imagination into a human heart and they they take on a life of their own and I don't think I think you've got to do a lot of work you know it is a struggle it's part it can be textual work but it can also be personal work um but nonetheless you know they they the great works of literature like the bible I mean I find something quite similar in Plato actually I think again you know there's a reason why we read Plato two and a half thousand years on um for me that speaks even more to the the you know the importance of the bible in a way um you know it's become the pivotal text um and but that's the way they work they do have a life well I don't want to keep you too long and what I want to do is I want to read your book and I want to um and you know I picked up a couple of barfield's other books and I want to read them too and I hope maybe after I'm a little better versed in him I might be a better conversation partner to uh to pull out of you uh more of the the riches that that clearly are there um you know I'll be delighted I'm on a bit of a mission now you know with the barfields you know I read the book and and if I may just I've got other material on my website if anyone wants to go and have a look I made some little films and things as well but you know it's very much trying to get the basic ideas out there and and see you know how we can develop them how they can really speak to our times so you know conversations around that are actually crucial so so tell me tell me uh so so give me some ideas how can people get in touch with your work how can they get a hold of your book when is it coming to America all of these things yeah thank you so I've got a website which is mark fernand dot com um and you can sort of click on barfield or the parent link there I think it's called Christianity and Consciousness actually and then that takes you through to various things from films excerpts that kind of stuff um the book's out at the end of August um in the UK and the US okay so the 2019 um it'll be freely available from then um and yeah I'm you know hoping to do it hoping to come to the US maybe in 2020 um in order to do events as well and I'm trying to build up um some sense of how it whether there's any momentum in the UK first and then maybe come to the US afterwards well there is a actually last night I spoke at the CS Lewis Society in in Oakland California and they you know they they don't just focus on Lewis they kind of they take Lewis and they like to do all kinds of things around Lewis so if you get to the point of planning your trip to the US and you're coming to the west coast let me know and I might be able to uh help um make some connections that could possibly help you know and let you know fill up a fill up a room and give you an audience because I also know some of the Rudolf Steiner people at least in in northern California and I'm sure you know Barfield's connection with them I personally I personally really enjoy bringing different groups of people together for meaningful conversation and so this that I think Barfield is potentially a really interesting nexus for a whole bunch of groups that really don't talk much to each other for some reasons to maybe be able to have some good conversation so yeah no I think Barfield can he can he can both bring people together and cast a different light on things I'm hoping that the CS Lewis community you know will be interested in him because of how he'll illuminate Lewis for them in a different way as much as anything else as well well well thank you so Mark stay on the line I'm going to stop the recording but I I I sure I'm very grateful for your time and and for this opportunity yeah well thank you too for all that you do and I'm delighted to you know we've made the connection