https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4P3dK4ePgoI

 Hi, this is Paul. Yes, a couple of days ago on Twitter, yesterday, I don't remember when it was, up came a story from the religion news service, Nadia Boles Weber installed as ELCA's, that's Evangelical Lutheran Church of America's first pastor of public witness. And I saw her and because I've been doing all the Mark Driscoll stuff, I thought, oh, that's interesting. I often compare Mark Driscoll and Rob Bell, and that's a valid comparison. But in some ways, this is even a better comparison of like opposites. Now, they elevated her denomination, elevated her in some ways to the evangelistic face. Now, they won't call that, they'll call it public witness. Now, again, I've been reading Molly Worthen's Apostles of Reason, and these tensions go back a long ways in the development of American Christianity, evangelical versus mainline. Now, when I mentioned the relationship that I see between Nadia Boles Weber and Mark Driscoll, some people on Twitter immediately reacted, no, no, because Mark Driscoll bad, Nadia Boles Weber good, other people will be like her, off you go. But she's one of the few mainline celebrities, and there's some reasons for that that we're going to get into in the process of this video. You know, kind of the founder of in a way, Robert Shuler sort of bridged the mainline, the mainline evangelical divide quite well. Robert Shuler in Southern California started with a drive-through church, eventually had the Christ of Cathedral, the Christ of Cathedral now has been sold to the Roman Catholic Church. But he sort of is the fountainhead of celebrity, well, not really, at least in the in the in the contemporary frame. Because if you go back, you've got Dwight L. Moody, and in fact, many will argue that church fathers were, in a sense, celebrity pastors of their day. I'm not going to get into that into this video, but that's something that we'll have to talk about as we continue to dive deeper into the rise and fall of Mars Hill. So some of you don't know who this woman is. And so I think it's worthwhile taking a look at some of the news articles and getting some orientation so that we can begin to see the relationship between her and the history that has basically gone through the American church in the last 20 plus years. Now, the rise and fall of Mars Hill on the second episode, they get into some of the history, and because I like history, I like that episode quite well. You can't understand any of this if you don't understand the emergent movement. Now, I just saw that Jordan, Jordan, it's not Jordan B. Peterson. It's the, it's the Evan, it's the Lutheran guy did some commentary on rise and fall of Mars Hill. I should just find it. It's right, it's Jordan B. Cooper and the discussion about Mars Hill, megachurch celebrity culture, and I watched about a quarter of it, which is being a bad YouTube consumer because we all know that, well, at least I know because you look at YouTube analytics, how fast people fall off a video. But, you know, I liked some of his commentary, and his commentary in this case is really rather interesting because Nadia Boles Weber is, of course, a Lutheran, and that's not incidental either in her formulation of understanding theology and how she works it. Now, Religion News Service is sort of an interesting organization. I could say a lot about that, but all of this stuff is sort of tied up in the emergent movement within splits into the progressive evangelicals and the young restless and reformed, and so in that sense, Mark Driscoll typifies this, but so does Rob Bell and so does Nadia Boles Weber, and again, we're going to get into this in this video. Nadia Boles Weber installed as ELCA's first pastor of public witness. We acknowledge that Nadia has a ministry that goes far beyond the walls of any one church, the installing bishop told Religious News Service. Reverend Nadia Boles Weber led. Left is installed as a pastor of public witness by Bishop Jim Gonia. Now, pay attention to titles. A lot of the focus on the horizon fall of Mars Hill is going to be on ecclesiology and polity, which means structure, and evangelicalism is famously egalitarian and flat structure. Now, maybe not necessarily egalitarian in terms of questions of women in office, but they don't have bishops. Everybody's sort of a lawn to themselves, and so you'll hear people who are part of denominations and have a little bit more robust structure, usually sort of chipping away at that, but there's a lot of room in denominations. Some denominations are very hierarchical. You really have to submit to the bishop. Other denominations have bishops, but not so much. The Christian Reformed Church doesn't have bishops. We're much more conciliar, which means we have groups of people at the head, so at the head of this church is a church council. And so when you get into Mars Hill, you have questions of a board of elders. It was interesting. I thought Jordan B. Cooper's presentation on some of the development of this was quite good, but she, of course, has a bishop of the Rocky Mountain Synod of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. Now, that title evangelical is a little bit deceptive because, again, as I spoke about in one of the previous videos, that word means different things in England than it does in the United States, which is why the founders of Christianity today call themselves neo-evangelical, because in Europe, evangelical basically means Protestant, because that was the label that was used in the Protestant Reformation to distinguish themselves from the Church of Rome. In a service at Montview Boulevard Presbyterian Church in Denver, well, that's interesting. Why was the service in a Presbyterian Church? Well, this gets into the whole. The thing to remember in American Church is, in American ecclesiology, in the church world in America, is that the reverberations of the modernist, fundamentalist split continue to move forward. And so you will find Methodists, Lutherans, Presbyterians very much on the same page, opposing neo-evangelicals, fundamentalists, Pentecostals. That's really where the line goes. Nadiabelt Weber was installed this weekend as the first pastor of public witness for the largest Lutheran denomination in the United States. Boles Weber, who has often attracted controversy, is perhaps best known for her New York Times bestselling books, including Shameless, a Sexual Reformation, and Pastrix, The Cranky Beautiful Faith of Sinner and Saint, the prayer and profanity filled memoir of her journey from alcoholic stand-up comic to Lutheran pastor. Now, none of this is incidental to my entire argument. She was called to the role of pastor of public witness by the Rocky Mountain Synod. Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. She said has supported her ministry since she first applied to seminary. Pastor of public witness may be a new position for the ELCA, but other denominations have clergy and similar public facing roles. One might argue that Bishop Barron is in some ways analogous in terms of his role as a bishop, and it's unusual for him to be a bishop in this way. Again, there's a lot of interesting overlaps here because she's part of a magisterial, hierarchical to some degree denomination. She has a bishop. For example, the PCUSA ordained Fred Rogers of Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood as an evangelist for television. Now, Nadia Bolzweber is no Mr. Rogers, but this is where a lot of this weirdness sort of comes together. Bolzweber laughed at the comparison to the beloved children's TV host calling it counterintuitive. That's right, but the connections are very much there, but she said it works. She'd seen Won't You Be My Neighbor, the popular 2018 documentary about Rogers and his show the day after she left the church she founded, the House of All Saints and Sinners in Denver, to pursue her current work as public theologian. There's another interesting name, and a while ago I did some videos on platform and church. What I said there very much connects in with this because, let's say the Southern Baptist Convention is all in a bundle over women in church office, but Beth Moore and many female bloggers have platforms that give them far more power and far more influence than your pastor of a local congregation. Her move from local pastor to public theologian or their title, what was it again? Pastor of Public Witness has everything to do with that. Of course, that gets very much into the Mark Driscoll story, the celebrity church, why Robert Shuler retires and Crystal Cathedral can no longer pay the bills. Mark Driscoll leaves. My next video I was intended to dive into what killed Mars Hill, but then this came up and I thought this is a nice background for that question. Mark Driscoll, they sort of, okay, now we're going to address you and we're going to talk about accountability and that's going to come up here. Basically, he resigns, flies the coop, goes down to Arizona. He and his wife have an epiphany. God spoke to them separately and there's a trap that's being laid and our term call here is done. He goes down to Arizona, Scottsdale, Arizona and sort of starts up the same thing. We'll talk about that a little bit later too. So it's interesting. So then if you go from this article to the other article, why she left the church that she founded, which was also on the same service, headed for a larger stage, Nadia Bolzueva leaves her house in order and again now she in some ways does better than Mark Driscoll because he basically gets kicked out and exploded. She leaves on her own terms and she leaves on her terms. It's a very interesting article. Again, I'll leave all the notes. Congregants pray over Reverend Nadia Bolzueva during her farewell services at House of All Saints, Centers and Saints in Denver, June 8, 2018. So this is, you know, we've had COVID in the middle, but this is sort of three years in the making. With silvering hair, dark makeup, liturgically inspired tattoos, Nadia Bolzueva stood late on the Sunday afternoon in early July to celebrate her final services pastor of House of All Centers and Saints. The Denver church she founded a decade ago at us as a 39 year old divinity student. The service was like any other at half ass. That's clever. I mean, I don't know. It's fun. Children played freely in the aisles. The Capella choir finished its opening hymn and Bolzueva invoked God using both feminine and masculine imagery. Only the regular members might have noticed the presence of many first time packing the church, taking a final opportunity to hear its celebrity pastor preach. Okay. Now she's a celebrity pastor. She doesn't have a mega church. I don't. I looked, I looked at, I tried to get a sense of how big this church is and churches don't necessarily publicize these things unless the numbers are really big. And so I just went to Google maps and looked at the street view and yeah, it's not a mega church. You know, maybe I have no idea. And if someone out there knows, leave a comment in mid June, again, 2018 Bolzueva Lutheran, and now one of the best known mainline Protestant preachers in the country. Now this is important too, because you'll find, I mean, she's been on, I think it was fresh air. I mean, she's been on major podcasts. Washington post covers her. New York times post covers her. This is the kind of promotion that many evangelical celebrity pastors would dream of when it's just not negative press, like someone like Mark Driscoll would get. And so a lot of this, again, we're in an attention economy and a lot of this is about attention. How does she get attention and how can you be a celebrity pastor in the mainline? There aren't a lot of them. Bolzueva said she had decided to step away only recently and still can't explain entirely what made her feel like it was the first, what made her feel like it was the first time. She reached a point, she said, where the church still loves me, but I don't think the church still needs me. Now there's another video I found that was super interesting. Nobody sent me this video. The YouTube algorithm served it up, which is a little bit frightening, but Francis Chan interviewed by Mark Driscoll and Joshua Harris. Now the latest of the, the latest of the rise and fall of Mars Hill was a really good episode on Josh Harris. And I know Esther dove into that in a blog and I'll probably get there if I don't lose interest. But Francis Chan is an interesting guy. He's got a very interesting story. It was, it was created by a guy named apoyo, the guy who passed away six months after Mars Hill's success. What he earned from this show wastag, er, uh, a row. He has a larger bill about killing trash and 나서iling more trash than he ever Hong. He's got a very interesting story. Of course, he's very close with Preston Sprinkle, who's been on the channel. Very interesting guy and is sort of a real foil for these other two guys because of course, Josh Harris deconstructs, Mark Driscoll goes down the rabbit hole. He's still, it goes down the hole. He's still in. Francis Chan seems to be a guy of a lot of integrity, but Francis Chan, of course, turns his back on hell, sort of like Rob Bell, sort of like Bulls Weber. But okay, so this is where you see the emergent, the young restless and reformed and progressive evangelicals. You have to see all of these people in part of this same movement that's developing. I've only listened to half of it. Very interesting conversation. Francis Chan talked about exactly what Nadia Bulls Weber talks about here in terms of leaving the church while they still love her for the church to grow. Now I think about that me and sometimes I think maybe I should have left the church years ago because church obviously, this church obviously hasn't necessarily thrived numerically in the last 10 years. So she decides to leave. I was aware how dangerous it was for followers to, for founders to stay too long. That's very true. And again, I actually applaud her for the decision to leave. And she left in charge. It's very interesting. Okay, in 2011, after preaching at an annual Easter sunrise service at Red Rocks, the Denver Post put Bulls Weber on its front page. Bulls Weber was horrified. She said to Terry Gross on Fresh Air, when suburbanites suddenly showed up at half ass, today the congregation roughly 500 housemates. Okay. So they're not a mega church about 500, which so below 200 is a small church between 200 and a thousand is a medium church between a thousand and up is a mega church. We might even say that's, that's sort of the nomenclature that the pastors use for, for categorizing these things. So not a mega church by 2015 Bulls Weber had put two books, Pastrix and Accidental Saints on the New York Times bestsellers list. Now, again, very popular. You won't find Mark Driscoll's books on the New York Times bestsellers list. Now, as we saw with the Jordan Peterson story, the New York Times is selective about the kinds of things it's going to put on its bestsellers list. And for reasons again, we're going to get into Nadia Bulls Weber is exactly the kind of person they want on the list because, well, because of how she fits into the cultural imaginary of maybe what faith can be with a worldview that secular urban progressives, New York Times readers can find appealing. She lectures constantly, most recently at the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America youth gathering at theologians at Pepperdine University and at the feminist makers conference in San Francisco. Her admirers range from conservative columnist Rod Dreher. Rod, are you a fan? I've read what you've written about her. Interesting. To Black Lives Matters activist, Sean King. She's also giving up handling of the day to day business of the church, making her official break all but a formality. Bulls Weber is hardly the only celebrity pastor to walk away from the local church ministry. Recently, evangelical pastor, Francis A. Eugene Cho announced he was leaving the Seattle church he found in 2001 to devote himself to anti-poverty work. Four years ago, Rob Bell left his mega church, Mars Hill, after 12 years to focus on speaking and writing. Unlike these pastors, Bulls Weber is leaving in part to increase her contact with secular audiences. And again, this makes perfect sense as she calls it preaching to the Gentiles. This, are they really Gentiles for what she's doing? This is kind of like in June, someone being bold to declare surrounded by rainbow flags that they're affirming of same sex marriage. It doesn't take a lot of courage in America. I don't know if it's really Gentiles you're preaching to. There's a hunger for the basic message of the gospel. Now remember, she's a Lutheran and that's critical here. And so Jordan B. Cooper, I'd really love to see a video where he talks about her. I'd really love to see a conversation between her and Jordan B. Cooper. That would be very interesting. Most people aren't going to show up in church on Sunday morning, right. But it doesn't mean that the message of the gospel can't still be freeing to them. Ah, well, what is this message? And I would say probably the word she would focus on most would be liberation. Liberation. And we're going to talk about that as we go. In Denver, many are asking what will become of the House of All Saints after its founding pastor departs. Reverend Reagan Humber left, speaks during a farewell service since Boles Weber hired Reagan Humber. Oh, that's interesting. See, again, you have churches that tend to be, churches with bishops tend to be run by individuals. Okay. It's very hierarchical. Churches with councils tend to be run by groups. Now, many churches try to have a combination of these, including the Roman Catholic Church. The Christian Reformed Church is quite conciliar in that you've got synod, classes, and local church council, or many in the CRC would flip it around. You've got local church council, classes, and synod, but there are lines of accountability all up and down. Now, the pastor being hired by another pastor. See, this is where, this is where celebrity mega churches get very interesting. And this is part of what's beneath the surface in the rise and fall of Mark's Hill because Mark Driscoll is a dictator. From what I've been able to see, he's a bit of a tyrant. Yeah, he had a board of elders, but then he had this oversight team of people who weren't local. And so you'll hear those conversations just kind of popping up and down throughout the rise and fall of Mark's Hill. And for church insiders, you listen to that and say, yeah, this is, this is the two poles of, in some ways, apostolic succession versus kind of a paper pope with councils. Okay. And this tension has been within the church, I'm preaching actually on Acts 15 this week. This tension has been within the church all along. You have the council in Jerusalem where James, the brother of Jesus, stands up and gives a pronouncement. So there's a lot of tension in Christian ecclesiology between those two poles, but the fact that she hired her successor is an indication that it's sort of where they are ecclesiastically. Nine months before he became an episcopal priest. I thought they were Lutherans. Ah, this is the main line. Keep that in mind. She told him to prepare for the day she would leave. She was probably looking for a successor. Admitted she was still shocked when the time came. Now half-assed pastor. Humber said in an email to RNS that he expected that Bowles-Webber's departure would benefit the community. Being a pastor isn't about me. It's not about Nadia. Being a pastor is about the whole community. Okay. So there you see the tension between apostolic succession and a conciliar sense of church. And again, this has been in the church right from the start, right from Acts 15. If you might say that Pentecost is the birthday of the church, Acts 15 is the birthday of church politics. Excuse me. It's about feeding the whole body. Now this theme is part of the tension beneath the rise and fall of Mars Hill. And that's part of what Mike Cosper is really wrestling with because celebrity pastors, one person shows now, probably the church is down to 500. So this is, these are his vestments. Humber, who will take over as pastor, there's a picture of him. Humber said, takes comfort in the idea that half-assed doesn't look at all perfect. Sure, we're going to screw things up, he said, but we'll screw things up and we'll still come back the next week. And that's where grace happens. That's when church gets real and the debt are raised. This is such interesting stuff because of course, I mean, there's some of that in me and you'll see that in my videos. And to the degree that you see anything of what goes on at Living Stone's very non-anxious, high in openness. That collaborative style has made half-assed a powerful model, said Bong Bo Young Lee, Dean of Faculty at Illith School of Theology who once taught Humber at Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley. Word on church history, if your seminary has the word union in it, it's part of mainline consolidation. There's Union Theological Seminary in New York, there's Theological Union in San Francisco, you're very much in mainline land here. Humber, who came to half-assed from St. Gregory Renisa Episcopal Church in San Francisco, is well equipped to carry on the church's alternative vibe. His partner is a hair stylist who moonlights as a drag queen named Fruit Bomb. And Humber is open about his struggles with opiates and alcohol. People in recovery know what it's like to be at the end of your ability and that's powerful, says Asher, a long-time half-assed member who was the first transgender member to be ordained in the ELCA. O'Callaghan was drawn to Boles Weber, he said, because she leads from a place of vulnerability, a trait he feels Humber shares. As Boles Weber's final service wound down, parishioners came forward to receive blessings from her. At the end, the congregation returned the favor, performing a traditional laying-on of hands. Then folding tables were brought out for a classic Lutheran potluck, mainly consisting in casseroles. A woman sang a song mocking the criticism Boles Weber occasionally sees for being too progressive and overly tattooed. The congregation's parting gift was a stole with the image of Wonder Woman on it. None of this is incidental. Symbolism happens. The church has never been mine, she said, it's always belonged to God. Okay, it's always been God's. So there's a little introduction to Boles Weber. Now, I gotta manage my OBS here. Okay. Now, where's the connection with Driscoll? Because reading this, you would imagine she would be just opposite of Driscoll, but there are like opposites. What does that mean? Blue Like Jazz, quite famously, and again, Blue Like Jazz is a foundational text in the emergent movement. It's hard for me to relate to many of you how important this book was at its time. It was all over the place. And this was sort of, and as again, Jordan B. Cooper said, there was a certain discomfort that arose in the transactional nature of the seeker movement. Well, what's the seeker movement? Again, Robert Schuller, a lot of these things go back to Robert Schuller, and Robert Schuller is mentioned in the Rise and Fall of Mars Hill. But the seeker movement comes out, Bill Hybels, Rick Warren, safe place to hear a dangerous message. They're going to use, and again, if you read Molly Worthen's Apostles of Reason, part of what made neo-evangelicals different from the fundamentalist was they embraced psychology and social science, and they used psychology and social science to really birth the church growth movement, Donald McGavern. And then from there, the seeker movement came out with a full blown employing of the church growth principles. The emergent movement was a response against that. And in many ways, it was sort of going from the 80s to the 90s. You were going from button down boomers employing all of their, see now, but you know, the counterculture is already baked into this, employing all of their smarts in order to build prevailing corporations. Oh, I mean churches. And yes, I have detailed files on all these things. Those who grew up, Gen X comes around and they're sort of like, nah. And I remember in one of my junkets to Willow Creek, they had the Gen X service. And what was the guy's name? Dieter? You'll put it in the comments. I want to say Dieter Bone, but he's at the verge. His is an interesting story too. I should look him up. But the Gen X service at Willow Creek never worked because Willow Creek said, well, there's the Willow Creek is sort of peak modernism when it comes to evangelicalism. And Willow Creek said, we can apply our business principles to the Gen X. And just like major corporations were able to market to boomers and then to Gen Xers and then to millennials and then to Gen Zers, we too are going to use the same principles as major corporations in order to sell Jesus, basically using fundamentalism for spiritual laws, Roman road. We're basically going to use this to sell Jesus to the masses. And in that way, the secret movement was deeply neo-evangelical and in many ways, just the next iteration of it. And the emergent comes back as a big push against it. And that push is going to go two ways. It's going to go the direction of the young restless and reformed. And it's going to go the direction of the young restless and reformed. And it's going to go the direction of the young restless and reformed. And it's going to go the direction of what eventually will become progressive evangelicalism and progressive evangelicalism just sort of drains into the main line, which sort of drains into the desert. And well, not really the desert, just kind of the background noise. And we'll get into that why the mainline evangelical just continues to become background noise in American culture. And this then, again, we'll go where we go. I know where the video is going, so I don't want to give too much away. Can't say everything at once. So anyway, Blue Lake Jazz, Rise and Fall of Maris Rice Hill mentions numerous times, you'll hear Donald Miller's name mentioned. And if you've heard of it, you'll hear it. And it's a very, very, very Donald Miller's name mentioned. And if you Google Donald Miller and check out his story, another very interesting story. He's one of the main sources of the emergent movement. And a lot of the grime lines, the crud that gives us a sense of authenticity, because Gen X, now, of course, I was born in the mid, early mid 60s. And so I'm right on the cusp of Boomer and Gen X, as is Jordan Peterson, as are the Weinstein brothers. So a bunch of us that are sort of born in the twilight of the baby boom, but not yet quite full fledged Gen X, we kind of see both sides of this thing. We kind of seen the tailored corporate professionalism of the seeker movement. That was, in a way, a response to the, well, all of that, the demythologizing of both fundamentalism and the main line. Now, so the re authenticity, when you look at Bowles Webber, and when you look at Mark Driscoll, is all going to be about the grime. Remember, both of these are going to appeal to working class. In many ways, Bowles Webber is an attempt of the main line to recapture the working class. In that sense, you know, but she's not going to do it like, let's say, Bill Clinton. Hillary is very much, you know, northern mainline. Bill Clinton was southern Baptist. All right. So Bowles Webber is sort of, now they're both Westerners, which is interesting. It's going to be working class, but can the mainline capture the working class? Mainline wants to speak truth to power. Mainline wants to be progressive. And so now you're going to get kind of the tensions, the social tensions you get in limousine liberals with respect to the mainline. Mainline, you have, you know, the Rockefeller Cathedral in New York City. Mainline, you have Marble Collegiate, the collegiate RCA's in New York City. Mainline, you have these downtown churches, but of course, in the 60s and then the 60s to the 70s, downtown becomes, basically goes downhill. And then 80s to 2000s, you have the rise of friends, sex in the city, town town becomes chic again. And so many ways, Bowles Webber takes all of this and sort of puts it all in his head. And so he's going to be all of this and sort of puts it all in her story. Former alcoholic comedian, tattooed. Look at this picture from the Washington Post 2013. Bare arms with a clerical collar. Now imagine me, you know, Jacob wants me to wear a clerical collar. So I'll buy one from some of the places you can still buy and we'll get a clerical collar and I'll cut the sleeves off and I'll get tatted up. And that will attract a certain amount of people because what we're doing is we're taking, again, Peugeot is probably better equipped to talk about why you're, it's basically this inversion that Peugeot keeps talking about. And she cusses all the time. She cusses a lot more than Mark Driscoll and she talks about sex. She wrote an entire book on sex. Compare her preaching about sex to Mark Driscoll's preaching about sex. This is written by Michelle Boerstein. You can continue to follow a lot of her writing. Look at how it's titled, a budding star of progressive Christianity. And the newspapers are always looking for these people because it's, you know, all of those mega church pastors, all of those celebrity pastors, they all vote for the wrong people. And so, you know, oh, we, oh, look, we've got one and it's a woman. Now, Nadia Bolzweber's tattooed Lutheran pastor represents a new muscular form of progressive Christianity. Again, this is, this is basically a contemporary of Driscoll. Bolzweber's liberal, again, conservative, but again, it's just not liberal and conservative. You can do quadrants and you can map this out. These are both populists. These are both grime liners. These are both people who are going to speak to the underclass, but they're going to have very different messages for the underclass. Now, this gets into some of the ironies with the, with the progressive relationship with the underclass, because as many, as many people are noticed, progressives often preach libertinism and live puritanism. So would we like Barack and Michelle Obama if they had an open relationship? Liberal foul-mouthed articulation of Christianity speaks to fed up believers. You could just as easily say Driscoll's conservative foul-mouthed articulation of Christianity speaks to fed up believers. They're preaching to very similar audiences with two different messages. Austin, Nadia Bolzweber bounds into the university United Methodist Church. Again, this is mainline sanctuary like a superhero from planet alternative Christian. Her six one frame is plastered with tattoos. Her arms are sculpted by competitive weightlifting. And to show it all off, this pastor is wearing a tight tank top and jeans. Looking out at the hundreds of people crowded into the pews to hear her present the gospel of Jesus Christ, she sees dockers and blazers, sensible shoes, grandmothers and soccer moms, nary a facial piercing. To Bolzweber's bafflement, this is now her new congregation, mainstream America. Should be a surprise. These people who put her memoir near the top of the New York Times bestsellers list this week came out in September. They're the ones who followed her every tweet and Facebook posting by the thousands who made the Lutheran minister a budding star for the liberal Christian set. Okay, again, just like Driscoll, mass media. Very similar audiences. They're emerging out of the similar pot of what's sort of bubbling under America that a lot of the other religious offerings aren't satisfying. A quick tour through her 44 years doesn't seem likely to wind up here. It includes, oh really, it doesn't? See, part of the problem with a lot of religious reporters is they don't get around enough. This shouldn't be a huge surprise. It includes teen rebellion against her family's fundamentalist Christianity, a nosedive into drug and alcohol addiction, a lifestyle of sleeping around in a stint doing standup in grungy Denver comedy clubs. If you get into the Josh Harris, the latest episode of Rise and Fall of Mars Hill, Cosper made a lot of really good points. And in some ways, in some ways, when he looks at Josh Harris and says, you know, it's sort of like Kim Kardashian. You have a talent. You know how to be noticed. You know how to use social media. You know how to speak. I mean, pastors, this is key skill for pastor. And if you listen to Driscoll, he does it too. Now I'm going to talk about Driscoll more because I've started listening to some of his stuff online and it's nothing new. When I listen to Driscoll, especially in his reformed years, he's just cribbing Tim Keller and John Piper. That's pretty much how he plagiarizes. Mark Driscoll is no stranger to plagiarism. I'll say it. Which is where, strangely enough, the match with her fans makes sense. The type of social liberals who typically fill the pews of mainline churches. Mainline churches pews aren't filled. See, this is in the imagination. All these huge, beautiful old mainline churches, they're empty. And we're going to talk about why. Like outsiders among fellow liberals in their lives, if they are truly believing Christians, if they are people who really experience Jesus, experience Jesus and his resurrection, experience Jesus' resurrection, when, and this is sort of the mainline-ish mythology and symbolism of Jordan Peterson. Well, resurrection means, and of course, this was the real shock that rationality rules got with Jonathan Pigeot, if they are people who want to hear words from the apostles in church, not, I don't know who that is, or Barack Obama, her in her body and her theology bowls, Weber represents a new muscular form of liberal Christianity. Again, Driscoll was a new muscular form of reformed conservative Christianity in his heyday. One that merges the passion and life-changing fervor of evangelicalism with the commitment to inclusiveness and social justice of mainline Protestantism. I've been starting a little stream on Twitter, just plucking things out of news articles, buzzwords are holy words. So remember that. Buzzwords are holy words. She's tatted up foul-mouthed champion of people sick of being belittled as not Christian enough for the right or to Jesus-y for the left. Interesting. It's always a market. You show us all your duty laundry, it's all out there. The Reverend John Alfred of the University United Methodist Church booms as if he is introducing a rock star, leading the cheering crowd into an impassioned round of hymn singing. Bowles-Weber springs on stage to do a reading from her book, but first she addresses the language that's about to be unleashed on the pulpit. I don't think church leaders should pretend that there's something there or not. The crowd erupts in applause. Bowles-Weber pulls out a new kitschy item that she raffles off to raise money for church charity. She waves a gift certificate for a free tattoo. Then she speaks to her new reality. You ladies over 70 dig deep because you know you want it. So you can read the whole thing. Christianity, Bowles-Weber preaches, has nothing to do with rules. Now this is 2013. 2021, never read everyday feminism. It's a lot of rules. Has nothing to do with rules. It's the process thing. It's the process of things constantly dying and then being made new. These things, she says, might be the alcoholic who emerges into sobriety. Some false narrative we have about ourselves, religious institutions that no longer inspire. I think God is wanting to be known and in my experience of God wanting to be known is much more a person who is in is much more in the person who is annoying me at the moment rather than the sunset, she says. She's presenting these, she's present, God is presented in these challenging interactions. I never experienced God in camping or trees or nature. So we've got an urbanism going on here. I hate nature, she told the Austin crowd. God invented takeouts and duvets for a reason. So read the whole thing. Very interesting. Now again, like Driscoll, she's sex positive. Now if you want to read an interesting take on her book in Christianity today, now part of the reason I subscribe to Christianity today. Now a lot of people interpreted what I said is very negative of Christianity today. I've got a nuanced view of Christianity today. I just thought it's ironic, but yet apropos of their deconstruction of Driscoll and some of the points that they'll make about how in many ways he begins in the emergent and he winds up just like the seekers. And you're not really going to deconstruct celebrity pastoring as wholly a evangelical thing when you've got Oprah, Rob Bell, and Nadia Bolz Weber, because they are celebrity clergy. They just don't have churches. And the reason they don't have churches is it's tough to do this in church because of the political alignment. Now, so the book that she came out recently, Shameless, a Case for Not Feeling Bad, about feeling good. And again, she gets a significant write up in the New Yorker. Evangelical pastors would die for something like that. A lot of celebrity pastors, what they're good at is finding a way into the media. Look at Carl Lentz and kind of the flashy Hillsong people. But now there's a like opposite with Driscoll here because, and if you listen to the Rise and Fall of Mars Hill about women, there he goes into Mars Hill and Mark Driscoll's outspoken use of sex. Wives should please their husbands. Husbands should please their wives. Now again, this is evangelicalism, so it's all within marriage, not so for Bolz Weber. There you're much more in the realm of authenticity. But now again, which rules? Because Driscoll's going to have rules and increasingly the sexual revolution has rules. And those rules always emerge. They always do. And this again is when we get into Peugeot country because there is an order to the world and people, even if they're not married, they're still married. And so they're still order to the world and people, even if they're deconstructing certain rules, they're going to make new rules. There are always rules. So this isn't about rule-based Christianity. That's easy to say in 2013. It's tougher to say in 2021. Now some of you might say, well, why is it always about sex? And that's a very good question. Again, as I said, I listened to the entirety of Christine Hayes' Yale course on the Hebrew Bible. And right off the bat, she notes one of the Jewish distinctions. So there's two main Jewish distinctions. One is she's sort of following Ezekiel Kaufman and the religion of Israel and the distinction between paganism and the meta-divine realm. Now, Christine Hayes is a modernist Yale University lecturer, very much given within a secular frame. I talked to Jacob a little bit and he said she'd probably fall sort of into the modernist progressive. I'm not always sure which nomenclature goes in the Jewish community, but we would say the liberal Jewish community. But the two biggies are contra the meta-divine realm, which is pretty much assumed in all of the rest of paganism, and a peculiarly conservative, and I use that word, guardedly, approach to sexuality. Now we consider it conservative. In the Roman Empire, it would be radical. Now again, I just finished reading Tom Holland's Dynasty. And so when Claudius takes the throne, Tom Holland, not the throne, no, I'm not really sitting on a throne, everyone thought that Claudius had very peculiar sexual tastes because he only slept with women. And we hear that and we think. So it wasn't exactly trustworthy because of his sex life. Now again, Claudius had certain physical disabilities, which is part of the reason he survived the constant dynastic purges, because nobody ever imagined Claudius would ever be emperor of Rome, even though again, they didn't call it that. But Claudius only slept with women. Nero, of course, quite famously, after he caused the accidental death of his beloved wife, kept trying to replace her, had a slave, a slave, had a slave castrated and turned into a eunuch, and then tried desperately to find someone in the Roman Empire who could, I guess, the first trans wife of an emperor. See, are eunuchs really trans? This is where these things get very complex. So he really wanted to turn his eunuch wife into something that biologically could produce an heir. And there is no such technology in ancient Rome. So that if you listen to the rest of this history, top 10 eunuchs, you'll hear his story. What pronoun do we use for eunuchs? What pronoun do we use for eunuchs whose emperor husband had him castrated because he accidentally killed his favorite wife? The Jews were very different, very peculiar. And in fact, in Tom Holland's conversation with N.T. Wright on unbelievable, the apostle Paul's assertion of what Christian sexuality should be was absolutely radical. Paul was the radical conservative Roman emperor sexuality. Well, we'll talk about that in a minute. And I was thinking about this morning as I was preparing the slides, there's some connection perhaps between the idea of the Medi-Divine Realm and Christian paganism, because in some ways the Medi-Divine Realm is a feminine space. It's a receptive space. It's a space. It's a Tohu, Wavohu chaos and order. It's the same femininity of the sea. And the Hebrew God is masculine. He comes in and he pronounces light and darkness. And to talk like one of my favorite Roman Catholics, Mary Cohen, it's that masculine energy. Look at a fist. When we do like this, aren't we raising a phallus in public? One of former pastor of this church, dear friend of mine, loved him greatly, tremendous evangelism. Great singer. He and his wife were great as many pastors and pastors wives were. She was a terrific pianist. He was a great singer, but he would often lead worship and do this. And there were some people that just couldn't help but laugh because this, well, we all know what this means. This is masculine energy and the Medi-Divine Realm is feminine and God comes in and let there be light and he separates and he defines and he brings order to chaos. Driscoll was bringing order to chaos, right? Masculine. And so the Hebrew God is very masculine and the realm into which the Hebrew God steps and brings order out of the Tohu, Wavohu is feminine. All right. Again, you guys have been watching Jonathan Pigeot. This should all be just review. Now, now we're really going to get some fun. This is feminist masculinity. Masculinity feminists believe at least some feminists believe is only safe when a woman does it. Two of my favorite progressive Christians to follow on Twitter, Joe Lerman and Mike the Therapist. Mike lives in Sacramento and has written some books. He used to be a pastor in a more conservative denomination, left it to become a therapist and he tweets pretty reliably progressive sex positive stuff on Twitter. Joe Lerman is a very, very, very, very, very, very conservative. He says, Joe Lerman, people who have an issue with trans women using women only spaces should just be honest and admit they are afraid of cis men. And the thing is, yes, same. All women are afraid of cis men. That's why trans women need to have the safety of women only spaces. Mike the Therapist says, note what Joe says, all women are afraid of cis men. It's true. Men allow trans women to have the safety of women only spaces. Some of you might wonder how I keep remembering and finding these things. When I find things that I think are interesting or might be memorable, I log them on my blog. And so my blog is again, not a list of things I believe in or agree with. My blog is a list of things that I find interesting. And I found this a few years ago, July 6, 2017. I'm done pretending men are safe, even my sons. I have two sons. They are strong and compassionate, the kind of boys other parents are glad to meet when their daughters bring them home for dinner. They are good boys in the ways good boys are, but they are not safe boys. I'm starting to believe there's no such thing. I wrote an essay in the Washington Post last year during the height of the Brock Turner case about my sons and rape culture. I don't think it would be controversial when I wrote it. I was sure most parents grappling with raising sons in the midst of rape culture. The struggle I wrote about was universal, I thought, but I was wrong. My essay went semi-viral. The very first time my sons encountered my words about them on their friends' phones, their teachers' computers, and even overheard them discussed by strangers on a crowded metro bus. The one thing to agree, it was one thing to agree to be written about in relative obscurity and quite another to have my words intrude on their daily lives. One of my sons was hurt by my words, although he never told me so. He doesn't understand why I lumped him and his brother together in my essay. He sees himself as the good one, the one who is sensitive and thoughtful, the one who listens instead of reacts. He doesn't understand that even quiet misogyny is misogyny and that not all sexists sound like Twitter trolls. He is angry at me now, although he won't admit that either, and his anger led him to conservative websites and YouTube channels. Probably found Jordan Peterson. Places where he can surround himself with righteous indignation against feminists and tell him, it's ungrateful women like me who are the problem. Basically, she goes to this and says, my sons aren't safe. I love my sons. I love some individual men. It pays me to say that I don't feel emotionally safe with them and perhaps never have with a man. It needs to be said because far too often we are afraid to say it. For some, masculinity is only safe when a woman does it because people aren't giving up on masculinity even if they wish men were abolished. And remember what I said about this? So this is a really interesting Christianity Today article written by Tish Harrison Warren, who is a very interesting writer. Did I get her name right? I'll read some of it. But let's just jump to it. The church made vagina sculptures long before Nadia Boles Weber, but early Christian ionic art symbolizes baptism, not free sex. February 26, 2019. In case you haven't heard Nadia Boles Weber recently commissioned a statue of a vagina. She gifted the statue to Gloria Steinem, who I hope will put it on her mantle, though in a pinch it could double as a paperweight or a spoon rest. The sculpture exists as part to promote Boles Weber's new book Shameless and in part as a kind of performance art protest against the damage done by purity culture. She invited women to male in their purity rings in exchange for a certificate of impurity and then melted them down to form the statue. Boles Weber has been applauded by some as an artistic celebration of female sexual liberation. Her critics, by contrast, bring up the authority of the Bible, the Christian call to repentance and the need to distinguish destructive parts of purity culture from basic Christian sexual ethics like chastity and marital fidelity. Others take issue with the icon itself as a fertility idol or at least a sex idol since I'm assuming the statue was on the pill. Tish Warren is a great writer. A few less helpful critics respond essentially, ooh, vagina art, icky. However, long before Boles Weber's book tour and the ensuing debate, Christians have been making ionic art, ionic by way means vaginal shaped or technically vulva shaped as a feminine counterpart to the phallus. And then she goes into that and what I noticed, yay. So masculine doesn't go away. This doesn't go away. It's only safe with a female arm. Now again, Boles Weber, weightlifting, tats, sleeveless shirts, you know, you always see in her some attempt to 6'1", that's sort of masculine, strength is sort of masculine, assaultive, profane, you know, the pastor, pastor that maybe she's a longshoreman, masculine, but she's a woman. Men aren't safe. Cis men aren't safe. Yay. A little quote from Tom Holland's dynasty and the whole section is quite interesting. In a city where the phallus was everywhere to be seen, protecting doorways as a symbol of good luck, guarding roadsides and scaring off birds in gardens, ramrod size was much admired. And why was Claudius seen as being a little sexually odd? Because he only slept with women. Now, when I say slept with women, it doesn't mean wife or wives. I mean, slave girls and consorts and concubines, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. But because for a Roman man meant always to penetrate and never be penetrated. It's interesting that Steinem is like this and Bowles Webbers like this. Who has given, who has received. Can you imagine a celebrity pastor giving Larry Flint a golden phallus made up of melted down wedding bands by liberated men, by been liberated from a forced monogamy. Now, when I watched Roush V talk to. Oh, glad I saw it when I had the chance. When Roush V talked to Milo, I just tried to pull that up. This video is no longer available because the YouTube account associated with this video has been terminated. Whose YouTube account was terminated? Was Milo's account terminated? Yeah, Milo's account was terminated. Isn't that interesting? Prohibiting hate speech. You know, again, the point of all of this is to, well, what has the church been doing? The church is trying to figure out masculine and feminine, and it's doing it in real life. And it's doing it the way people figure things out as communities with opposing ideas and opposing frames. And this is in many ways what's going on under the surface. Now, Nadia Boltz Weber is promoted to the center of a hierarchy. Mark Driscoll is exiled in a marketplace, but can't be dismissed because the hierarchy is implicit. And so this is what was so interesting about her promotion to this post. Because for the ELCA, in a sense, what they are saying is for her to be the first pastor of public wisdom, pastor of public witness, she now embodies in many ways what the ELCA wants to be and become. She is their head. She is their leader. She, well, what kind of head, what kind of leader. And now Driscoll is tyrannical. I don't get the sense from anything I've read that she's tyrannical at all. And so again, that's part of the reason people say Driscoll, he's evil because he's tyrannical and she's not evil because she's not tyrannical. That's a very fair point. But now remember we're talking about the emergent movement. And the emergent movement pushes back on the boomers and their button down corporate, scientific, modernistic approach that sort of wants to mass produce certain kinds of Christians. And so both Driscoll and Boles Weber are in some ways fringe actors saying there needs to be space for us at the fringe. Now Driscoll was brought into the center of evangelicalism and then pushed out. Boles Weber is now brought into the center of mainline, this mainline denomination. My guess is she won't be pushed out because when I think about what she would have to do to be pushed out, I've got a pretty good imagination. I'm sort of hard pressed to think about what that would be. Now both are responding to disappointments by embracing a certain brand of conservatism. Now for Driscoll the conservatism is obvious. Boles Weber, she wouldn't be anywhere near as interesting if she didn't use Christian iconography, if she didn't show up in a sleeveless shirt with a clerical collar, if she wasn't festooned in sort of steampunk goth Christian stuff. Okay, there's a conservatism in there too, but just like I said, the apostle Paul and his approach to human sexuality was radical against the conservatism of the Roman Empire in which the emperor Claudius is weird. There are different layers of conservatism under Nadia Boles Weber and in some ways this is how we're tracking every church is always in danger of paganism. Different churches are in danger of different kinds of paganism. The main line is in danger of a particular type of paganism that Boles Weber is in some ways exemplifying. It's a paganism that you can have Jesus alongside of your other ascendant saints and holy people. That's a certain brand of paganism. Now there's a difference in assumed and asserted moral norms in their two warring tribes and that accounts for a lot of the differences between them, but again there's a like opposite thing going on here and there are polarity dynamics at work because I would say both are fundamentally reactive and again, summoning up Jonathan Peugeot's parasitic processing video, both are reactive, but in a way Driscoll is reactive to the reactives and the revolutionaries which sort of makes him conservative, but is it really conservative? And it's this way that Peugeot is interesting because Jonathan goes back and basically embraces the hierarchy and the monarchy. Driscoll stays in Protestant land and part of the reason he remains I think fundamentally defective is he remains ironically, even after he's been deep in the heart of young restless and reformed, his own savior and lord which Tim Keller or John Piper could say well that's sort of reformed Christianity 101. There's one savior and lord and you ain't it. Now in a secular age celebrity is the last public transcendence. I picked that up in Mike Cosper's latest episode I Kiss Christianity to Buy, Goodbye on Josh Harris. Fascinating, fascinating and Cosper has been doing a lot of reading and analysis as many young restless and reformed Hanson too who Gospel Coalition, Colin Hanson termed that gave us that that mean young restless and reformed. You'll find Hanson quite often reading or commenting on Charles Taylor. Now I had Andrew Root on the channel. Now he's again part of mainline Lutheranism. He's been reading Charles Taylor. Charles Taylor has been pervasive enough that in many ways all sides of different conversations are reading Taylor and I think Cosper is dead on right here. There's you know I very much recommend this podcast. There's tons of good stuff and despite some of my critiques and in some cases even criticisms of what they've done, it's well crafted, well thought through. I don't think the analysis necessarily quite goes deep enough in some cases but again this is Christianity today. It is a popular rising outfit, not necessarily a terribly deep organ. They go deeper than sort of shallow fundamentalism but I think in a lot of ways his analysis needs to go deeper still and that's why I'm going to spend some time with it because I think there's more to see further in. Now the ELCA and the mainline have been deconstructing authority while at the same time maintaining hierarchies and this her elevation to public witness is a classic move in that sense. It fits the parasitic storytelling script perfectly but now it's borrowing from celebrity in order to survive and that's sort of where the mainline is at and so when you read organizations like the Washington Post and the New York Times celebrating her is because there's an ongoing anxiety that even though they always feel to be winning in sort of their progressive revolutionary sense these dynamics that Peugeot lays out nicely in parasitic storytelling come into play that if you're a revolutionary you can never really sit on your haunches and Peugeot brings up then the Chinese Cultural Revolution. You have to keep critiquing deeper. There is no pure thing. Masculinity must always be done with a feminine fist but it's still masculinity. You can't get away from it because you're always dependent upon the thing you are revolting against. Now at the beginning of 2021 I made a video policing the sex lives of high status Christian men and I made that and I really never sort of finished the thought because the first thought sort of grabbed me so hard which was Christianity always wants to bear witness to the fullness of life but the inability to live its own sexual ethic or the inability of many of its highest status leaders to live its own sexual ethic that sexual ethic that was pioneered the radicality of Paul of Tarsus basically picking up and in some ways bringing a Jewish you know even refining it further eventually so no more concubines no more slave girls just your wife and again him following Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount on that I mean Paul and Jesus basically I mean Paul and Jesus basically refine and in some ways double down on this Jewish radicality of human sexuality already in what Jesus and Paul of Tarsus inherits so Christianity wants to bear witness to the fullness of life but the inability to live its own sexual ethic to live up to its own sexual ethic up and down the hierarchy causes deep dissonance and provokes deconstruction and the two ways to go are both Driscoll and Nadia Wolfe's Webber those are the two options either double down Mark Driscoll masculine masculinity or complete femininity in sexuality but see this is where these labels get weird because of course men propose and women dispose part of feminine power is yes and no but sometimes yes and no is dependent on physical power which is masculine power and in this way you sort of have Adam split in half into Adam and Eve again Jewish idea both Driscoll and Bolz Webber seek a resolution to this dilemma and both have a sex positive root they double down on rules versus changing rules and of course Driscoll will get tyrannical because that's he's got some things to work out and it's not purely psychological but policing this goes in two different ways and this is sort of what we've seen from the ongoing development of sexual liberation as sexual sexual liberation gets increasingly tyrannical and as rule development grows you know what what happened to governor Cuomo sexual liberation there's me too there's a lot of rules and human resources as you fill out a form and of course if you watch the office they they'd go into that often with with the relationships that would happen in the office and so all of this is revolving around these questions and so again when Jordan Peterson says to Vice magazine it's not entirely clear whether men and women can work together in an office space he's got a point now he gets mocked and but he's got a point and and so Driscoll is to a degree in that and so is Mary Cohen you know look at my conversations with Mary so this is what we're working through now policing is always about trust who you can trust now if you're a man you can't be trusted by some feminists Driscoll doesn't really seem to trust anybody but him and his wife and that's kind of classic in certain tribal structures and in some ways celebrity megachurches become tribal structures so you know kudos to Waltzweber for stepping away from her church before it becomes a celebrity church and if living stones would ever grow large because of this channel these dynamics would come into play and I'm not oblivious to the fact that once you dip your toe into other platforms like I'm doing right now as you listen to on YouTube and podcast these dynamics come into play you don't escape these dynamics and what most people do somewhere in the middle is they say masculine power needs to be under control that's what Mark Driscoll says it's dangerous that's what the feminist says they're both right you're going to have to find a way to live with both truths in an imperfect world and that's going to involve trusting and trusting people is going to involve people failing that's the way it goes in this world try to control people go ahead people are very hard to control people make very bad slaves now in some ways and the the Liam Thatcher piece touched on this abuse is in some ways becoming the new racism David Brooks just had a very interesting article what's ripping American families apart well many young people believe themselves abused and many parents are like how have you been abused you weren't sexually abused you weren't physically abused I was relationally abused there's going to be a lot of gray areas in that now please hear me right relational abuse is real but where do you draw those lines and you know some of those similar things we have around racism see the difficulty is is that once you create sort of this super stick with which to beat people you're a racist you're an abuser once everybody agrees that racism is bad or abuse is bad and here are these things we can label abuse you have definition creep and more and more things you're going to see racist everywhere and you're going to see abuse everywhere and it's going to be one factor and now we're very much going to the the saints and sinners things in a place like half-assed church in Denver that stuff's going to deconstruct it's going to be hard and this gets into the question of can we in the age of decay to what degree can we achieve perfection and both Driscoll and Bowles Webber would say no they're both sort of on the grunge side of things but they embrace the grunge and well they're going to be consequences to that just like their consequences to everything once you create the super stick it's the biggest prize in town and everybody all over the place is going to be fighting for the super stick no you're a racist no you're a racist no you're an abuser no you're an abuser and you've probably created an idol and you're probably in danger of the nuance required for actually using these terms productively because if everyone's a racist then no one's a racist and if everyone's an abuser then no one's abuser and the truth is there is racism and there is abuse and it takes wisdom to figure out the nuance and appropriate response and appropriate consequences and all of that it's tremendously difficult and when it's when abuse is when people turn the other way there's disaster but when abuse and anti-abuse becomes tyrannical you're going to have disasters there too what's interesting about this and so okay so masculine Bowles Webber is not going to be tyrannical what archetype is getting worked here I think it's in the inviolability of the feminine self now I grew up in New Jersey and in many lawns in New Jersey with Italian Catholics and you'll find as some people will say Mary on the half shell this is femininity squared okay the perpetual version virgin in the vulva the violated virgin child is the ultimate victim the Roman myth begins how you've got a consecrated virgin raped by Mars and she gives birth to twin sons who found Rome and one kills sacrifices kills sacrifices willingly unwillingly the other these are the archetypes at play in this and well inviolability becomes the archetypal quest and okay there's going to be consequences for that too Driskell and Driskell and Driskell is the male masculine defender and when you listen to some of the clips that are in the podcast about him angrily scolding men a lot of people here are hurting little boy can't trust so we're going to defend women okay sometimes women need defending sometimes they don't sometimes people need defending physically oftentimes they don't our world has done a lot to reduce violence empire does in fact because basically empire works because the government has a monopoly on violence there are deep connections between that way of thought and Christianity again Paul of Tarsus read Romans 13 this stuff isn't going away feminists hear this and say masculinity is not safe in men we have to take it over okay what about the inviolability of the virgin child oh that's the woman's defender all right now it isn't violated if you give it away freely and so that's what you'll tend to find permission permission do what's authentic to you but again the rules about violation of the will are going to get very complex because again all of this question about the will is all being done in a space where we're having a meaning crisis where again what provokes the meaning crisis we look at the world and in at the dawn of the modern period we begin to see mechanisms in the world and they are demythologized they are mechanistic they are clockwork like and suddenly and suddenly humanity we are the only person out there in a mechanical world and then we learn psychology and we learn sociology and we learn the social sciences and we begin to look at each other and we used to look at the sun as a big clock or the earth as a big clock and animals had little gears in them now we're seeing gears in each other and as we keep seeing gears in each other now we're seeing gears in ourself and what sort of goes away is the will but you've made the will inviolable you've made the will the sacred essence of yourself the will cannot be the will is now sacred it's the secret sacred self down low beneath and so now the person can continue to change because you have to do what's always authentic to you at the moment in other words the will isn't even bounded by time how's that going to go in relationships it's really hard to have two people in a relationship where the will is sovereign in both of them because they're going to clash violation of the will becomes the greatest sin divinizing the will has consequences masculinity and femininity you can watch um Jonathan Peugeot's conversation with mercury and Andrea with the bangs CS Lewis's the weight of glory there's a specific pleasure of the inferior it's the feminine now men and women women are superior at having babies than men men are superior men are superior at things that require upper body physical strength and women okay men and women are different they've got different strengths different challenges men and women are different there's a specific pleasure of the inferior it's to be sought after it's to hold the attention of the masculine and the male it's to be loved the feminine is worshiped because she's all about holding attention what do i mean by worship go back and listen to Jonathan Peugeot's conversation with Jordan Peterson it's about attention the attention of the man should be on the woman bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh the woman adores the attention in the curse your desire will be for your man and what if he's not desiring you men propose and women dispose there's this dance of masculine and feminine that make the world work men and women have masculine and feminine feminine qualities all of us have both ironically in the divinizing of the will you've divinized the masculine and the feminine is lost and this is what Peugeot talks about again and again and again in parasitic storytelling you can see this and you can see it play out this way an article i brought up many times um he asked permission to touch but not to ghost because he kissed the soft pot of my arm i said and then he disappeared they looked at me blankly her roommates because he asked for my consent over and over so sex felt like a sacred act and then he disappeared a sacred act one roommate said laughingly girl you sure don't treat it like one well what is sacred sacred is holy sacred is a part i only do this with few people well what's fewer than few one what's fewer than one none look at the time of august and when virginity became sacred because it's holy the the inviolable perpetual virgin feminine it's it's the it's the end of the archetype but i do this woman protests we perform sacred acts for with and among strangers all the time i would assert the more you do them with strangers the less sacred it becomes again go back into the hebrew purity codes there's common and there's holy holy is set apart it doesn't mean never to be touched means to be touched cement common is to be touched regularly we have common parts of our bodies the apostle paul says we have holy parts of our body that are in some ways set apart and the apostle paul says these are our weaker members we use that language we give charity to people we don't know yes we pray in church with people we don't know yes when he when he asked so many times about my desires because the will is what's sacred he checked to be sure he was honoring and respecting me then sex however short-lived however short-lived became a reciprocal offering but the moment we pulled on our genes that spell of reciprocal honor and respect was broken in other words and again this is straight from say the book of ezekiel from the hebrew prophets what is true in the temple is worked out in the life life the secular world longs for something sacred but it can't violate the will because that's what's sacred to it its own will the cult of authenticity is really the cult of the sacred will not even bounded by time i have to be authentic to me now right now in this moment if if it was last year my name my pronoun my gender my religion that's not authentic to me now it's a terribly hard way to live as creatures that live in time as creatures who are meant to live communally this is part of the reason mainline churches if the will is elevated too high can never have a church or at least not a very big one maybe with a celebrity pastor because well wills are tricky i feel authentically like my favorite soda is coca cola but now we're looking at each other well have you been duped by advertising is that how can i then you have the crisis of the authentic will how can i know that authentically the secret sacred self loves coca cola when when what when i've been in when i've been bombarded by commercials well now we're back to commercials now we're back to the seeker movement the emergent movement tries to say no to the seeker movement i'm an authentic self do you use apple products commercial well the main line struggling for sacredness and identity in the modern realm we have a celebrity let's yank her up the hierarchy it's the way these things work reality lays itself out there's an order that can't be broken now bolz weber moves to the center what does that mean she is now the face of the elca that's what they want from her they want her they want her to say this is what the evangelical lutheran church of a mad of america stands for this fringy little church okay is it going to work are you going to be able to establish and maintain community together what's at heart of the rise and fall of mars hill in terms of the the anxiety beneath it is well again read apostles of reason neo-evangelicalism wanted to unify the fragmented fundamentalists to such a degree that they could in some ways regain the preeminent position that christianity had lost in america lost at harvard excuse me lost at yale read marston's fundamentalism and american culture jesus story becomes part of the pagan pantheon it's a loss of christian exclusivity so well jesus resurrection means the same as all of the other mythological resurrections they're all the same the church becomes a feminine that can hold little attention and here's the iron the irony the more she is put at the center the less effective the aspects that drew our attention to her in the first place become once it's no longer unusual to cut the sleeves off your clerical collar shirt it's just a clerical collar part of this stuff is deep and subtle people celebrate the main lines conformity but the main line holds little masculine cultural interest in that sense it's weak now masculine churches they hold interest and well the will is what what do you need to hold masculine energy safely in the world you need the will to be confined and contained you need rules bolzweber says we're against rules you're at the top of the hierarchy they're not going to be some rules there always are rules otherwise you can't have a hierarchy are they good rules are the rules too specific are the rules too tyrannical are the rules too specific are the rules too are the rules enforced tyrannically look at mark driscoll he's enforcing rules tyrannically because he can't trust oh you got a little boy with trust issues oh there you go um people celebrate the main lines conformity but she can't hold masculine cultural interest in other words the main line church is increasingly just a wallflower oh yeah that's religion but i think the yoga studio that was really cool that really felt authentic to me but again in america religion is a marketplace by design the government stays out the government stays out of the religious marketplace more than it stays out of the internet because the government is already in the religious marketplace but with its own temples as sort of a temple apart not unlike in some ways rome which leads us to the next question which i'm not going to get at in this video so right when i was leaving on vacation jonathan released a video christianity is not revolutionary and julian sent me a message almost immediately you gotta do a you gotta do a commentary on this video there's a lot going on here because as with many things christianity is powerful because in christ we hold together both the hierarchy and the revolutionary but christ is not a revolutionary in the sense of the way we like to imagine egalitarian revolution the way we like to imagine egalitarian revolutionaries because if you listen to christine haze in the hebru bible there's just one regime and the book of job is out there and hasa tan the accuser is part of the royal court but in the christian bible well and you can see in the book of daniel we're heading in towards that in the christian bible this is my father's world again calvinism and many protestant denominations play in this because again protestantism is in some ways a revolution and protestantism is protesting the establishment okay so for a rigorous anabaptist like a hutterite to take offense at jonathan peugeot's saying that christianity isn't revolutionary makes absolute sense in the world jesus is a revolutionary like aragon is a revolutionary or frodo is a revolutionary or gandalf is a revolutionary because in middle earth they are under the sway or threatening to become under the sway of sauron and so jesus is the king who turns over the illegitimate regime in order to manifest the kingdom of god and it's not a meta divine realm where there is no boss it's just an empty feminine space with its own rules that are disposing and the gods the masculine gods how to figure out how to act in that it's a masculine god that creates a feminine space in which the space in which we live and move and have our being this will give you something to chew on so yeah i'm my video production continues to be a little lower than usual for some of you you'll be thankful for that for others maybe not and um we'll see you next time