https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=o5q_5mVArNI

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a very special guest on my channel again today. She hasn't been on for a while, but she has her own channel that you can find and I'll leave the link below in the notes. And Mary, it's so good to be talking to you today. Well, it's great to be back on your channel because this is where it started. I tell people that it's your fault that I haven't channeled. I'm happy you have a channel and I think, you know, I want to encourage you to not... I mean, it's, you know, the YouTube thing is weird because when you have five subscribers and then you have 50, it's like, oh wow, I have 50. But then when you have 50 subscribers, it's like, oh, I don't have, you know, I don't have 100, but then you have 100 subscribers. This numbers thing is kind of a not good thing because in my opinion, the numbers don't reflect the quality of the channel. So, I just want to encourage you to not stop. Well, I'm not going to stop. I have 400 subscribers now. That's awesome. I was kind of surprised at that, but because the number of people who are subscribed but who don't interact in the comments is quite large. Yeah. That's the vast majority. Most people don't interact at all. So unless they're mad at you. I've got some people that really interact in great depth with the material. And so that is really neat because, you know, they challenge me and they provoke me and they make me think about what I'm doing and what I'm saying and stuff like that. So it's good. So anyway, I thought one of the things I wanted to talk to you about was I watched Dave Rubin. Now, do you watch Dave Rubin regularly? Because I know you've watched him some. Yeah. Yeah. I, the political, the political stuff always disturbs me. And Rubin has gotten so, I mean, so much of his channel seems political to me now. And he sort of went one dimensional with his politics. So I haven't watched him too much lately. Yeah. So, okay. Well, that kind of ties in with this because he's talking to mostly conservatives, right? And he's talking to some pretty prominent conservatives. I mean, people like, you know, he's like Glenn Beck and what's that Jewish guy that has the, like the thing he calls a university or something? Oh, Dennis Prager. Dennis Prager talked to, he's taught Douglas Murray. I'm just a lot of people, he's talked to a lot of people that are well-known conservatives. Yeah. So lately, or maybe a few weeks ago, I noticed that he started announcing something. He started announcing that he was going to start a family, which of course prompts an instant question, right? How is this going to come about? So, and of course, there's several ways that it could come about. I mean, it could come about through adoption, it could come about a number of ways. And what I, somebody told me, and hopefully this is good information, that what they were planning to do was to have the man he lives with donate sperm and his sister, Dave Rubin's sister to donate eggs and then have a surrogate. So anyway, what I was, what was interesting to me is that he's talking to conservatives and nobody seems to be giving him any pushback on this. Surrogacy. On this plan. And I wonder if they're not giving him pushback because of the politics. Does that make sense what I'm saying? Yes, it makes a lot. I was thinking the same thing when Eric Metaxas, so Eric Metaxas is a fairly political, you know, radio talk show host too. And you know, when he had, when he had Peter Thiel on, I thought the same thing. And it's, you know, maybe I'm being simplistic, but those same kind of questions go through my mind. And yeah, this stuff gets messy fast. So keep going. Does this make strange bedfellows? Well, you know, but on the other hand, you know, when you're, it's common decency. I mean, it's sort of like the gender pronouns thing too, where just usually as a default, I will, I will at least, especially in public, try to accommodate people's gender pronoun wishes if they're reasonable in my judgment. And part of that is, you know, in face to face communication, we don't want to, we don't want to bring the whole of all of our thoughts rushing into any given conversation at any moment. And we can see, you know, let's say Ben Shapiro's relationship with Dave Ruhm, and they've talked about gay marriage on Dave's show and on Ben's show. And so, you know, your question is good, though. I mean, do we, how do we manage these principles in, I mean, is that your question? Because I mean, I deal with it all the time with the homeless people and... Well, that's part of the question. You know, it's part of a whole constellation of things in my head. I think I'm instantly, the thing that instantly strikes me about this is that you're talking about a baby not having a mother. I mean, that is, that is one of those things that like, you know, Douglas Murray says there's a whole bunch of things that we knew until 10 minutes ago, right? Yeah. And one of the things we knew until 10 minutes ago was that it would be an unimaginable tragedy to deprive a baby of a mother. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And that, yeah, that is what we are, that is what we are talking about. Yeah. And so, so that, that's like the first, like the first thing that strikes me and just stabs me in the heart, you know. Then, then there's other layers of it. So, one thing is that, you know, this, even though they may not be, I don't know what kind of monies, if any, are changing hands in this situation. However, it's a participation in an industry that commodifies human life. And to a large extent also commodifies feminine female bodies, commodifies the reproductive systems of women, often praised by poor women, and even women in other countries, you know, really poor women, desperate women. So that all, it's all part of a whole industry that is, that when you look at the whole industry of it, is not something that I would think, because I like, you know, I like Dave Rubin. I think Dave Rubin is really trying to be a good person. I think that's very evident. But I would think that if you look at this whole thing and everything that's involved and attached to it, they'd have to say, you're stepping in a lot of really nasty stuff here. And so I think there's, you know, I think that, and I don't know, maybe somebody's talking to him privately, I don't know. But that's kind of some of the things that I think about with the situation. Well, let's try to separate a few things. I think because there's a variety of issues on the table. One issue is a gay couple starting a family via adoption. In a case like that, there is a child in the world that is being possibly raised by foster parents who have no, you don't have a permanent relationship with the child, raised in an institution. Whereas, you know, I know some, I know more lesbian couples who have adopted children than I know gay men couples who have adopted children. And that's a conversation we could have because in a case like that, these children have no father. And I look at the work of Warren Farrell that has done a lot of listing about the role that fathers play in the lives of boys and of girls. My wife's, I'll try to be careful, I want to talk about my wife's story. My wife was adopted and her adopted father died when she was 13. Fathers play a different role in people's lives than mothers. And what you say about Douglas Murray, I think it's a terrific example that before, you know, you and I are both old enough to remember conversations in the 70s and 80s, and a lot of hand-wringing about children growing up without fathers, because that was the more common situation, completely apart from the same-sex marriage thing, that was the more common situation and the emphasis on the need for fathers. And in a lot of my experience, which was inner-city African-American populations who have migrated to the north, I just, I actually, there's a video that's getting some steam right now with a bunch of black conservatives. And Thomas Sowell talking about the fact that before the 1920s, out of wedlock births in the African community, African-American community, that their rates were lower than in white communities, which I thought was interesting, that the number of African-Americans growing up without fathers in the home, this is a 20th century, 21st century thing. And so that's an issue, okay? And the surrogacy issue, I think, brings in whole other issues, just as you said, about reproductive technologies. And, you know, now, so we have a Protestant Catholic thing going on, between you and me, to one degree, because in vitro fertilization and some of the practices of, for example, they fertilize a large number of eggs, they implant a large number of eggs, they select down those eggs, questions about, say, what are the best ways to fertilize eggs? So there's a lot going on here. And then when you get to something like surrogacy, where there's money changing hands, is this a womb for rent, is this, you know, the issues are piling up with a situation like this. With a situation like this. And for me, at least in my mind, there are often many sets of moral issues in any less perfect situation. And so here you have, let's say, a same-sex couple adopting a child of either sex, because I think daughters need fathers, daughters need mothers, sons need mothers, sons need fathers. I think the, and as you said, I think the science tells us that the ideal situation for a child growing up is in a home with that child's biological father and biological mother, even though it might be the case in certain situations that another home might be better, because for other reasons, the biological parents are not ideal parents and things go on in the home. Statistically speaking, that situation of a biological father and a biological mother raising their child remains the ideal situation, the best-case scenario for a child. And so to allow situations which are less than ideal in situations for a child, the child already needs a home, which are less than ideal for me, has a different moral valence than beginning the life of a child knowing that you're going into a less than ideal situation. Right. Well, right. So I just wanted to kind of throw a bunch of that nuance out there. I agree. I agree. That's, you know, some people will say, well, of course, children, you know, there are situations, like I said, you know, a baby without a mother, people will say, well, sometimes mothers die, and the babies don't have mothers. And, you know, this goes back to, you know, like Douglas Murray says, things we knew until 10 minutes ago, you know, you would understand that you immediately get a woman to be a mother to that child, like a man would maybe turn the infant over to his own mother for a while for caring for while it was, you know, a small infant, or his sister or somebody else in the family, or, you know, you had time in like the early days of America, or even like 100 years ago in a small town, a man's wife dies in childbirth, and he, you know, walks down the street to some widow that maybe he even barely knows her. And he says, I realize you don't have a husband. My wife has just died. I have several children. I have a baby that needs the mother. Let's get married. My great grandfather did that. Married his, so his wife, she died in childbirth. She had a brother who was married to another woman. The brother had died. And so the other woman was a widow and my great grandfather was a widower. He, she left her child with her parents, became the caretaker for that family. And that was the story of my great grandfather's family. And so that was my grandfather's, that was the woman who raised my grandfather and became grandma Vanderclay. So yeah, this is, this has happened in the world a lot. Right. But there was, there was an understanding that what we're doing is we're prioritizing the needs of the child. Yes. Yes. Yes. You know, above the, above the adults' preferences. You know, the needs of the child come above the adults' preferences. And in this case, you know, yes, it's true. There are tragedies like what happened with your great grandfather. There are tragedies where people die or some horrible thing happens. But, but, and in society we have compensatory arrangements for that. Right. But I liken it to, okay, most people have two legs and they can walk. All right. Sometimes something terrible happens and a person loses their legs or their back gets broken and they can't walk. So they're in a wheelchair. But we, and a wheelchair is a wonderful thing. It's a wonderful appliance. And, and, you know, now they have electric ones and everything like that. And it's a, it's a great advantage to a person who can't walk to be able to get around in a wheelchair. But we don't go around saying a wheelchair is so wonderful that, you know, we'll, we'll take a, we'll take a sledgehammer to people's backs so that they can enjoy the advantage of a wheelchair. Right. Right. Right. Right. So we, in other words, we don't, just because we have the compensatory vehicle, we don't create the situation. It doesn't give us an excuse to create a situation. And actually a thought I've had with abortion is a lot of the American abortion debate is actually about the participation of the doctor because people say my body, my choice. If a woman came into a doctor and said, I would like you to amputate my leg, I have decided my body, my choice. I'd no longer like to have a leg. I'd really like to have a wheelchair. I don't think you could legally coerce a doctor in America to have a leg amputated. Well, unfortunately, unfortunately, there, there, you know, there are people that have this mental condition where they're alienated from parts of their body, and they make the same claim that trans people make. That they must have this surgery or they're going to kill themselves or they're going to do it's body image dysphoria or something like that. And they'll they'll claim their leg is not does not really belong to them and is alien to them and they want to get rid of it and they do actually. They do actually, they have, I don't know if they've legally figured out a way or to make the claim or they found some doctors that will go along with it or what it is, but those kind of those kind of things do actually happen. Really? Yeah. Wow. You've read stranger things than I do. So, so, so I want but I wanted to get the, you know, in terms of the conversation I wanted to get the, the compensated and you had the right the right word for a compensatory arrangement out of it because I mean, and part of it, what's difficult about a question, a conversation like this is. Okay, what is this conversation about? Is this conversation about what the US government would or should allow? Is this conversation about what is moral or immoral? From what point of view? Because I think you're exactly right that. I would say a couple, a couple decides, you know, and of course, birth control has brought all of this to the fore in a way that before we had cheap and effective birth control, this wasn't so much an issue. So parents, you know, you know, you get to know the time of the month and, you know, a lot of couples would have an idea about when it's a little, when you're maybe going to have a baby and when the odds are a little less. So I mean, all of that going on. So, so, well, let me ask you that question. What? Because I mean, so when you when you wrote me and said, this is what I want to talk about, I thought, oh, and because this is a hot thing. But I at the same time, I want us to practice having conversations that make us uncomfortable and that will make other people angry because my people who listen to my subscribe to my channel pretty broad out there. So there's some going to be some people that even us discussing the morality of it is going to upset people. And so part of my question is what aspect of this do we want to talk about and any aspect is okay. But I think that's part of the nuance and reasonable request of a conversation is because we can just come up and say this bad me against that's very low resolution. So, so where are we going with this, Mary? What's happening with this? Well, you know, that's that's one of the things I was thinking about is, I do think that one of the problems that we have in in in our culture is that the this bad, you know, like, that attitude that way of approaching things, I think is not is not advantageous. I think it's one of the reasons why people are, you know, people are so how can I put this, it's like, we might need another way of communicating to people and explaining things, rather than coming at someone with let me hit you over the head with the law kind of kind of thing. Okay, so I was thinking about that. I was thinking about, you know, not Dave Rubin, but the other David, because his, the man he lives with his name David also. Oh, but easy. I don't know which. Well, he goes by David and the other one goes by David, apparently so. So, what would like what would the Catholic Church have to say to say, David, you know, that's kind of what I was the Catholic Church, Mary. Yeah, the Catholic Church. Because that's not that not to not to be an annoying Protestant or anything. But when I talk to different Catholics, they say different things. Oh, well, you know, the just kind of hear me out because I'm being creative here. All right, so I want to, I'm trying to find ways to say things that are in accord with church teaching that are that are present the teachings of the church, but do it in a little bit of a different way. Okay, like for example my, my, my thing I'm doing on distributism on my channel right now. I had originally done that for some people in my parish and I titled it, but I call it Catholic social teaching as you have never heard it. Because, okay, if you say Catholic social teaching, like, let's say you're in a parish, and they say, oh, we're going to have a presentation on Catholic social teaching I'm gonna tell you what goes through the head of, I'm going to just say the average married family man in the parish. Thanks. Okay, here we go. I'm going to sit through something where I'm going to be told all the things that I have to do for other people. That's basically what Catholic social teaching is going to do. Either what I have to give money to, or what kind of tax policies, you know, are, you know, they won't come out and say tax policies, but you know, you'll all, everybody will know what they're talking about or immigration policies I'm supposed to, you know, what am I supposed to do for someone else? And when I did the Catholic social teaching, I approached it from, what does the church say you're supposed to have? I'm going to start with that. Because there actually is something that the Catholic Church says that you, as the head of a family, are supposed to have and what is that? And let's start there. Instead of starting with what are you supposed to do for everybody else in the world? What is your status in the eyes of the church as a family head and what are you supposed to have? Which is actually a great deal. And that's why, you know, I'm doing this thing about distributism because the church actually says that, you know, the head of a family is supposed to have his own private productive property so that he can be independent and free. That is actually the teaching of the church. And now distributism isn't just one segment of the church or the, because the thing is with the Roman Catholics, I mean, you guys have official teaching. And, and so that is the official teaching of the church? Well, distribute the teaching of the church is what I just said, but distributism is a way of trying to talk about that in terms of economics. But what I just said is what the church actually says. Here is the, here is what the church wants to be the position and situation of every family head. So can you say that again before I rudely interrupted you so I can get it down? Because I'm curious. That you, you are to be the owner of your own private productive property that you use yourself to supply the needs of your family. You are to be in a, and you were to be a free, you were to be independent. You should be a free and independent person, not dependent on someone else for your sustenance or enable and having the property and having, you know, everything that you need to care for the needs of your family. That's what the church actually wants you to have. Nobody ever hears that. Can you work for the government? Yes, you can work for the government. I'm not being facetious or, again, an annoying Protestant. Unless you are, but what the church would want is for you to be free to say no. In other words, if you're working for the government and the government comes and says to you, well you have to subscribe to these immoral things now in order to keep your position, the church would want you to have enough independence to be able to say no. Do you understand what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah, I do. Not to be dependent. This is very interesting for me, Mary, because I mean, with this you can really, and with a lot of these other things, you can really sort of get a sense of some real different cultures and Catholicism and Protestantism with respect to a lot of things. This is very interesting, so keep going. So anyway, that's why I said I call it Catholic social teaching is you've never heard it because I'm, I want to come at, I want to come at it from a different angle. I want to come at this thing from a different angle too. Okay. So here is the angle I thought. What would the church say to David, who has expressed, because I mean to David, because Dave Rubin has said that he did not personally ever want to be a parent, but he's doing this because David want to be a father. Okay. So, I would say the church would say to David, your desire to be a father is wonderful. It's noble. It's good. It is in fact, the calling of a man to be a father. It comes out of a good place in you and comes out of that part of you that wants to, to imitate God, you know, and, and that, and that's good. So how how ought you to know about that. You ought to marry a woman and have children. To which, you know, and I want to take it off of using David, you know, and just say that this would apply to any man. Right. And, and so a man might say, well, if I did that, I wouldn't be having sex with who I want to have sex with. Right. To which the church could probably say, yeah, well, join the club. That's true of all the married men. Mary, what are you saying? What are you saying about men that were Randy Beasts who have thoughts that perhaps are less than honorable from time to time? How dare you say that about men as a man, speaking as a man, I'm offended. Yeah, you look real offended. Oh, and I like that. I like the way you laid that out. And because in a lot of ways, what you, what you illuminate here is that within our choices, we are expressing a hierarchy of values. And, and in a sense, some of what we're doing is sort of trying to have it both ways in that I'd like to be a father, but I prefer having sex with men. So this way, or with anyone other than my wife, or with anyone other than my wife. So I'd like to have it both ways. My wife, I'll, I'll, I will dare to speak for her. I would be quite upset if I'd have sex with a woman other than her. That would not, that would not go down very well. Probably be a lot more, more upset if it was a man. That gets tricky. That gets tricky. She wouldn't like that either. I'll, you know, let me just get that out. My wife does not say, oh, you can have, you can have sex with men, but not women. I don't really care to have sex with men, so she's not too concerned about that. But, but no, but this is, but there's a hierarchy of values here. And if in a sense, you're, you're, and, and, and I think it is important to say this because a lot of people look on the news and the media and they imagine, they think that there's all these unimaginable things. But you and I could probably both talk about men that are attracted to other men who have decided that it was higher in their hierarchy of values to marry a woman and have a family with her. Now, over time, people's hierarchy of values, I mean, in a sense, once you, and that's what marriage is about. Once you, you know, at a certain point in time, this woman on my hierarchy of values was ahead of all the other options on the menu. And so I married this woman here and suddenly the menu goes away and I say, till death do us part. And so then what's on the hierarchy of values is not just at one point in history selection of this woman, but marriage itself and faithfulness to family and to God and church and all of that. I mean, this is all one big thing that people are really uncomfortable with now because they might suggest that such constancy in the longevity of a life is an unreasonable burden to ask of people. Well, you know, a lot of it has to do with what we're worshiping, right, because we know the worship of sex has become quite a thing in our, in our culture. But I think what I want to get back to this idea of men and fatherhood and stuff for just a second because I haven't been able to sufficiently derail you. Because I think one of the, one of the things about the church and, and you know, you're part of, you're part of this church too, because, you know, you're a, you're a Western Christian and you have a lot of Catholic, you know, your inheritance goes back to the Catholic Church to some extent. So I'm not, I'm not saying Catholic because I'm disinhewing anyway. I'm saying it because that is, that is the, you know, that is the heritage and that's what we're talking about. Right. There's, there's your big C Catholic and small C Catholic and I'm a small C Catholic. Okay. So what I would say is that the Catholic Church has a very great appreciation for, this is going to sound shocking, for male sexual energy. Okay. Happy to hear it. This is the Roman Catholic Church you're talking about here? Absolutely. Absolutely. All right. But, but Christianity as a whole does, I think, especially the Orthodox and the Catholic churches have a great deal of appreciation for male sexual energy as the, this great potent thing. You know, we talk about power sources, we talk about power and energy like, you know, the oil industry and things like that, that we have to have energy to run a civilization. But the basic energy that runs a civilization is male sexual energy. And against that, and what the church has said through all the, you know, centuries to men is you have this great energy. And we want to give you mastery of that energy. In so that it can be channeled to the building of civilization. And this is the project that men are invited to by the church. And the church has all kinds of tools, spiritual tools, psychological tools, assistance to help men have that mastery so that they can channel that energy. Now, Voth blesses, blesses Saul. And I was having a conversation one time about, you know, masculine and feminine things and he, he wrote something for me and sent it to me and he, he, he used an illustration that I thought was just great. He said that the man is like the trolley car with the electricity, the energy, but the woman is like the track. And he directs that energy. So that feminine, that's the church. The church is inviting men to this project, not denigrating them. See, this is one of the things that so bothers me about feminism is they want to take these great masculine traits and this masculine energy and make it like this is a bad, evil, horrible thing. Disgusting, dirty, you know, like that. But that's not a Catholic mentality at all. And so, you know, as a Catholic woman, I guess I, I admire masculine energy and I admire men and they're an as men, you know, and enjoy them and recognize and admire their, their potency and their power and their that penetrating generativity that they have. Do I have to put a, do I have to put a thing on this for YouTube after you just said that, Mary? That sounded awfully R-rated. Keep going. I'm sorry. I shouldn't. And so, you know, but the, what the church has done has given to, to, to us and what Christian faith has given to all of us is a way to take all of that great masculine energy and direct it, direct it towards the building of a civilization. And I'll tell you something really funny. We had a situation in, in one of the churches, one of the parishes and I don't, I don't know where it was, but it was in the past couple of years, where a priest who was, who had same-sex attraction, you know, was celibate, decided that he had to come out to his congregation. You know, that he had to tell them that he was gay. He told them that he was celibate and, but he felt like he had to be honest with them and he had to tell them this. And so a woman parishioner wrote a letter to him and it was, it was made public some, somewhere, somehow, I don't know. But, but it was hysterical. She said, she said, why do you think that any of us care who you're not sleeping with? She says, you know, what about all the other people in the congregation who are not sleeping with someone? Do we care who they're not sleeping with too? She said, at least you, at least you don't have to sleep, or no, the person you're not having sex with. She said the person you're not having sex with. Would you think we care about who you're not having sex with? We don't care about how all the other people who, that, that the people in the congregation are not having sex with. She says, at least you don't have to sleep next to the person you're not having sex with, like all of us who are practicing natural family planning have to do. Oh, oh, oh. Grow up and be a Catholic man and quote this self-indulgence, you know. 90-foot stuff. Oh, oh, oh. So that is, that is what I think is the attitude of the church. Okay, so I would just say, you talked about, I watched your video today or listened to your video today, you talked about Abraham. Yep. And Abraham, you know, with the promise, you know, that he wanted to have an heir because he wanted to have, you know, this nation that was going to come from him. Yeah, and that was a reduction. Anselman said, well, is that all? But, you know, my point was kind of this salience. But I want to focus on that for just a minute because, you know, I want to just talk for a minute because what comes up with Abraham is the, because of the age thing with Abraham and the whole thing with the, you know, Sarah and the slave, the whole thing is, it's very pointed on the question of potency, right? Yes. Yes. And so here's the thing is what God says to Abraham is your, your sexual energy, I am going to direct to make a great nation. Okay. And Sarah wants that to happen. And that's why she gets Hagar involved. She doesn't want to stand in the way of his sexual energy making a great nation. And she, so she figures out this alternative, alternative plan, which was not, did not turn out so good. But she has regard for him, for his potency and what it can lead to in making a great nation. I've never thought of that before. And you know what, when Sarah laughs, why does Sarah laugh? Well, it, it, I think I always see it as the absurdity of the impossibility. What does it say? What does it say? It says, it says, it says it expresses, I think it expresses, you know, sometimes when we laugh when we don't want to cry. Okay, let me look, is it Genesis, what is it? It should be around Genesis. Genesis 18. It'll be before, it'll be before Abraham talks to God about Sodom. Okay, so I got it. Okay, so Sarah laughed to herself saying, listen to this. After I've grown old and my husband is old, shall I have pleasure? She's laughing at the thought of having sex and the pleasure of sex again with her husband. So then when the angels say, you're laughing. No, I didn't laugh. She's embarrassed. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. When she's asked that she is embarrassed. But it's not, it's not, you know, some people take it like she's laughing in disbelief. Yeah, yeah. She's not, she's not disbelieving. She's like, she thinks, wow. Good point. Good point. So, so anyway, this is, you know, people think the Catholic Church is real prudish and not, you know, is like no, no, no about sex. It's just the opposite. I think the church has sex in high regard. Like Scott Hahn wrote a book about sex and what he says is, he says, sex is like, this is like cornflakes. It's great. The church says it's great. And he has a couple of other little things he puts in from advertising about. That's what the church really says about it. But recognizing it's great energy, great masculine energy and what it can do when sublimated, because that was the whole purpose of celibacy was the sublimation of that sexual energy to higher things, to, you know, to generation of philosophy and spirituality. So, that's what I, that's what I think the church would want to say to, you know, this whole idea of identifying people as homosexuals is a very new thing. That didn't used to, that didn't used to be the case. You know, we didn't used to have this classification. And I think the classification should just be men. You know, men, you're men. Here's the calling. The calling is to fatherhood. The calling is to use that sexual energy that you have to make a great nation. And we can't do that if our choices are going to lead to the destruction of children. Because then we don't have that. We can't generate a great nation without children. Well, I think also. And I've heard I've heard whispers of this. I don't know how children are going to respond to. I mean, part of part of my concern. I have a lot of I have a lot of concerns with these arrangements, especially when I see I see enough biological parents not parenting well. I see enough biological parents no longer. I see enough biological parents losing interest in their children and not just the kind of interest that has to be sustained as a parent, but even the committed interest to provide financially and encourage. And because part of the thing about parenting that that few people talk about, I've talked about it a little bit on my channel in the earlier days when I was doing this adult parenting classes that you don't stop parenting ever. I mean, children, they grow up and they have families of their own, but they're you still have a relationship with them and you're still their parent until you become their child. But, you know, these are these are these are the things the things we start without knowing what we're starting parenting marriage, all kinds of things in life. I do appreciate what you have to say, though, on this point. And I think it's well said. And I think it's important. And I think Protestants have something to learn from these points that you've made, especially I'm going to be so I haven't I have an author. I have a book from an author. And the book is I'm reading the book now in preparation for the conversation I'm going to do with this author. And right now, especially in Protestant churches, there's a whole lot of negativity about masculinity. And and what's interesting about this is, you know, for all of the for all of the discomfort that Protestants can have about Mary, there's there's at least in some ways a a masculine feminine balance that has been managed in Roman Catholicism that that certain types of Protestantism with their that I've been I've been one who has been I've been one who's been opposed to keeping women out of church office. And I say that very intentionally. But it's interesting that in certain tribes certain areas of the church that are really demanding of of women's priesthood as CS Lewis called it. There's a real disparagement of masculinity. And I look at, you know, I've learned I've benefited a lot listening to people like you, people like Jonathan Peugeot. I've learned a lot about masculinity and femininity that, you know, I didn't know before and there was just kind of this cheap shallow dismissal of masculinity. And what I think we've seen is that things that are true are not so easily dismissed. They sublimation is not a bad word. They come, they come emerging out in other ways such as Jonathan Peugeot's video of Wonder Woman beating up men. And like so here we have female heroes expressing masculine strength. And one of the things that I noted a while ago was that there's very little regard for feminine strength because feminine feminine strength is different from masculine strength. And as a man I sometimes I am a I am very I am very aware of feminine strength and I look at it with a bit of awe because I see one man may be able to dominate another man with masculine strength. I look at women dominating many many men with feminine strength and I have to say to me feminine strength is very powerful. One man may be able to dominate one other man with masculine strength but usually two men with masculine strength will will get the better of that one man. But a woman boy there's no end to the number of men that that a woman can dominate. So you know there's this. I think Protestants you know I've been doing a lot of thinking about Protestantism lately and some of the upsides and downsides of some of these exchanges that Protestants have made. And this area of masculinity and femininity is is an area where where I think Protestants have have made some exchanges and taken some losses. So yeah. Well I had a conversation with a woman in my parish a few months maybe about six months ago or so. And she's somebody who's had his all full of you know feminist ideas. And so we were kind of going back and forth. She she was she said you know well I think that women should be able to be priests because you know the men should have all the power. And I said well first of all you know the position of a priest is not a position of power. That's not the point. Just ask why. Even a Protestant why. And then as we went on talking and she was you know she was going on and on about this at some point I just said a woman cannot be a priest because a priest is a father and a woman cannot be a father. You know it's very simple. It's really that simple. It's like I was saying what part of this do you not understand. But that's you know we're not we're we're it's not going to happen in the Catholic Church because we already thank God Pope John Paul II was so clever in the way he put it. You know how he answered this question of women's ordination. You'll love this. He said we do not have the authority to ordain women. The church does not have the authority to do it because Christ did not give us that authority. You know if he wanted to have you know if he wanted to authorize women to be priests he had his mother right there. He could have made her a priest. But he didn't. And so if the Virgin Mary is not a priest then we can't say that we have the authority to ordain women. So I love the way he put it like that. He put it as this is not a power that we that we possess. It's not an authority that we possess rather than saying as an authority we're going to say no. So I really love the way he the way he said that. But he said something else too. You know this question of you know if the masculine vocation is to fatherhood and is that penetrating generativity that brings forth a civilization which it is then the woman's the woman's role is submission which means what it means that our mission as women is under that mission. It's supportive of that masculine mission. That's what it means to be in submission that our mission is in support of their mission. And John Paul II said something else too and he wrote a document on the dignity of women and he said that mankind this was like a thing in around 1985 or something like that. He said that mankind was coming into an extremely perilous situation and that men needed women the support of women in order that mankind may not fall. You know and I look around at feminism and its denigration of men and it's it's contempt that it has for masculine sexual energy. And I just say oh my goodness this is just this is terrible. We you know men need our need our support and they need our respect and you know I think men are wonderful. I'm just a normal woman. Thank you. I thank you on behalf of all men. Yeah, and you know I this this video, this video is going to get me in so much trouble with so many people that I so dearly love but I, if I if I decided the point of this channel was to not be in trouble I never should have started it. But I you know I if we're if we're going to know things. We're going to know things that we might not like. To me, that is part and parcel of knowledge. And if we're going to have a will and if we're going to have knowledge, we're not going to always match up. And you know part of the so the Christian Reformed Church ordained women, you know that that fought that fight in the 70s 80s 90s and they sort of came to a political compromise. And so I've because of you know being born in the 60s and I've known women and continue to know women on both sides of these issues. And the irony is that you know some of the strongest women I know are like you. I mean you're Mary you're no, you know, you're no wallflower anybody who's watched any of our conversations or watches your channel. You are a strong woman and many some of the strongest women I've known have you know expressed beliefs similar to what you just presented. And that's something that I would hope because because there's a you know part of what Part of what conflict does conflict brings some good things into the world usually because you know I was listening to Karen and Michael the video that Karen just released of her and Michael's latest talk and Karen was reflecting on the fact that she was a woman. You know I was listening to Karen and Michael the video that Karen just released of her and Michael's latest talk and Karen was reflecting on you know infants and toddlers and toddlers want something and that wanting of that thing makes those toddlers do really hard things like learn to crawl and learn to walk and that that that energy is really important for us. And, and so, you know, obstacles are really important for us to, to, to sum up that masculine energy to colonize and dominate and control and and get things done. But then there's, you know, these other energies to that are also needed and so the toddler on one hand needs to learn to marshal those energies those masculine energies, but then there are these feminine energies that the toddler also must master that the toddler can't just, you know, lay waste to the lay waste to the playpen against siblings and and others that has to learn to play and and you know we have to we have to get these things right. So, I don't know Mary I I I'm not signing off with this but I always enjoy talking to you because I always learned so much from you. And a lot of that is because of, you know, we, for those of you who haven't seen Mary in my first conversation where she told her story I'll put the link down below, maybe have a whole playlist just for Mary but you know you have you have learned much in your journey. And you see and here's an irony again because part of the reason I don't, and this again is a Protestant Catholic thing, part of the reason I don't like keeping women from teaching roles in the church is because you Mary are such a good teacher. Well, okay. But this is a Protestant Catholic thing you're not a priest, a teacher. Right, because, you know, I, women can be teachers. They're just not, you know, they're not priests, they're not, they're not teaching from the, they're not teaching from the pulpit, but probably most of you know. Okay, so woman is an icon of the church and the church is a teacher. And mother part of the role of being a mother is being a teacher. And mother part of the role of being a mother is being a teacher. Many of the teachers in in Catholic schools are women. And on top of that even in the seminaries women professors teach seminarians. So, having having women teach. Having women teach is not an issue. The issue is, but see then we have, we have a liturgy and we have the mass and we have, you know, we have that structured worship, where when we read things in the scriptures about that have to do with the worship. We're reading it. That that was the mass that was going on. No one they're talking about those things are talking about the mass. You know what I'm saying. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so we're looking at it, we're looking at it as, you know, instructions for the liturgy. And once you get outside of that particular structure. You know, women can can teach women can lead in certain in certain areas. But, you know, it's so that, you know, that's why it's so it's so I don't know we say, let's say annoying but that's not quite the right word grading and so grading. When these women go well, you know, women should have authority in the church. It's like, you know, you have plenty of authority already for goodness sakes. Have they ever been to a church? I know. And it's like, you know, and men will even say priests will even say you know the women basically run the run the parish. So, it's just this matter of looking at it's this matter of looking at, you know, if there's a position that a man has it's like, she says I've got to have that position and see that attitude is wrong but it's not just that attitude is not just wrong for women that is wrong for everyone. You know, if anyone is sitting on the congregation watching the priest and saying, well, I should be I should be up there. I should have that position. I should have that authority, I should have that power. A bunch of us would say, would you like it. Really. Okay. I'll give it to you. I'll say if a man goes if a man goes to the, you know, to a spiritual director or to a vocations director in a, in a, in a diocese and says, I should be a priest, I should be a priest because I want that power and I want that. You know, that's, we've already discerned that you're not quite the material for, you know, so we don't want men with that attitude either in that position. And then, you know, so part of what, you know, part. So I've watched Protestants try to navigate this field and and so you know one of the things that I saw in. Once the once the issue came up the way it did. Then suddenly I watched churches and in the Protestant world we have the egalitarian versus complementarian churches and the complementarian churches won't let women serve in certain offices the egalitarian churches will allow the women to serve in different offices, but very quickly Then I watched the complementarian churches have all kinds of rules that started creeping in. Okay, women may not women may teach Sunday school until boys get to be 13 and then you know after that women may not teach them I'm thinking, where's this coming from and then, you know, if there's a if there's a ministry in the church. And a woman wants to lead it then she's got to have her husband right there with her leading it and I'm watching and thinking, where's this stuff coming from. And so, and I, you know, my, my service in the third in the developing world was in the Dominican Republic where it would have been and And, you know, the, the crazy, crazy, the very So, so in those churches, even though they could be rabidly anti Roman Catholic because of course they're coming out of Catholicism and they're, they're evangelicals. You know what you would not have a woman pastor, but every church of any size would have a dama mission era, which would be called you know was which is a lady missionary basically and those damas mission era stay they wielded great power in the church. And, and so, you know, I look at these questions and I look at the church, trying to figure out exactly how to do some of these dances and you know even one of the interesting You know, one of the interesting conversations that has arisen on the discord and of course not everybody. There are some people who live on that discord and and you know those of us like you and I will pop in and out and such. But one of the interesting things for me that has arisen on the discord have been all of these comparing notes between Protestant Catholic and Orthodox A lot across a whole range of issues. And so as when I look at a, you know, I am, I understand very clearly why You're not going to have women priests in the Roman Catholic Church. And I'm just going to say that as such. I'm not even going to say anytime soon as people. I mean, because the entire function. He's the father that priest is different from a Protestant minister in many ways, but part of what we're seeing now is in these conversations are Figuring out the role and function of how people are to be fed and so people will go to their parish church and they will celebrate the mass with the father homilies will be very short, but they might You know, derive a good bit of instruction from watching your channel or watching Bishop Baron or even watching me and you know we're continuing to see this In each In each contextual cultural challenge, we're continuing to see the church. You know, meet those challenges and needs of the people and and I think obviously the Protestant Reformation was whichever way we think about it and attempt at least to address that. But I I again I for one, maybe it's just my weird high and openness nature, but I have I have benefited greatly from you and from You know, Brett sock old. I mean what what I haven't learned from this guy and from Jonathan Peugeot and the original And and and and and and And you see my conversation with the Orthodox priest. No, no. Is that on your channel. I'll watch that. Well, he'll be coming back father Tom. He's a he's a longtime friend of mine. Okay, I think I did see some of it. Now that I now that you mentioned it because I thought, well, I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that. Because because so we're in this world where we as Christians and really the the newest wave in the Christian reform church probably the most vital wave in the Christian reform church is not sort of the mainline ish or the evangelical Ish or the confessional reform dish, the kind of new emerging faction in my denomination. I would call the neo sacramentalists or the the reformed Catholics within the Christian reform church because there's a real wave of the new Reformed church. And I think that's the most important thing to think about. And I think that's the most important thing to think about. I would call the neo sacramentalists or the the reformed Catholics within the Christian reform church because there's a real wave of coming to terms with aspects of the reformation. Understanding the Catholicity of the church, not reading Calvinists necessarily of the 17th century as much that sort of went in a different direction, but reading the john Calvin who knew well his church fathers and And, and so, you know, there's a lot going on right now in the church, but at the same time, I mean, we started on a And maybe I successfully just derailed this uncomfortable conversation, but we talked started talking about Dave and David and you know you're a fan of the Rubin report and Well, I have, you know, I have some of your sensitivities to with regard to the politics, because I, you know, I often feel like Same way that I felt about Jordan Peterson to is that there's not enough coming to grips with some of the with some of the pervasive injustices of the of the society, you know, and I've talked about that on my channel I mean my when I started the district, the distributist series I started off talking about, you know, I call it can distributism answer game these questions. Because I'm bouncing off of the game be conversation on rebel wisdom which I noticed you've been paying attention to also. And so they're asking questions and one of the one of the people they had on there actually said, Well, what are the other models that we have for civilization. You know, can we, can we, can we learn anything from the Middle Ages. Did you hear him say that. Yeah. You know, but people when people think of the Middle Ages, they don't. First of all, middle ages is big. So, you know, what century are you talking about right thousand years. Yeah, yeah. And so, you know, people don't. So, you know, people don't. People often have an understanding in the Middle Ages, it's kind of like they're thinking 11th 12th century something like that they're not thinking 13th 14th century. And so, you know, I think that's the transition. The tremendous, the tremendous technological advances that were made during the Middle Ages, mostly at the monasteries. Yeah, yeah, you know, the machinery that was being created. And the, and the understanding of plant genetics and animal genetics and all of that that was going on. And so, you know, one, you know, to sum up real briefly what I did on the distributism. I did a series of three videos on how their bell ox know their bell lock is Chesterton's great friend right GK Chesterton hello. And, in fact, George Bernard Shaw called them together the chest, the Chester bellock. He treated them like they were one animal, you know, and so the, the bell rock wrote the servile state. Well, what he did was go through the history to starting talking about the economy, the economy of ancient Rome, which was a servile state where much of the labor was done by slaves, and then talked about how did the church reformulate society all through the Middle Gradually eliminating slavery and coming to the point where you had what we call a distributed economy, which is an economy of wide ownership. So that productive property was widely distributed throughout the society. And then what happened to that, how did that change and we get back into a situation where most people do not own productive property productive properties only in the hands of a few and other men have to work for them. So that's, Mary. Distributism is not communism, and the church is very much against communism. In fact, what we say, I'm distributed will say is that the problem with capitalism is not that there are too many capitalists is that there are not enough capitalists. So, so it's not it's definitely not communists is definitely not, you know, Marxism or anything like that. But that's the question that people are asking with the questions that people are asking is, if we didn't have, excuse me, let me go to more. If we didn't have this. If we didn't have this capitalist since capitalism, the way that we have it is the only alternative communism or socialism, is that the only alternative. And distributism says no, there's an there's another way and we already have a model of it. We have a model of it in productive property widely distributed throughout the economy of the late Middle Ages, which it took the church like 1000 years to build that economy and to develop the habits of mind and people that would support that economy. So that's kind of the question. The other thing that Hitler bell brings out, I talk about in my series is he says that if you can have all the political freedom in the world. But if you don't have economic freedom, you'll lose some political freedom. That's right. That's true. And I think, you know, I think we've seen that. And, and we're seeing that in, you know, again, the income or the wealth disparities continuing to grow. And in many ways, poverty, poverty is not a lack of cash. Poverty is far deeper and more pervasive and more multifaceted than just a lack of disposable income or, you know, other ways that we tend to measure it in a facile way. Well, Brett Weinstein in his last, he put out one today, but the one, the last one he did before today, his conversation he has with his wife. Yeah, the last one he talked about subsidiarity. And he, and he even said, he said, well, there's this thing called subsidiarity. He says, and he said something like, and oddly enough, it comes out of the Catholic Church. And he started talking about, so, you know, people are asking these questions, and they are questions that there are thinkers in the Catholic Church. Bishop Fulton Sheen was, you know, always railing about, you know, this, this situation. He said he had a saying, is own or be owned. So he was very much for the idea that people ought to own their own productive property. And, and if they didn't, they were going to be in, in, in bad shape. Well, it's, you know, I, I'm optimistic by temperament, but I, I do think, you know, I listen to, you know, many of the same, we both listen to many of the same people. And I, I, I am not, I am not pessimistic about where they'll wind up, because I do believe that, you know, I do believe that when people begin to learn a little bit more and discover a little bit more, and maybe if we can not be such jerks with each other about people who aren't in our tribe, and that, like your example of Brett Weinstein's, you know, discovering this, I think we're going to see more of that. You know, I, someone just sent me a clip of Sargon of a Cod, who's, you know, basically, and I think we're hearing a lot of this people who had sort of really bitten hard on the atheist thing, you know, sort of looking at their options now and saying, gosh, those Christians weren't so bad. I think I'm going to have, if I'm going to deal with a fundamentalist, at least I want to deal with someone who says, a fundamentalist who's following someone who died for his enemies. That's not a bad fundamentalist to, to have around. Yeah, yeah. What, well, you know, I think things are, things look really bad in our country right now. But they're not bad in my neighborhood. And they're not bad in most neighborhoods, I don't think. I think that we can get an impression. Now it's bad. I mean in Atlanta, I don't know if you heard what happened in Atlanta yesterday, is that some protesters were shooting off some, some guns. And killed an eight year old girl in a car. Very, very sad. But, you know, I'm not in Atlanta. I mean, it's not that far from me, but I'm not in Atlanta. And it's not, I think most, most people know about this stuff and it's get traction and takes up space in their head because it's so much on the news. But, but I really think it's, it's magnified. Are you thinking that it's being magnified for us that it's looking, people say, oh, the whole country's on fire and I'm like, you know, I don't think the whole country's on fire. That's part of the media distortion and now we not only have mass media but we also have social media that's distorting everybody's filters. But I, I, you know, I've lived my whole or most of my life at the intersection of black and white America. And, Well, I've lived a lot of my life there too. My, my children's father is black. And so, oh, I didn't know that. Yeah, yeah. So, yeah. So I'm, I'm, I'm, and I see, I see the new education. And I'm really disturbed at how this is molding children to think about others that they don't know they might look at me and say, well, Paul, you're, you know, you've always been good to me, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, but you're not like most white people. And I think, actually say that to you. Oh yeah, you think they have. Yeah. Goodness gracious. Yeah, yeah, it's, it's not. These things, and especially with the young, because, you know, not so much in Sacramento. Sacramento is quite integrated. And the schools are quite integrated. But in Patterson, I mean, a lot of those kids, they didn't get it. They didn't, they didn't go much further than a few blocks from where they were living. And, you know, the people at Northside were some of the only white people they knew up close that they could actually touch, you know, when they were kids. And when I was a day camp counselor, I mean, the kids were all over me, they're feeling my head and, you know, checking out the body parts and they think because they want to, you know, what is this strange? Is he like us? Because, you know, they were living in a fairly monolithic ghetto situation. And, well, you know, I used to live in Miami. And of course, Miami is very cosmopolitan. I basically I grew up in Miami. And, you know, it's got a lot of Cubans. And, you know, black Haitian, a lot of people, most of the people in Miami when I was growing up were, were from the most the Americans were from New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Ohio. Because like, you hardly ever met anybody, you know, that actually was, you know, intergenerational or multigenerational. Kind of like California. Yeah. So, but I remember having the conversation with somebody one time. It was a black friend of mine when I was in Miami and they were saying, talking about, you know, getting more black people on television, that it was important to have more black people on television. That, you know, it would be, it would be good when like half the people that you saw on television were black. And I, and I said to this friend of mine, he said, what percentage of the country do you think is black? I was like, well, probably about, you know, 50%. I was like, no, like if some, at that time it was like 11%. You know, so you, you think, but if you grow up in a certain area, you think that everywhere is, is like that. But I mean, you could travel to some parts of the country. I mean, my husband grew up in Wisconsin and there were no black people in the town that he grew up in. Yeah, yeah. So, so, you know, it's, people, people are shaped by their immediate environment. They think that the whole world is like that. Yeah, yeah. And that's, that's the way it is. And so I, yeah, no, I, I, I don't know, pray for our country. And, but I, at the same time, God is good and I trust him. And so anyway, so I don't know, did we, did we do you justice here, Mary? You got more you want to talk about now you're on the channel or do you want to go back to the Daves or what's your pleasure, Mary? No, I think, I think this is good. I think we can wrap it up. I really, I really appreciate it. I enjoyed getting to talk to you again. You know, I think you're, I think you're just such a loving person and it comes across in your videos so well. And I think that's, that's touching a lot of people. I can see it like when you have the conversations in the discord and stuff, you know, I listened to them after you recorded them. And, and I can just hear that people are being impressed. And I mean, what, what else is there for any of us Christians to do but to bring, you know, to bring God's love into the world. That's what we're supposed to do. That's what's gonna, that's what's gonna really, I think, change people. You know, I had a conversation with a friend of mine the other day and I was saying, you know, let me see how you would answer this. Because I've asked several people and I've gotten, I've gotten the same answer from, from several of them. So if, if you were to go to a person who doesn't really know, have any Christians around him, you know, a secular person, and you were to ask that person, a person in the United States, and you were to say, What is a Christian community that you know of that you think really lives a Christian life? What do you think they would say? If I were to ask this person who didn't know many Christians? Who didn't know, who didn't really didn't know, know Christians, just had to go by the meat from the media, you know, and you asked them, what is a group of Christians that you know of? In the United States that really is living a Christian life, who do you think they would say? I think they would pick the politically caricatured fundamentalists because those are the only Christians that they hear about. Oh, well, that's one answer, perhaps. But yeah, I've had several people say the Amish. Yeah, they got the Amish got some attention with the, you know, with that tragedy of the killing of those schoolgirls. And that that I think got some people's attention and I think that's true in talking to. So, you know, now because of the channel and because of the meetups and because of all of this, I obviously have many more conversations with people with quite a bit less experience with Christians and the, you know, there are these there are these cartoons in the media that are Christians and they tend to be the, you know, Jerry Falwell or a, you know, of course, of course, through kind of the and again, I get the point that you made previously. In the United States, I have always lived in blue areas. Okay, New York, New Jersey metropolitan area college campus Grand Rapids is sort of more mixed Sacramento sort of bluish. So someone who lives in the Bible Belt or someplace like that or in the Midwest, you know, their mileage may vary. But in many of the people. Gosh, but then how to generalize about people because every single one you meet is different. What is it about the Amish that drew people's attention? Well, and I think this is forgiveness. It was their forgiveness. Yes, but I think that, you know, people when when when someone really forgets people identify that as being Christian behavior. You know, they recognize a lot of a lot of the people who don't know any Christians. I don't hear them saying that. I still hear Christians are Christians are people who believe in superstitious stories that want to deny people their freedom. I live in Sacramento. And I lived outside of New York. And but I don't hear that in the black community. The black community is very different. So it a lot depends on on where they're speaking from. But I think part of the part of what caught the attention of the Amish and I think this is also part of why Roman Catholic and Orthodox churches are growing in certain segments, maybe not enough to, you know, tip the balance of those who are leaving. Is there's a there's kind of the sense that if you're going to be religious, be religious enough to be weird and to and to show you're serious about it because the Amish show they're serious. Right. And the Orthodox and the Catholic show they're serious that a lot of Protestants, you know, even though Amish are Protestant, a lot of Protestants don't. That's what Rod Dreher is trying to get us all to do. Yeah, yeah. Well, there's Benedict option and and be weird, be weird Christians. Isabel Burton Young Young is that Isabel Burton. I know that Julian Julian follows her pretty carefully. So, but she had a right or no no no she's no she's a reporter, but she she wrote a very interesting piece in I think it was the New York Times on weird Christianity. And, and I think what people are sensing is that if they're going to do something as countercultural as be a Christian, they might as well go all the way because that's the only kind we're really going to respect. So the Amish right Catholic or the Orthodox. Right. Yeah. People want to see a sign of contradiction. Yes, yes, they do. And that's what we then that's what we need to be we need to be a sign of contradiction we show that contradiction to the war of the world when we forgive one more loving. Yes, yes. You know, that is that is the kind of contradiction that I would like to see the church and I think, you know, when when you get sort of out of the media space because I think that's a huge distortion field. And often when you talk to regular people who wind up, you know, they will say things like, you know what when I, I visited that church and they were nice to me. And I had some needs and they helped me out. And they didn't really push all their stuff on me. They were respectful of me and you'll find some bad actors out there but I often, I often get a lot of bad comments from people who are not I often, I often note that total strangers will show up and knock on my door. And that's not because they think that the building is filled with hateful bigots, but because they think there's at least some chance that someone might give them five or $20 just for asking for it. And that says something. I mean, we're dupes, but at least we're nice dupes. Well, one of my friends said to me one time, we were talking about giving people money on the street, you know whether you should give to beggars and you know there's this kind of conversation on Facebook as a conversation that, you know, people say well you shouldn't give them money because we're just going to buy booze or, you know, use it on drugs or something like that. You should go and buy them a meal or something. Instead, there's all the conversation this friend of mine came in and said, you should, you should give to them, give to them, even if they're undeserving, because GK Chesterton said, you can only give charity to the undeserving. If they're deserving it's justice. I'll tell you, I have been reading more and more Chesterton. That guy, that guy was something else. So that, so that really, that was like a real transformational conversation with me for me, number of years ago. And it's actually the thing that got me into distributism anyway, and got me into Chesterton was that statement. So, yeah, and I think it might have been, I don't know who was who said, somebody said that the beggar, it might have been Dostoevsky, Dostoevsky was in it, that the beggar is the protagonist of history. Because we are all beggars before God. Wow. That's good. So, see I learned so much from you Mary, I always do. You have such good stuff. Hey, look at this, the two of you, Brad Wienstein and Heather Heine keep talking about Chesterton's friends. I know he brings it up all the time. And it's like, Brett, you should read a little more that guy, but he's not as accessible as Lewis. timeless, just had a way of writing that just, you know, just so smooth and Chesterton, you got to work, you got to, you know, sometimes he'll say something, it'll be like, I really got to think about that. Yeah, yeah, he is. Well, Chesterton, Chesterton didn't write. I mean, what he wrote was timeless, but he embedded it so much in with references to his time. Yes. That it makes it a little hard to tease, to tease things out. Yeah. Because a lot of the people that he references or situations he references, we don't know what he's talking about. Yes. Yes. And Lewis did that too, in some of his books, The Great Divorce, Pilgrim's Pilgrim's Regress. A lot of those books have a lot of contemporary, you know, their contemporary references that I read them. I mean, Mr. H.G. Wells, and it's like, I know this much H.G. Wells, and, you know, there's obviously a vivid cultural conversation going on there that I'm missing a lot of. Yeah, with Chesterton and Belloc, it's George Bernard Shaw. He was their great, he was their great antagonist. Yeah, yeah. Well, but for Chesterton, you know, some of his chapters, and I think it was Heretics, you know, he's also got great love for Bernard Shaw. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, they were great friends. They were constantly together. Yeah, yeah. In fact, there's a wonderful picture of George Bernard Shaw, Chesterton, and Belloc together. So you know, it's like, you know, all the stuff that we're doing, they were the IDW of their time. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But there were some Christians in there. Depends how we define our little IDW here. I don't know, you're the pastor of the IDW. Look at my flock. They're avoiding me. I'm too low status for them. They've got nothing to gain talking to me. So, but I think they have a lot to gain talking to. I have no reason to complain. I have been richly blessed by everything that has happened in the last two and a half years of my life. It's been quite a ride. So, yeah. Well, I feel the same. I feel the same about my life. You know, I feel the same about my whole life. My whole life has been quite a ride. You know, I've had a lot of interesting experiences and talked to a lot of interesting people. And so, you know, God is good and faithful and, you know, we'll just keep on keeping on. So, I will see you around, Paul. Okay, Mary, until we talk again, again, always, always a treasure to talk to you. You're a real blessing to me. Well, thank you. And if you're not watching Mary's channel, go over there and subscribe. Because she's got a lot of really, if you've learned from her today, you'll learn more listening to her. There you go. Thanks for the plug. All right, Mary, take care. You too. Bye. Bye.