https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vwxjCLZFFq0

 This is your immediate life and so I'm going to build a hierarchical structure. So let's say something happens. Let's say your son got married. You're engaged in that, right? You're interested. Yeah. Okay, but you're obviously, sorry, because the degree of separation here is very small. Like it's very relevant to you in an immediate way. Yeah. Okay, no, it might be something more distant. Maybe the, his wife, sister, something happened there. Now, you're still going to be interested, but less so. And then if I tell you, John Levkowitz just had a child, you don't really care about that, right? Don't know who he is. No, right. Exactly. Yeah, I just made it up. But what happens if something that's completely foreign to you, how do you get something that's completely foreign to you? If something that's completely foreign to you engages, for example, you watch Better Call Saul, right? And you don't know any of these people. They're not even, they're fictional characters. There's something there that engages you, right? So what I would posit is that the further away it is, the deeper in terms of your internal mechanisms you have to go in order for it to be relevant. So, yes, actually being engaged in something that's that's on the surface completely foreign is a sign that is that it is very profound. Yeah. So that's that's what I wanted to share. Yeah, no, I think that's very true. And so then the structures. So if you were to tell me that whatever this dude's name was is a pro wrestler, well, that would go, that would go into this conversation. But when let's say, okay, so a current example that King Charles has cancer has cancer. Oh, okay. Well, now we're going deep and he's not even my king. I mean, the whole American Revolution, but Americans still follow him. And then, Pope Francis, you know, there's all this drama around the pope and it's like, I'm Protestant, I'm American, I'm not connected to Charles, I'm not connected to the pope. Oh, but, you know, and so then and then someone comes along and says, I've got proof Martin Luther was gay. And it's, oh, now suddenly. No, you're exactly right that where I think that's an excellent observation. So so so then the next thing is going to be related to McGill Christ, which is why we have a corpus of stories that is at the base of our culture, both of our cultures. And why is it a story? So I was thinking of, because you have essentially two ways of representing ideas. One is a story. The other is a model and abstraction. So what I just did, for example, was a model with the points and the lines. And what's what's the difference between them? What what are they? So here's my thing on it right now. And actually, I'm reading McGill Christ's book. I've been listening to him for a while, but I'm reading his book also because it's going to play into my PhD, probably, his work and. And. Essentially, stories are the master brain, the right brain way of representing reality, whereas models are left brain and. A good model is going to be actually immune to interpretation. The point of a model is to decontextualize it in such a way that there is nothing there left to misconstrue. A model is aimed to distill a specific idea in a specific way. It's a freezing in time of a concept and taking it outside of any. Yeah, any grounding. Yep. And it's to, you know, in my language, it's to raise it up. It gets it off off the ground. And so it's transcendent. It's universal in some. Well, that's the hope of it. But then there will be even if. Yeah, so even if it is. It might be universal, but it's not not everyone is going to either understand it or be able to. It's not transjective. Right. Right. Where I'm going with this and stories are a story is. A representation of actually how we perceive the world. And because our cultural stories. So. So stories are transjective and. Because the stories that we're talking about at the bedrock of our culture. Are profound because of how the stories that are profound managed to survive across time and the evolution of religion. And that's something. Because these are profound stories, no matter how distant you find them. You should be able to connect with them on some level based on what I. The model that I just gave you, if it's if it's correct. So we have deep even just the physicality because you know this personhood. I mean, there's there's super deep reasons why. Even in this model, we can connect with stories. Yep. Tracking. Yeah, so, so. So these stories, because they they can touch. The deepest recesses of our minds or souls or whatever. It doesn't matter how distant they are to any one individual. There's always something there. To to grab onto and. And also stories, they're not a distillation. So they have a lot of. What could for some reason would just be noise, but they have a lot of distinct parts and. And this allows for much broader relevance realization, much more encompassing. So for. For me, if I watch a show, I can identify with one part and completely ignore another part, which is like the time of day or or the day of the weekend. For some people, maybe that will hold some significance. Whereas something I'm interested in wouldn't. So a story has a lot of. Different parts that. That can. Serve as a basis for for. For connection and understanding and. And then then you can have a culture that's based on the same stories and everyone agrees that it should be based on those same stories. So there's like I wrote a story allows for a generalizable hyper specificity. So everyone anyone. Can find their own very specific situation in in a good store. Yep. Yep. Okay. It's also important to recognize while we're being meta here that what we are doing is modeling story. Yep. Which is what I just. Earlier. Yeah. Yeah. And and so, you know, I just there was just a there was just a live stream with a somebody who's kind of made a little name for himself at the moment as a skeptic in the corner again and he. It was so interesting because once you begin to once you begin to recognize the elements of this model. And you hear people talk it's like, oh yeah, I just want clarity. And and you begin to notice that. Okay. I I just want this. I I'm looking. I'm really frustrated with let's say wrestling again. I'm really frustrated with wrestling because it doesn't fit them. It isn't a model. That's right. Wrestling is not a model. You can learn you can derive some models from it. You can learn about models through it. But the fact that it isn't a model. Hmm. And so if you become a dogmatist with respect to models, you can't actually live in models. Because they're not transjective. Exactly. Exactly. And and I would absolutely put stories above models in the hierarchy if only for the fact. So to talk to someone like that, the reason would be that it's much easier to take a story and create a compelling story and create a compelling model from that story. And you can think of literature analysis, then it would be the other way around. Right. You can't just take a model and okay craft a compelling story around that model. Right. It was funny when, you know, for a while, Peugeot was talking about story and people were like, okay, I'm going to take the model of an archetype. I'm going to craft a story around it. And those always make terrible stories. Yeah, that's that's my experience as well. You can tell when a story is aimed to to transmit a specific model where compared to when it's it's organic. Yeah, it's why Christian movies are often so terrible. Because certain Christianity, you know, especially in Protestant system. Well, here's the model. So let's make a story that, you know, perpetuates the model. It's usually a terrible story. Yep.