https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=h5ocTSiHmFU

 Hi, this is Paul, and I'm gonna work on a little bit of this video by a guy named, oh shoot, Maxwell. And he'll introduce himself once I start playing the video. But I'm gonna continue on my project of trying to figure out, no, just everything, trying to figure out how the world got split, how Jordan Peterson tries to put it together, how the history of philosophy and religion in the West have brought us to this place, how all this stuff works. That's basically what my channel's about. And again, in many ways, I think the gift that Jordan Peterson has given me and many of us, and I think a significant number of people in the Western world, at least the English speaking world now, and also in some non-English speaking places, is this, is basically an invitation to talk about these larger things in community, not just in community, because actually the church gives us that, but to create new communities where we are conversing about these things. Now, Esther sent me, Esther O'Reilly sent me this video by this guy, Maxwell. And again, I'll remember his name once I, he's got a little channel, SelfWire, about a little over a thousand subs. This video's views are in the hundreds, but Esther Saut was very impressed. She sent it to me, I was very impressed, and I said, you know, I definitely want to dive into this video quite a bit more. Now I'm going to start playing the video. He's going to introduce himself, and as is my usual practice, I'll butt in and give some commentary along the way. I'll have a link to his video. I'm only going to treat the first part of this video because, and you'll see why, and then I'm going to get into some more verveci today and maybe some Charles Taylor, and we'll see just how long it takes. I should cut myself off at an hour or two hours as I normally do. So let's let this guy introduce himself and we'll do some commentary. Nope. Nope. Okay. All the way to the beginning. Okay. Today we're going to give our best shot at classifying Jordan Peterson's biblical hermeneutic because okay, so he, he does a nice job on videos better than me because I don't edit and I don't have a nice little musical introduction and I don't have, you know, I don't have a nice show. Maybe I'm just feeling my own insecurities as a YouTuber, but he's today, this is, this is the thing he's doing today. He's going to give Jordan Peterson's hermeneutic. Now right away when he used that word, it stuck out at me because there's actually a long history behind that word and the reason that word becomes such a trigger point within competing and conflicting Christian tribes is because that word, a hermeneutic, is basically in layman's terms, the rules by which we use to interpret the Bible. And this approach to the Bible really comes out of the modern worldview. I'm not going to get too, too much into that. In this video at some point I will, but again, some of you are saying, well, let the guy talk. Well, if you want to watch the video, watch this whole video through, maybe put me in a window next to him so you can hear him uninterrupted. And in this side, I'm going to interrupt him. So okay, so here does this nice introduction and okay, today we're going to give our best shot at classifying Jordan Peterson's biblical hermeneutic because his method has always been ambiguous to me and whenever he speaks about God, he does so straightforwardly, but in a way that feels difficult to classify. And that's really true. Here we are today trying to put him in a box, even though he doesn't really like to be put in a box. So let me see if I can, why can't I remember this guy's name? Maxwell is his last name, Jordan Peterson, Dr. Paul Maxwell. And he's going to give, he's got a systematic PhD in systematic theology. So Dr. Paul Maxwell, why can't I remember his first name? He's got the same first name as me. So Paul Maxwell, he's got this interesting channel that I cruised through and I've seen a few of his other videos, got his channel up in this tab too. Really kind of interesting, really kind of interesting mashup of masculinity issues, man issues, Christianity, kind of anti-political correctness, kind of anti, I don't want to say necessarily anti-feminism, I don't want to put him in a box, but some of you will, some of you might enjoy his channel. I know a lot of people who would hate it. But it's, I've listened to, I've listened to some of his, I've listened to Christian Hedonists, see that there's a lot of inter-tribal things here, you talk about Christian Hedonism, you're going to talk within reformed circles and he locates himself, at least as coming out of the reformed community. Maybe I'll talk to Paul at some point. But Christian Hedonism then gets into John Piper and that whole strain of Christian, of conservative reformed Christian tribes. So there's a lot of interesting stuff going on here. He did graduate work in terms of PTSD and trauma and psychology, so in that sense he's got a lot of tools with which he can converse with Jordan Peterson and he's going to make mention of those as he gets into this. So let's let him talk some more. Jordan Peterson, psychology professor at the University of Toronto. If you don't know who he is, you've been living in a box for a long time. Okay? So, Jordan Peterson is a public intellectual. He has ignited much political controversy over the past few years for many reasons, which we won't get into. But he first caught my eye after first appearing on the Joe Rogan podcast. I forget what number it was, but he was talking about the psychological significance of the Bible, which is likewise the title of his lecture series, consumed by literally watched by millions of viewers on YouTube. So let's get down to brass tacks. I have my BA in biblical languages, Greek, Hebrew, and Latin. I can read the original texts of the Bible. I have my MDiv from Westminster Theological Seminary. Okay, now Westminster. I didn't say Westminster, West or East. Again, if I talk to him, we'll figure out some more of his stuff. There's so much intramural tribal reform stuff. Westminster East was founded by a breakout group within the Presbyterian fights, the modernist fundamentalist fights. Some CRC people were instrumental in founding Westminster. Westminster kind of grows out of the modernist fundamentalist fight when in old Princeton, when Princeton broke up, and then the conservative refugees founded then Westminster in Philadelphia. Later on, another Westminster Theological Seminary, I don't exactly know their relationship was someone who would usually inform me in the comment section. Another Westminster Theological Seminary was founded in Southern California. Now both of these are very conservative reformed seminaries, but they've also kind of got their different resonances. Westminster East has a lot of connection to me, but some resonance with me because Westminster East, Tim Keller taught a little while at Westminster East. Westminster East also took part in some of this early urban reformed ministry stuff that very much my father resonated with. And that was a context that I grew out of, one of the strains that I grew out of this reformed urban inner city emphasis. Urbana in the 80s had some of the speakers were there. Harvey Kahn was in that group. Ray Bakke, again, most of you don't know any of these names, but some of you do. So that was Westminster East. Westminster West had some of their different emphases and they've been quite well known in reformed circles as again, conservative reformed the White Horse Inn with, I can't forget his name, I can't remember his name right now. But also some connections with the CRC, actually some connections with the CRC split off the URC in Chino, Escondido, Ontario, California, Southern California, Imperial Valley, that area. So there's a lot of, these are a lot of connections to me, but they're kind of cousin layer connections. They're not really sibling layer connections in the CRC. They're cousin layer connections in like the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, the PCA. These are conservative breakouts from the PCUSA as it continues to have the, you can call it liberal conservative, you can call it modernist fundamentalist. None of those labels actually encompass at all, but he's from the Westminster tribe. So that locates him in my mind in terms of, and now if I talk to him, I'll obviously get a higher resolution, but this is conservative reformed. His channel is very interesting because he has kind of this masculinism and bodybuilding, which is like, well, that's kind of interesting. I hadn't heard any of that before. So you'd probably be appalled if I took off my shirt, but so it's interesting stuff. So let's let him talk some more. I don't know where he got that. So I'd like to find that out from him at some point. So when I first heard Peterson dignify, Peterson as a psychologist dignified theological concepts as indisputable for psychological flourishing using the text of the Bible, I became a fan instantly. And you know, same here. So I'm not surprised given, you know, some of the, some of the similarities and some of my formations with this other Paul that this would, that he would connect with Peterson and similar, similar ways to what I did. Because he spoke with such fluency. I had never heard someone traverse the terrain of theology and behaviorism and psychodynamic theory and continental philosophy so fluently and so eloquently. Okay. So since that time, my admiration for Peterson, quite honestly, has only solidified, but there is a theme in his interviews where those with religious interests or even those with anti-religious interests, they find Peterson hard to nail down and he admits as such. Okay. So there's one interview in which Peterson was asked, do you believe in God? And Peterson answered in quote, I don't like that question. Okay. And I've heard him give this answer several times. I don't like that question. What do you mean by that question? It depends on what you mean. Okay. And that can seem like he is sort of kicking the can down the road, but I don't think he is. Okay. Because he goes on to qualify what he means by that in a way that, well, we're going to examine that a little bit further below. But the initial observation that we can make about Peterson is that he really, he self-consciously resists simple, reductive analysis with the popular categories of ideological analysis, you know, of which both Christian theologians and secular psychologists make regular use. And I think he's dead on right here. I think so. He and I are really tracking here in terms of, okay, why does Peterson resist this? It's this is the reason. This is the reason he will do you believe in God? He gives he doesn't like the question because I think Paul is exactly right here. So so here we're basically going to make an initial attempt to classify elements of Peterson's thought. And if classify is too strong of a term, I can imagine Peterson sort of pushing back on that term. Maybe we could just say that there are some strong conceptual resonances between certain tools that Peterson finds central to his project. And again, I really like the way he just phrased that because I think that's exactly right. Classify resonances, resonances a little looser, you know, conceptually, I think that's a better way to approach it. So, again, I heard this stuff and I was like, wow, this guy's really this guy's really nailing it. So keep going in certain modes of thinking, which help us to sketch kind of the architecture of his project relative to the Bible and likewise to God. And God is a concept that operates close to the center of his focus, focus, focus as a YouTuber. It's like we lost focus and it will be helpful for us to sort of locate him conceptually and historically on certain spectrums. Perhaps we can do so without requiring him to take on the burdens of the insufficiencies of other ideologies. So I'm going to go back and I got distracted by the focus thing because he said some important things there. Likewise, which help us to sketch kind of the architecture of his project relative to the Bible and likewise to God. And God is a concept that operates close to the center of his system. And it will be helpful for us to sort of locate him conceptually and historically on certain spectrums. Now, what he's doing here is he's got a PhD. So he's he's well versed in academics and this little move that we make psychologically where there's kind of a a flat world approach where you approach Peterson and say, is here, isn't he a Christian? Now, again, Peterson objects because he says, well, what do you mean by Christian? What do you mean by belief? What do you mean by God? To a certain degree, with with certain populations, if you say those kind of things, you're dodging. And and that's a function of a certain approach to the world. Now, Paul here obviously has a significant amount of academic training. And one of the things that you learn as an academic is a certain amount of detachment where you say, OK, Peterson's out here. So let's leave him out here and let's kind of walk all the way around him and see him from all different sides. And then we're going to well, if we're not going to categorize him, we're going to look at the resonances. We're going to try and get a try and get a sense of conceptually where he fits into the world and how his world is working. And this is this kind of academic detachment is what schools train us to do. Now, is it a good thing? Is it a bad thing? I'm not going to go too far into this. But this, in a sense, allows us to take a bunch of these questions that certain groups want to rush to questions like if Jordan Peterson dies tonight, will he go to heaven? Or is God pleased with Jordan Peterson? These are I'm not saying these are insignificant questions or unimportant questions, but in many ways his approach and often my approach wants to kind of hold these questions at bay and say, OK, I'm not going to say these questions are illegitimate. I'm not going to say these questions are unimportant, but I am going to say that these questions are contextual. And I'd like to do something else over here for a while, because I think actually the work we do over here will probably, if you're really interested in these questions, help to inform you. There are other people listening that are not interested in those questions at all because they are not that simply not the world that they believe in. And I've made the comment before that evangelism explosion towards the middle and end of the 20th century was a favorite evangelistic tool of evangelical Christians. They would go door to door. They would knock on the door and ask someone if you were to die tonight, what would you say to Jesus to for him to let you into his heaven? Now, apart from actually deconstructing that question itself, that entire approach is embedded within a belief system, within a worldview that has certain features. And again, now I'm practicing the same academic detachment right there. Right now, I'm not saying that this worldview is true or false. I myself am a relatively conservative Christian believer, so I certainly have ideas about I usually tweak the language, life of the age to come, communion with Christ, living in Christ. I'd rather use some of those more biblical terms rather than some of the more fashionable, contextualized terms that we tend to bump into more in evangelicalism. But they even say, oh, Vanderklaay, you're just confusing the whole thing. Yeah, OK, so I am. But I'm not trying to confuse. I'm actually trying to illuminate and articulate and specify and enlighten. What Paul is doing here is the same thing. He's saying. Let's hold back on jumping to conclusions for certain answers about Jordan Peterson too quickly. Let's let's first, if we want to get the clearest picture of him, if we want to do the fairest analysis of his project from any given perspective, it's important that we first understand his project within a certain context. I think Paul is probably particularly well suited to engage in this because he has obviously an interest in trauma studies. He's got a background in theology. And so I'm not at all surprised that he listened to Jordan Peterson said, oh, look at that. This sounds interesting. And he's kind of dived into this. Now, this entire video, if you get to the end of it, you find that in some ways this entire video is an application posted on YouTube, hoping that Jordan Peterson will find not a lot of people have found the video yet. Now, I know after I post it, a bunch more people will find it. So Paul, you're welcome for the little bump. You're probably going to get in your subscription. Not a big bump, just a little bump. But that's the project here. And I like this is the kind of video I love. You know, I love talking about Jordan Peterson. I love taking it apart. I love taking it apart with with someone who's got a good perspective and some background and someone with whom we can talk about a little bit later. He's going to talk about Hegel and Kant and and and Boltman and Paul Tillich and then American pragmatists like varieties of religious experience. So on and on and on and on. So this is I love to nerd out over the stuff. And and this guy's an interesting nerd. He's got his nerdiness and he's got his manhood stuff and he's got his health stuff. So this is what's so cool about the world. There's so many interesting people and so much interesting stuff going on. So here you can find a guy whose study comes out of a very conservative reformed background and he's nerding out on masculinity stuff and bodybuilding stuff. And Jordan Peterson and watch a bunch of his videos. He nerds out, but he nerds out in his own nerdy way. So and you know, I'll shut up about that too much. I get myself in trouble. Perhaps we can do so without requiring him to take on the burdens of the insufficiencies of other ideologies. So that's a quick way of saying let's let's let's kind of respect who he is out there and let's try to get a 360 degree view around him before we jump in with our judgments and within our own categories. And try to locate him too quickly within our own frames of reference. And this again is a very this is what academia trains you to do. So but we we we have to keep in mind that the discipline from which Peter Peterson speaks is psychology. Okay. So when he speaks of God, he speaks of the effects of God in psychological metrics. That's really crucial. And he said it very, very well. He speaks of the effects of God within psychological metrics. This is Jordan Peterson's project. And again, a lot of both Christians and atheists when they listen to Peterson and he even though Peterson keeps giving the disclaimer, I'm speaking from a psychological perspective. I'm speaking from a psychological perspective. I'm not speaking from a theological perspective. I'm not speaking from a political perspective. I'm speaking from a psychological perspective. Paul just asserted is a great articulation of exactly what Peterson is trying to say. Let's let's listen to it again because it was really well said. Speaks of that the discipline from which Peter Peterson speaks is psychology. Okay. So when he speaks of God, he speaks of the effects of God in psychological metrics. The effects of God within psychological metrics. Peterson obviously has done a lot of work on psychological metrics. And all this stuff that he did with with Colin DeYoung. That's kind of his main discipline. Now the effects of God now right there. If you're a we're going to get into these categories a little bit later in this video. If you're let's say a let's call it a confessing Christian where you have a very robust sense of God number one and God number two. Now again, God number one is could be kind of the idea of God. God number two is this living active agent governing colonizing history Tolkien over Frodo. So God number one, God number two, if you're confessing believing Christian practicing Christian the effects of God, of course, all over. And those are simply axiomatic. If you're within that worldview, if however, you're more secular and more skeptical or atheistic, then you kind of have God number one. But you disbelieve in God number two. All right. And I know there's been some question in the comments section about what is the God one and God two thing again. You'd have to go back and watch hours and hours and hours of my old videos. And that's totally unfair to require of you. But Peterson, what Peterson can say is he wants to hold the hold the question of God number two as an open agnostic. But God number one, he says, well, at least we can have this God. And this is what he does in the Sam Harris conversations. At least we can agree on this God. And even Brett Weinstein can agree on this God. At least the idea of God or the sociological reality of God has been shaping humanity and all of that. So I want to study the effects of that God in culture, in individual lives, in all of this. And so that's how Peterson definitely down on God number one, open agnostic on God number two as to whether the degree to which God is in fact this ontological separate agent acting through history. That's of course the ancient conception of faith. That's the pre that's the pre secular assumptions of faith that this God is in fact acting. And even the modern language. See, once we use the word God intervenes in history right there, when you use the phrase that way, you've already in a sense seeded the ground to secularity because the older conception wouldn't be. We'd say, well, Tolkien intervenes in the story of Middle Earth. What do you mean Tolkien intervenes in the story of Middle Earth? Tolkien, the story of Middle Earth is coming from Tolkien. Tolkien doesn't intervene in the story. In fact, in many ways, if we were reading Lord of the Rings and you got to a poet, you know, Dios Ex Machina. We find that in fact a flaw in literature where Tolkien and a lot of people actually complain about the Eagles in the Lord of the Rings that this is a problem that the Eagles are too convenient a solution in too many problems to get Gandalf and either in the Hobbit or in the Lord of the Rings out of a scrape that the Eagles come in and pick people up and take them to another place that the Eagles become a device in the story that breaks the narrative. And so this is a problem for me when I listen to a lot of secularist talk because, well, God intervenes. Well, God doesn't really intervene in the way that Tolkien Tolkien doesn't really intervene in Middle Earth because you won't have Middle Earth without Tolkien, just like you won't have history without God. Now, now this is the ancient conception. Okay, this is a this is a pre secular conception of reality. And once you start imagining. Really, you know, through deism, the world that kind of stands on its own and then God has to intervene. Well, you've already in a sense given up the pre secular where in fact God is all over the place, just like I often ask. If you were to ask Frodo to find Tolkien, where in Middle Earth could he find him? Well, you'll find you'll find Tolkien in Gandalf. You'll find Tolkien in his own character. You'll find Tolkien in the map. You'll find Tolkien in Aragorn. You'll find Tolkien all over Middle Earth. This is Isaiah six. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. He's he's outside of history. Whole Earth is full of his glory, but he's also you can't find any place where he isn't. Paul quoting, I think he was a stoic maybe not a stoic, but in him we live and move and have our being. Paul quoting a pagan in the Book of Acts. So so this this is the this is the reality here. So again, Jordan Peterson is looking at psychometric things and saying we can find the effects of God in human society in human behavior. And in fact, you need God in order for human beings to be well. And this is what Peterson means when he's having a conversation with the objectivists in that video that Peterson found in his own clinical practice that people didn't get better until he went to theological language. They needed the conception of good and evil. They needed the conception of God for many people really to get whole. And I think part of what we've seen in 12 step programs is this bears this out that you've got people who can't seem to get sober any other way. Now suddenly when you introduce what's fundamentally a theistic. It's a post. It's a it's a secular theistic framework. This helps addicts of various natures actually begin to break their addiction. And so you've got Carl Rogers and you've got you and so all of that psychology. So again, Paul Maxwell seems to be a really good conversation partner in this. He knows a lot of theology. He knows psychology. He's got interest in some at least academic exploration in trauma. And he's willing to talk. So cool. OK, so so let me read to you initially what we could call a prolegomena to Jordan Peterson's theology proper. And some of you will remember that a lot of my earlier videos, I talked about a prolegomena as I was in a sense doing the same thing as as Maxwell. I don't have the same training in psychology that he had my to the degree that you say I know any psychology. It's just stuff that I've picked up reading and working. So I don't have any formal training in psychology. OK, so Peterson says Peterson says this. The question is, what are the principles that guide our behavior? Well, that's something that's something like what the archaic Israelites meant by God. We're trying to extract out the core of the guiding principles and we turn that into a representation of a pattern of being. OK, now this articulation by Peterson, he's reading Peterson here. This articulation by Peterson is decidedly secular and Peterson is in a sense doing what I said earlier is done. Peterson takes a step back and says, OK, you've got the question. Am I Christian? Am I not a Christian? Do I believe in God? Do I not believe in God? I am going to practice the the art of secular academia. I'm going to hold all of those questions at bay and I'm just going to talk over here about it. And and I'm going to talk in a way that is noncommittal on these questions. But again, even if once you talk that way, you can imagine talking in a disenchanted world. So even though you're you're trying to hold those questions at bay, you're assuming those questions can be held at bay. That's a tricky business, too. But I'm talking about this stuff and I want to try and figure out, OK, how does God operate in the world? That's God. It's an abstracted I didn't take what the archaic Israelites meant by God. We're trying to extract out the core of the guiding to you initially in psychological metrics. OK, so so let me read to you initially what we could call a prolegomena to Jordan Peterson's theology proper. OK, so Peterson says Peterson says this. The question is, what are the principles that guide our behavior? Well, that's something that's something like what the archaic Israelites meant by God. What are the principles that guide our behavior? Now, Peterson kind of jumps over law. And it's a very interesting question. What's the relationship in ancient Israel between law and covenant and God? And theologically, we could have a very interesting conversation in that. But Peterson kind of jumps to the conclusion and says that which guides behavior? Well, that's God. Now, again, as a reformed Christian, that's covenant. Covenant isn't God. Covenant administers a relationship. Covenant doesn't, in fact, substitute for a relationship. It administers a relationship. But let's keep going. We're trying to extract out the core of the guiding principles and we turn that into a representation of a pattern of being. Turn it to the core of the guiding principles and turn that into a representation of being. Now, again, there's tons of philosophy that's packed into that. There's some Heidegger. And again, a number of months ago, we talked quite a bit more about Heidegger. And what Paul Maxwell here is going to run through is a whole bunch of stuff about how we get to this quote that he's reading now. That's God. It's an abstracted ideal and it manifests itself in personified form. Now, again, many Christians are going to hear that it's an abstracted ideal and say, oh, are you just saying God is an idea? Well, again, this is part of the project that Peterson, well, let's hold it out here. So there's God number one as an abstracted ideal. We're going to withhold judgment on God number two. And again, Peterson, at least in terms of his public posture, remains kind of an open agnostic. And I know some of you are going to jump on that too or have jumped on that in the past. But it's helpful to understand that often when you're when you're engaging in conversations on certain platforms within academia or let's say on stage with Sam Harris, this is a posture that you assume for motivated reasons. So you want to gain a listening because if you jump in as I'm a Christian and I believe this and so I'm not going to I'm not going to allow any kind of conversation where we talk in this way. Well, and people say, great, you can go pound sand. I'm going to go over here and talk to someone else. So in a sense, part of what our context now asserts is that you're going to have to adopt some of these postures in order to have conversations, to have productive conversations in order to explore ideas. That's what Peterson is doing, regardless of what he himself personally decides to live out. I'm not going to say the word believe. That's OK, because what we're trying to get at is in some sense the essence of what it means to be a properly functioning, properly social and properly competent individual. OK, and this sounds very much like a psychologist and Peterson never presumes to speak as a theologian or even really as a philosopher. OK, so just as astronomy was performed by ancients as a matter of perception from Earth's point of view. So also Peterson construes theology as as an expression of a particular perspective. OK, theology is never objectively speaking about God and making metaphysical claims within Peterson's project. OK, and he tries to locate what are universal anthropological conditions which make possible that religious experience. Now, I think a number of you are going to hear that say, what what what what are you saying? And again, it's really helpful to kind of slow things down to go back, listen to things two, three times, figure out exactly what Paul Maxwell is saying as he's trying to interpret Jordan Peterson's. OK, I think properly is in some sense the essence of what it means to be a properly functioning, properly social and properly competent individual. OK, so so right here you have the question of what does it mean to be a good person? What does it mean to be a healthy person? Well, what does it mean to you would be productive, but we've all got all of these assumptions about what that is. Now, Sam Harris wants to say, well, we can just take all of those assumptions and call it good and work with that. It's like Jordan Peterson is like, not so fast because it's not entirely easy to know. Well, let's say it's not entirely easy to articulate what all of those things are. OK, and what we actually do have is a hash or in a sense, a heuristic, culturally situated now that many of us share that we can't actually sit down and articulate out fully. But we have the sense of if you do this, I look at that. Yeah, that's a good thing to do. If you posture yourself this way, that's not a good thing to do. And I think actually in many ways in terms of Paul Maxwell's channel that comes through because you don't recognize you have this until someone kind of steps outside of it and does something different. And then you're so again, you've got this little part of your brain that's your conscious brain. You've got way more of your brain. That's your that's not that you're that's not within this little sphere, this little view of consciousness. They send feelings into you and you listen to Paul Maxwell and you think, oh, this sounds good. Or listen to Paul Maxwell and think, oh, I'm troubled by this. You don't know why you're troubled by this. This is just other parts of your brain sending in feelings saying, be careful, be careful. This this this this might be dangerous. You better be careful. And and we have all of this. These this this is how we this is how we live. This is how we navigate a an overly complex world and try to work our way through it. Okay. And this sounds very much like a psychologist and Peterson never presumes to speak as a theologian or even really as a philosopher. Okay. So just as astronomy was performed by ancients as a matter of perception from Earth's point of view. Let's say I don't know if that's. Astronomist ancient astronomers obviously only practice astronomy from Earth's point of view. I don't know how aware they were of the context in terms of doing it, which aware of contextuality has very much become a dominating factor in highly pluralistic contexts. So also Peterson construes theology as as an expression of a particular perspective. Okay. Theology is never objectively speaking about God and making metaphysical claims within Peterson's project. See right there. What he said is also you dive into the history of theology. That's a really big deal. Actually, it's a view. So also Peterson construes theology as as an expression of a particular perspective. Okay. Peterson pursues theology as an expression from a particular perspective. All of these never objectively speaking about God and making metaphysical claims. That's what he just says right there. Theology is not making metaphysical claims. This is a function of modernist theology. And so in a sense what now Paul Maxwell isn't claiming this about himself. Paul Maxwell is claiming this about Jordan Peterson. And what he's already doing here is what he's going to do in much longer form in the rest of the video is say that Jordan Peterson to the degree that he's touching on theology. Now again, he's approaching it like a psychologist, but the degree that he touches on theology, he approaches theology like a modernist. And what we're going to do when I pause the Maxwell part of this video and I get into the verveky, finally learning how to say the man's name, into the verveky part of the video, we're going to see why this split. You see this split is really important because in many ways it's this split that separates modernist from fundamentalist. And it's the split that separates secularist from believer. Someone deeply embedded in the world of God like Frodo is embedded in the world of Tolkien. Okay, it's the split world that when I first started listening to Peterson, I thought he's trying to address the split world. That's really important and it's really interesting. And what Paul Maxwell is going to do again, probably later than what I'm going to treat in this particular video, I want to get to it in another video. But he's going to begin to address some of the history of theology, a lot of which coming out of Germany, and eventually he's going to get to William James, the pragmatist in America. But a lot of this theology coming out of Germany in terms of this split world. And this again happens in, this happens in philosophy. And it's the rupture that I think happens. And it's again, my whole project is trying to piece together, why does secularism come out of the Reformation and what are the relationships between that? Because in the Reformation with the, in the Reformation with the move from text to philosophy, and you see this, let's say between Aristotle and Newton in terms of learning physics through Aristotle versus learning physics through watching a stapler drop. There's the move. Okay. But what you also then do is you split the world in terms of the world that's living in the text, which is the story verse to the world that's living out here in materiality. Human beings are stories and we always live in the story verse. And so we have the split world between us and matter. And we construct, this is, say, speaking from a modernistic perspective, we construct a story around a stapler. But the materialist will say, I bring the story to the stapler. Peterson is already saying their story built into the stapler because you can't understand the stapler outside the story verse that brought it into being. And the past video where I brought in Vervecki before about Aristotle, we brought in the formal cause of stapler. An engineer conceived of this in his mind before he designed it in AutoCAD and before it went to manufacturing and before the metal was molded and formed and the rubber figured out by engineers and so on and so forth. So this is the split world. Within Peterson's project. Okay. And he tries to locate what are universal anthropological conditions which make possible that religious experience. Okay. Now the move towards universal anthropological conditions is because what we realize is that pluralism is a whole bunch of competing stories. And so what we want to get at is the what will be called the layer of nature. I always listen to how that word is used. This layer of nature, which is below it, because we're hoping that if we can get below the story verse, which is the area of humanity where stories are governing what we're doing down into nature, which is non which is pre-human as we conceive it and non-human. Well, then we can get this this universal layer, which will be trans cultural. All right. Okay, which Christians call faith. Okay. And in order to understand within Peterson's project. Okay. And he tries to locate what are universal anthropological conditions which make possible that religious experience. Okay, which Christians call faith. I guess he's equating the religious experience with what Christians call faith, which is one of a number of definitions of faith, which are all legitimate. But that's part of the problem that you have with you've got a word like faith. Give me a whole bunch of different things. Okay. And in order to understand how Peterson accomplishes this, it will be helpful for us to look at how his proposals resonate with the language of historical philosophy relative to speech about God and the Bible. And so this is where he's going to get into Kant and Hegel and and Feuerbach and Boltman. And he's going to kind of follow along with this history of theology philosophy. Now, it's a very interesting question to me to the degree that Peterson to the degree that Peterson is aware of these connections. Or at least the origins to the degree that he's just simply a product of the academic intellectual stream that has brought us to this place. You know, obviously, Peterson knows who Kant is. He spoke about Kant a lot in his conversations with with Sam Harris. He obviously knows who Hegel is. He probably knows a little bit of Feuerbach, but I think he probably gets these for your Bakian ideas through Freud. So he knows those Freud a lot better than for your buck. And and this is where you get into the interesting parts of the conversation with with Rachel Brown with respect to she's the one who first that I noticed brought up for your back in her blog and then in the three creators video. Noting that. Well, hey, well, Marx, because Peterson's antagonistic relationship to Marx. Well, Marx, Marx very much follows for your buck. And so does Freud. And Peterson is wrestling with this question of projection versus reception is is God is there a God number two out there that is actually acting that we whose actions we. Perceive or is it in fact this materialist story which starts from the bottom and goes up that we are projecting out to the sky this God and but here's the thing once we have that idea. Well, if God is only a projection, well, then at least we've got a semblance of the idea of saying that well, there is no God that God is just something that we make up or God is a story that we tell because again, If you make the materialist starting point, if you have the materialist starting point, then the story verse is always dependent upon the matter verse. Okay. And the story verse are these creatures like us that have large brains that think in stories and we see stories everywhere around us. We make up stories. We see incredibly complex things happening. And so we make up a story. Well, the question is, is, is story derivative or is story? This gets into the Jonathan Pichot video I did and pattern is that foundational and it gets to kind of the basic dividing line in history of whether matter is foundational and story and consciousness are all derivative or whether consciousness and story are foundational and matter is expression of story. Okay, there's the there's a fundamental divide in the universe. Okay. So first is we're looking at Hagel. Okay. Now this this first intellectual with which Peterson resonates is Hagel. Hagel is a 19th century philosopher who wrestled who wrestled with the possibility of speech about God after Immanuel Kant. Okay. Now Kant posited that now just from a youtuber perspective here, it's really interesting that I suspect Paul Maxwell is alone and I suspect he's got two cameras. He's got two cameras going and so he's taking all the video from these two cameras and he puts them all together and he puts it into his nice video. He edits which is what I don't do. I just don't want to take the time to edit too lazy perhaps. You can frame it that way. I'd have better videos if I edited. I'd probably edit this out. But I also got two cameras going back forth. One of his cameras has trouble focusing probably because he's over to the side of the view. So I know sometimes people have questions about this and I do watch this as I'm watching this stuff. That there was a crude distinction between the world of our perception, which is the what he called the phenomenal realm, the world of phenomena and the world as it really is, which is the numeral realm or the world of numena. Okay, here's another split and this is an important split and this is where I'm not going to go too much further with Paul Maxwell in this video and I'm going to go to Vervecky because again, I want to know why the world has split the way it's split and what we can learn about those splits and how those splits are governing now. So let's go back and listen to this because he started with Hegel, but he says well in order to talk about Hegel, I have to go back and talk about Kant. So let's listen to that again. And the world of our perception. Okay, so you've got the phenomenal realm, the world that we experience and then the numeral, which is the way it is reality. Now again, if you go back and you look at my commentary on Peterson and Sam Harris, in many ways, all those four talks, they never got beyond Kant in many ways. That Peterson kept dogging Harris and saying, your naive simplistic imagination that you can maintain this monarchical vision and just talk about a world of objects can't do that anymore. Can't do that anymore and have philosophical credibility. That day is done. That day ended at the beginning of the 20th century. Sam, it's time to get with the program and realize the day is done. I don't think Sam Harris either never accepted that position or doesn't understand that position. I don't know which or chooses to deny that position. No matter how much Sam Harris says he's done psychedelics and wants to talk about consciousness. This is the position that Peterson kept trying to bring Sam Harris back to and Sam Harris wouldn't go there. Peterson basically says, all those videos that I talked about the a priori structure, which then kind of becomes God number one, this a priori structure, you don't engage. I don't engage the stapler. Now I sit here and I think I can't help but engage this stapler as a stapler. It's cold. It's hard. Kind of hurts when I hit it on my head. Left a little mark. How on earth can I deny the obviousness of this stapler and that in fact if I hit myself hard enough with this stapler, this stapler will govern consciousness because either through pain or all the way to unconsciousness, this has that capacity. But as we know from all kinds of science from the early 20th century on and a whole bunch of philosophy, it is not quite so simple as this. That in fact I am not only am I perceiving the stapler as such as something independent and separate from myself, but in fact I am bringing to my experience of the stapler loads of things. There's an a priori structure that in fact has been built into me by many, many human generations where, you know, where I'm just listening to the deacons talking in the other room and I'm getting distracted. There's this a priori structure that is built into me by many, many generations and it's a good thing because I don't live long enough to actually develop this structure myself, but there's this a priori structure that goes way, way, way back all the way to the lobsters and before that governs my relationship with this stapler. And it's so built into me. It's so completely implicit to me, but it actually is fundamental and important to this entire conversation. All right. So there's the split world between the phenomena of the stapler and the numina, which is well, let's say the greatest truth about everything about the stapler, which even the stapler is so vastly more complex than I could spend my entire life articulating. If you look at all of the things that brought the stapler into being, the history of staplers, the history of metallurgy, the history of physics, the history of human society that would cause us to bring together a device that would have the need to attach papers together. I mean, if I imagine John or Tom Hanks castaway movie, a stapler pulls up on the beach in the FedEx packages. What good would a stapler do him? Well, maybe he would want to manage some papers, but apart from the rest of human society would have no meaning. So even just the simple stapler is astoundingly complex and my relationship with it is astoundingly complex. But there's so much that's built into it that I so effortlessly and so naively interact with a stapler now. It's the difference between the phenomena and the numina. Now, there's a split that has happened here because this whole idea of the numina. Well, what on earth is that? And how on earth are we going to can we in fact talk about that? So it's time to get rid of Mr. Maxwell and to go back to the PowerPoint. And to we're going to take a step way, way, way back. And we want to talk about the continuous cosmos and the axial age because before we can talk about Kant, before we can talk about Hegel, before we can get to Feuerbach and Boltman and this entire 19th, 18th, 19th century history of German idealism, of all of this philosophy that comes out of Germany, and also theology that comes out of Germany because the philosophy and the theology are very much wedded. The philosophical problems give birth to the theological problems, at least for the academics who are playing in this space and defining the rules and telling naive, No, you your beliefs in God are not justifiable. That then gets later on into, let's see if I have the book here. No, I don't have that book here. That gets later into Alvin Plantinga and Nicholas Waltersdorf and the question of whether this whole critique of justifiable belief. Anyway, we're going to want to talk about the continuous cosmos and the or what I call the integrated enchanted world where we small creatures live in the garden of the gods and some of you say, well, it sounds like the Garden of Eden. There's a reason that's a garden and the axial age where you have a split world division of heaven and earth, earth, which is pain, decay, corruption, illusion, heaven, which is ideally eternal, unchangeable, true. So Kant is wrestling with, okay, there's in a sense, Kant is post axial. Now, what do I mean by actual? What do I mean by continuous? Well, for Vickie has some of these really handy lectures and he he has a real gift for articulating these concepts. So let's listen to for Vickie for a little bit. And if I'm learning how to say his name. All right. But what is the actual age and what's the axis upon which it turns. So what Yaspers noted is that there was a fundamental. Now, this comes out of a a. This comes out of a scholar named Yaspers in the middle of the 20th century that that asserted that there was this movement in history called the axial age and then defines it. And so this is this conception has been dominating and governing and growing for the last 70 years. And it takes about that idea for some new academic ideas to really spread out into the culture. And so that's what for Vickie's doing it to and we'll we'll see how useful this is in conceptualizing and I'm going to critique it as we get into it. Change in this time and how human beings understood themselves and their place in the world. Such that. This kind of thing probably seems natural to you. How many of you have read some Plato? How many of you read some of the Bible? Okay. How many of you have read any ancient Egyptian? Yeah, I know that you're waving your hands. But yes, a little bit. Have read any ancient Babylonian? Now Egypt is a major civilization. The first nation state exists for like, you know. About 5,000 years its religion lasts that long. Right. It has a huge empire at one time and yet. There's no call to read any of that literature. This this point that he's making here. This is a genius point and it's a genius illustrator. This is why the guy's like the guy's obviously great teacher. So he's saying hey, you read the Bible. You read Plato. You read Aristotle. You read all these you read Buddhism. You read Confucius read all these axial age ancients that we read today and we continue to find. They continue to get traction. We continue to find them to be productive for us thousands of years later to read. We read the Bible. You have all these axial age. Things that we're reading but we don't read ancient. Egypt in the same way something changed and Egypt is a major player. In fact, we we copy Egyptian architecture. Have a look at the Washington Monument. It's an obelisk. We continue to copy the the the architecture the structure of Egypt and that itself would be a very interesting conversation, but we don't read what they wrote and we don't. Call our president Pharaoh and and we don't borrow from them politically or philosophically or religiously like we borrow from these axial age elements. Why is that? Genius question when they when I heard him say this and I thought about it was like bang duh. Brilliant. This is amazing. It doesn't seem like part of your history. But in a way that if you stand back and think about it sort of like objectively you consider Plato and ancient Israel part of our history. There's somehow still relevant to us not that I'm saying any of you are necessarily Jewish or Christian or Muslim or any of you are Platonist, but somehow we consider those people to be currently relevant such that we can do that. Continue to read them. There's a cultural appropriation of those people people from the axial period now. It's not. Not just you know, Eurocentric. How many of you have you have read any of Confucius some of the analytics anybody? How many of you have read any Buddhist texts? Okay. So right how many of you have read some Dallas text for example, how they share and things like that again all these things that are considered pivotal pieces of literature from the axial period strike you as relevant in some way as important to consider as a source of and I'm going to put this word in quotations because it's going to be something we're going to discuss and debate in the course a source of wisdom. Somehow in the actual age people were producing literature that we consider meaningful relevant and in some sense bearing wisdom for how to lead a good life. Other times. That precede the actual age do not have that grip on us. We can be interested in I'm reading a book every night on the rise and fall of ancient Egypt. It's a fascinating book. Intellectually interested in it, but it doesn't have that same sort of existential grip on me. Now why what was going on? What was changing? How are we still and I tried to show you the children of the actual age. What happened there? What did it give birth to and how has it been so woven into the way we understand ourselves? Understand ourselves. So what's happening right is a fundamental change in how human beings understand themselves and the world that they're in. Now as we get through this, I'm going to nuance that a little bit because it's very much a change, but we're going to have to at least give this idea of subsuming an idea because I'm going to argue that the continuous cosmos doesn't really give way fully to the actual age, but they blend and they overlap. Quite a large literature on this. I'll be making use of some central ideas from Charles Taylor and Robert Bellah and others about the actual age. Mark Taylor has some interesting things to say about it here and there too. But what seems to be going on is a breakup transformation in an older worldview, a worldview that plausibly goes back into the neolithic or perhaps late paleolithic cultures, especially Shamanic cultures. This was a worldview. Pre-Axial world is one that's called the continuous cosmos. By Charles Taylor and others. So the continuous cosmos is based on the idea that there's no fundamental difference between the natural world, the human world and the sacred world. They're not different in kind. They're different in degree. They're different in degree. So the difference between, for example, the gods and human beings are not that the gods are fundamentally different kinds of beings. Now that the sound messes up the sound isn't great in this video at all anyway, but the sound message basically they're human. They're superhuman beings. Let's hear that again. They have more power. Not that the gods are fundamentally different kinds of beings. It's just that they're basically superhuman. But that they're basically superhuman. They have more power. They have more power. So see, and I would assert that part of the reason I say that the overlap continues. So we have Netflix and I have teenagers and we watch a lot of Netflix and Marvel Infinity Wars is now on Netflix. And so one of my sons was watching Marvel Infinity Wars and I'd seen it in the theater when I came out before my movie pass became no longer useful, which I'm still not real happy about. But so if you if you look at the Marvel Universe of Superheroes, that's a continuous cosmos that that Thor and Iron Man and the Hulk and Captain America and this whole cast of Marvel comics. They are all living in the same world as we are. And so in a sense, the the Marvel Universe is for us back to the continuous cosmos. And we in fact enjoy going back there and watching those movies and in a sense inhabiting that world. Now we suspend disbelief. But the fact that that world is not only a place where we live in the universe, but also a place where we live in the universe. That world is not only intelligible to us, but attractive to us is really important because it shows that the continuous cosmos has not in fact been replaced by the axial age. But the actual axial age enhances subsumes. I don't know. I'd say I'm still trying to figure out the relationship between them. But it's really important because if you understand what the continuous cosmos is or the integrated enchanted as I would say is. It's still here. Okay, it's still here and we can still in fact we haven't lost our capacity to live in that world or even our desire to engage with that world. It's still there despite the axis that this axial age will turn on. So they typically act. They're not ethical exemplars for example. And the Greek gods are not. The Greek gods are not exemplars. And as many C.S. Lewis, I've made the point many times, the difference between say the Greek gods and the God of the Bible, these are very different things. And so often when it's often atheists that want to kind of want to kind of give a cheap shot, they'll say, well, well, God, you know, Yahweh and Zeus are the same. Hardly, hardly. It's there. The world is connected enough so that we can in sense see relationships, but they're hardly the same thing. The God of the Bible is very much axial age and Zeus is very much continuous cosmos. They typically act right for their own particular concerns and they're and they're typically also located tied to a particular place and or function. So, you know, you have, you know, Seth is the God of the desert in Egypt represents chaos and that chaos isn't somewhere else. It isn't in another world. It's the chaos that surrounds the chaos of the desert and the flooding of the night. You don't have to sort of you don't have to like go to another world or another dimension to see the reality that Seth represents. Human beings could become gods if they could improve enough power, enough prestige. Iron Man. Who doesn't want to be Iron Man? Okay. And Iron Man in a sense via technology becomes a god and can go toe to toe with Thor. All right. And so all of these ideas are at play within the Avengers. So it does not strike anybody again. It's not some sort of bizarre thought that a man in Egypt is also a god, the pharaoh, precisely because he wields such tremendous power. And that makes him divine. Now, it's helpful to remember that, again, these ages are they overlap. And so for us to hear pharaoh as a god, we're very much post axial age. And we hear that we say, and then we hear Jesus is the son of God and Jesus is God. And we hear that. And for a lot of people, they just, you know, that's that's that doesn't make any sense. But if, let's say, you're an ancient person and you're reading the testimony of the apostles in the Gospels and you hear about Jesus stilling the storm and raising the dead and doing these miracles, it's very easy for them. Well, he's a he's a son of God. He's a god. That's that's what gods do. Well, that's the continuous age. And so when you're looking at first, second century AD, you're well past the 300 AD of this of this asserted, you know, axial age transition. But they both continue to inhabit the same space. And so when Paul and Barnabas go, I should look up that Bible passage, when Paul and Barnabas go and are asserted to be gods because Paul does a miracle. Well, that's again this continuous universe thing that gods, the gods live among us. But in fact, we still we still trade in that just in the virtue of celebrity. When you when you a celebrity is known for their intelligence or their musical skill or their beauty or their popularity or their wealth or their status or their access. Well, they then have more power and they're almost treated as gods. They are worship. They have fan bases. And I mean, so this this dynamic is built into us. So we don't actually graduate out of the out of the continual universe. We we visited in the movies. We write stories about it. We live it in terms of celebrity culture. We we we practice it. So that doesn't go away. We just add the axial all these new axial tools with it. He's going to get into some of the technology things that lead to the axial. This is really great lecture. So that world is therefore organized around issues of power. It's organized also in space and time in terms of cycles. So everything is cyclic. The season cycle, the day cycle. Now, what that means, right? It will come back to this, right? Is that you're not trying to radically change things. Because if you change things too much, it will come back to affect you. So what you're trying to do is to become as best embedded into the world as you can. And again, this will be one of the big transitions with the actual age. When we go from more of a sickle cyclical conception of the universe to a much more linear conception of the universe and a what we'll say a progressive conception of the universe. But you cannot have a progressive conception of the universe until you have a location or state of being to broke to progress to. And that's going to be built into this axial transition. Embedded in such a way that you can find the power in order to find the prosperity that you want. And now also in terms of the ancients, what are the differences between the ancient and the modern conception? Is that an ancient would, well, the world is big and great. And so what wisdom, and we're going to get to wisdom in a few minutes, what wisdom means is to fit into the context where you're at and to find success. Understood as well-being, power, wealth. If you listen to the sermon that I did last week on, I haven't posted the one yet. I'm going to post the Sunday version, the rough draft you can hear on this channel, the Sunday version. You have to hear on my church channel. But the but wisdom is your capacity to engage productively towards the ends you desire within this set universe. The axial transition will be to transform the universe, or at least to transform myself up into this further destination. Okay. So wisdom, all cultures talk about wisdom. But wisdom is understood primarily as the knowledge that you need in order to get the most power you can, the most power and prosperity you can. So, issues of harmony. See, because again, harmony, this is my internal world in harmony, matching and productive relationship with my context. That's harmony. That's the goal of wisdom. And if you've got mostly static, let's say cyclical conception of the world, this is again pre-axial continuous cosmos. Embedding, figuring out how this works so that you can best align yourself with it to get the power you need so that you can best prosper are central. Because this is a continuous cosmos, right, the chaos and the violence that you see in the world are just part of that world. There's no deep difference between the violence in nature and the violence between human beings and the violence between the gods. Yes. Yes. Pre-axial. Yes, Sean. Why is it called axial? Because what's happening is it's an axis, a turning point. It's going from this way of thinking, the continuous cosmos, which is pre-axial, to an alternative way of thinking, which I haven't explained to you yet. Now, this is a very powerful way for human beings to be on the world, to be on the earth, to be in the world. It is a way of orienting yourself towards reality that built and sustained civilizations. So I am not trying to cast it as something that is odious or something like that. But, yes? Can you explain why you have to be embedded in what you risked by not? So if I change this, that will eventually come back to have effects on me. Oh. Now, in the West in particular, we'll talk about China and India later, but in the West, this world came to a cataclysmic end. There's a book that's been published called The World of the Dead. And it's a book that's been published in the United States. The West in particular, we'll talk about China and India later, but in the West, this world came to a cataclysmic end. There's a book that's been put out that actually gives it a specific date for it. A little bit tongue-in-cheek. The book is entitled 1176 BC. That's probably a little too precise, but around that time, the world has seen the greatest collapse of civilization in its entire history. Much greater than the fall of the Roman Empire, for example. More cities, cultures, and political organizations go out of existence at this time than any other time in world history. Got to close the door of the classroom. So this is known as the Bronze Age catastrophe, the Bronze Age collapse. There's a lot of discussion about why it occurred. I think it had to do primarily with fundamental changes in warfare that made chariots obsolete, but there's other theories. That's not what this course is about. What happened was all of these empires were either destroyed or lost. Egypt loses its empire, Syria loses its empire, the Hittite Empire is wiped out. A huge, powerful empire is wiped out. Kenite civilization is destroyed. What this did was it shook this worldview. It shook it to its core. What happened was these sort of dinosaur kingdoms passed away. What happens initially are a lot of small states emerge throughout the Eastern Mediterranean. There's another civilization that collapses, by the way, is the Greek Mycenaean civilization. Throughout the Eastern Mediterranean, small states emerge, and there is a lot more experimentation with social and cultural organization. The analogy I'm using is like when the asteroid wiped out the dinosaurs, these little mammals now have all these niches that they can explore. There's a lot of diversification and experimentation. Of course, that brought with it new ideas, new ways of thinking. Importantly, what happens during this time is a dark age in which civilization, a lot of literacy is lost, trade breaks down, there's economic decline. It's a very bad time. But what happens is some things are invented that have a huge impact. What I want to talk about are psychotechnologies, the invention of important psychotechnologies. Okay, so you know what a tool is, you know what technology is. A physical tool is something that is designed by human beings in concert together to, in some sense, fit human physicality. The chalk was designed to fit my hand. It wouldn't be good if it was this big. I'm trying to write on the board like this or something. The chalk is designed, it has this shape, it has a cylinder for a reason. It's designed to fit my hand and then enhance what my hand can do. My hand can't, on its own, make these kinds of permanent marks. Thomas's water bottle was designed, I mean, imagine if you didn't have that tool and you had to carry around water in your hand. This is my water for the day. I was watching a show on Homo erectus with one of those reenactment shows. You have to take it with a grain of salt. But I'm watching and this one Homo erectus is carrying around this tooth that it's found. It's carrying around in its mouth and keeps carrying it around. Why is it carrying around in its mouth? I'm like, oh yeah, pockets haven't been invented yet. Okay, this is technology. We're all cyborgs. This is technology. This is technology to help modify our relationship to our physical environment. It does social work for us. None of you are dressed like pirates right now. But you could if you wanted to. You choose not to because that's a message you really don't want to send. Okay? Now, a psychotechnology is something that is designed to fit the way the mind works and enhance its capacities. Okay, this is again a really good, there's so much good stuff in this lecture. This is psychotechnology and I think you all understand what he's saying. Now, this is also something people ask, well, what is the story verse? Well, psychotechnologies function in the story verse. They function, these are ideas that have us. These are ideas that we have. These are things that allow us to gain all sorts of power over the matter verse. Psychotechnologies beget the kinds of things that will produce staplers. It's designed to fit the way the mind works and enhance its capacities. So all of you are making use of a psychotechnology invented at this time. You're all making use of literacy, alphabetic literacy. Pause for a moment. Who are you writing to? You're writing to yourself, which is kind of creepy. Now, what literacy does is it massively expands the cognition you can bring to bear on a problem. First of all, what you can do is you can bring to bear on a problem. First of all, what you can do is you can take your brain at this time, your brain at another time, and yet another time and have them all work together across time because you've written things down. That's what you're doing. You're writing to your future brain so it can make use of this information. And so everything doesn't have to be carried in your head. It's also a time machine. It also allows you to slow down and make more permanent your own thinking. You can reflect on your thought. You can stand back and look at it. You can pretty quickly examine it. If you didn't have literacy, if you couldn't do that, your thoughts would strike you as much more ephemeral, much less open to your own cognitive access and modification. You can debug your thinking much better if you can write it down. Try to make your current brain to future versions of yourself and to other brains through literacy. Try the reverse. Imagine if I took from you literacy, not language because spoken language is natural to us. Again, remember I said pay attention to natural versus human. And that's exactly the distinction he's making here, then using to try to say that which can be trans-cultural, that which is cultural. Now he's going to go on for a while. He's going to talk about literacy. He's going to talk about the development of letters as opposed to little pictures. Remember the Egyptians had hieroglyphs. And then in the Levant, you have the developments of alphabets and then invention by the Greek, the invention of vowels, which in Hebrew could become points. He's going to talk about this for a while. And all that is super interesting. And I really like it. But it's not really quite on topic where I want to go with this. And what I haven't done is really sketched out exactly where I need to jump back in. So I'm going to just try a few places here. Cognition is your knowledge and awareness of your own cognition. Okay. And that's, I really hit it. Very carefully in order to try and build pyramids. They got very good at this engineering aspect to arithmetically calculate things. So now we're getting into math and this ability to the Egyptians were doing engineering and the Greeks come in and do math. And math is the beginning of this metacognition, where with math we have this layer of abstractions that's allowing us to colonize the material verse. Comes into the tongue. So people start to use abstract, symbolic, mathematical form. And now you see this, so then you see that the development of money, which is a story verse element. This is where money becomes invented for soldiers that are working far from home. And literacy with alphabets and vowels. These are all examples of, in a sense, metacognition where in this transition we have this, we have the basic world which is full of tools and things. And then we start to develop these abstract mental tools. And so you have this, you have the world, the regular world. Go back to Kant and Paul Maxwell where we started this. So you have the phenomenal world of all this stuff. And then pretty soon we're going to start thinking about the numinal world. And we're going to have the creation of the numinal world, which is a fundamental shift in terms of the axial age. So what the Greeks do, again, I'm contrasting Greece and Egypt here because they're both, we have a lot of access to those histories. The Greeks take something that the Egyptians have been doing for years. The Egyptians had been doing a kind of measuring of the earth. They had measured the earth very carefully in order to try and build pyramids. And they got very good at this engineering aspect. What the Greeks did though is they took that measuring of the earth, right, and they made it an abstract mathematical simple system. You know it as geometry, which is Greek for measuring the earth. But it has nothing to do anymore with measuring the earth. It has to do with abstract logical mathematical thought. So people have literacy, they have numeracy, and they have practice in abstract logical thought becoming more and more pervasive. So of course they're going to start to turn this onto domains other than those in which these psychotechnologies originally arose. So very quickly people start to apply these new ways of thinking more comprehensively. And what's invented, according to Bella and others in the Axial Age, is what's called, what's invented in the Axial Period, the second order of thinking. The second order of thinking. Which again will seem natural to you. Now we're going to talk about this later when we do the coxsci. Every human being, as far as we can tell, is capable of metacognition. Cognition is your knowledge and awareness of your own cognition. So how many of you know that you have a thing called memory? Some of you don't. How are you remembering this right now, I wonder? So you know certain things about your memory. You know that if I asked you to remember four numbers, four, seven, seven, one, that'd be easy for you to do. If I asked you to try and keep in mind 27 random numbers, you'd find that very difficult. You learned a lot about how your memory works. You understand a lot about your cognition. Everybody has that. You need metacognition for second order thinking. But second order thinking isn't just metacognition. It's metacognition that has appropriated and internalized these second, sorry, these psychotechnologies. Yes? So what's the definition of metacognition? Your knowledge and awareness of your own cognition. So are you thinking right now? But how is that measured? How is it measured? It depends on, you measure, it's a category term, so you would measure it by specific instances or specific processes. So one of the things I can measure, you can do this developmentally. So have you ever noticed that little kids have a very poor meta memory? They think they can remember everything. You have a better understanding of your memory. So I can measure your ability to predict your performance compared to a four-year-old, and you will do much better, for example. So you can't measure this per se. You can measure specific processes that are instances of metacognition. So again, you see here you've got second-order thinking and metacognition. It all has to do with this move that I talked about a little bit with the Paul Maxwell video, where we, in a sense, take a step back from ourselves, and we can see ourselves. And this is a little children can't do this, that my dog can't do this. They're just living, people say, oh, you should live in the moment. My dog lives in the moment. A child lives in the moment. There's a real beauty about living in the moment. There's also a reason why we don't live in the moment, because we take a step back from ourselves and we see ourselves. And this is a really powerful tool that we've developed. And you can see the relationship between this and second-order thinking and metacognition. We're watching ourselves think and see the power of this as well, once we begin to watch ourselves, because we're so bad at seeing ourselves. And in fact, my dog and a small child, the reason a small child, when my little, when my kids were young and lived in the Caribbean, I mean, they'd run around naked and the kids thought nothing out of it. Why? Because they couldn't see themselves. They couldn't mind read. They couldn't see themselves as others see them. They couldn't be self-conscious. Now, on one hand, we might say, I wish I wasn't self-conscious. Oh, but yes, you do, because the capacity to see yourself is this powerful tool by which you can protect yourself and this powerful tool by which you can manipulate others and this powerful tool by which you can work with ideas and concepts. This ability to take a step back from oneself is an astoundingly powerful thing that has reshaped us completely. Okay. So this metacognition, this develops. And rather recently, I'm not saying that people prior to this couldn't do that. Obviously, they did. There's reflection in it. But this is, you get a sense of what I'm talking about. So what second-order thinking is, using metacognition to take these new ways of thinking in these psychotechnologies and turn it on your own cognition. So what you're doing in second-order thinking is you're using these new ways of thinking, the literacy, the numeracy, the abstract symbol system, the reflective thought. And what you're doing is you're turning that critically on your own thinking. You're taking a critical metacognitive stance towards your own thinking. And that critical stance is empowered by these new ways of thinking that these psychotechnologies have provided people. So people start to become very, and I don't mean this in an impurely negative sense, they become very self-critical. They start to analyze their own thinking, their own cognition. Which is to say that in a very real sense, the origin, the beginnings of cognitive science are also in the axial revolution. Because you have to take a step back to see yourself in order to do this science thing. That's where the attempt to critically and rationally reflect on cognition begins. Now, what does that mean? What that means is people start to become aware of an important central capacity of cognition. They start to become critically, in the strong sense of that word, critically aware of some of the central features of their own cognition. What they start to become aware of is that human beings are meaning-makers. That we make meaning. That we frame the world in particular ways. I don't mean that in just a trivial sense. What I mean is there's a dawning awareness that violence is not a natural part of the world, but it is due to the meanings that things have for us as human beings. Okay, what I said right there is really important and really complex, but I just wanted to note again, and I'm going to kind of do a Jordan Peterson thing here, if you read at least the introductory stories of Genesis, you find the man and the woman in there in a garden. And Jordan Peterson does a very interesting job of looking at that psychologically and noting all the different facets of what has historically been called the fall, or what I often rather use the rebellion, where that happens. Now you get to the pre-Noahic flood story, and there's all this violence, and God looks down at the world, and he laments having created human beings because we're so violent. See, now you can see that story within this frame that Vervecchi has just laid out. That's very much an axial frame because, so right now I have the cat back home, my daughter's cat, and the dog, and the dog and the cat don't get along, they're about the same size, and so the dog's always going after the cat, and the cat's stalking the dog, and so it's just all cat and dog games going on back and forth at home. But there's no conscience between the dog and the cat with respect to any of this. If, let's say, a mouse or a rat would come around and the cat was there, the dog's too useless to engage a rat or a mouse, the dog couldn't ever find it because it's blind. But the cat, well the cat's an apex predator, and the cat would be all over that mouse, and the cat would think nothing about stalking and killing the mouse, just like we think nothing about the tiger stalking and killing the goat or the child. Well, we don't like the tiger killing the child, but we don't hold the tiger as a participant in the story verse as we would say a human predator in a neighborhood. So right away this critique, this metacognition, this watching ourselves, this watching of violence, and we say, in a sense we have the dawning of morality in this, and we say, oh, we ought not to do this. Well, where is that in the story? Of course it's God. Now, a modern say, oh yeah, we're taking Feuerbach, we're taking all of this morality and projecting it and embodying it psychologically in a God that will work in the story in this way, or something else is going on. A distinction starts to emerge between how things are and how we're making sense of them. What starts to happen, right, is this realization of how self-deceptive we are. Now, there's two sides to this, and that's why when you hear this second order thinking in critical, you have to think about both destructive and constructive criticism. So what starts to emerge is the degree to which human beings are capable of self-deception, the degree to which the mind twists itself out of alignment with reality, distorts how things are being seen, misdirects what is important or what we should pay attention to. This becomes very pervasive. But in conjunction with this, because you are inter-defining, right, is also a realization of a capacity for self-transcendence, for seeing through illusion and deception, for having an insight into how you have mis-framed reality. So you're already beginning to see now where this split world of the axial age is going to come from, because once you have conceptualized self-deception, you also will conceptualize self-transcendence. You can see things better than you have before. So what starts to happen is this kind of, I'll try and give you an analogy for trying to sort of remember this. Right now my glasses are transparent to me. I'm looking through them. And they're in a very real sense sort of framing my experience. But sometimes what I can do is I can actually step back and instead of looking through my glasses, I can look at them. I can become aware of the medium rather than just aware through the medium. Why do I do that? Why would I take my glasses off and look at my glasses? Anybody? Do I do that just because I periodically want to blind myself? Any ideas? Why would I take my glasses off and look at them? Yes? To clean them. Because patterns... Harry wipes it on his dirty t-shirt that he lectures in. I love this. I can, right, I can become aware in which the medium of my mind, my mind as a lens on the world, is distorting my vision of things. But that could also afford me the capacity for transforming the mind, transforming the medium, so that I could then see the world in a less distorted fashion. I have a capacity by transforming my mind to engage in a process of self-cognition. Now what happens... Yes? I don't think metacognition is generally powerful enough on its own. There seems to be even increasing evidence in current cognitive psychology to become more rational requires learning a lot of psychotechnologies. So to use the analogy that I used with language and literacy, we're naturally intelligent, but we are not naturally rational. Rationality is something that has to be learned. In fact, measures of general intelligence are only weakly predictive of measures of rationality. Or rationality is very broadly construed. Rationality means using the most reliable cognitive methods to achieve your goals. See, and I'm not sure about his definition of rationality. I think Ian McGough-Christ has a better one in terms of rationality being a consistency device rather than necessarily using rationality as a function of accuracy. I think that promises too much from it. I think consistency is terribly helpful in terms of accuracy, but it itself is not the same as accuracy. It's consistency. So your goals might be true beliefs, your goals might be skillful actions, things like that. But what you want to do is find the most reliable methods. And your intelligence does not naturally find the most reliable methods. It finds good methods, but it also tends to distort things a lot. So to use an example that has become associated with me. All right, I was going to go through the dots. People initially find this, they think this presents itself to them as... But the task facing you is to connect all nine dots with four straight lines. People initially find this, they think this presents itself to them as an easy problem. Of course, four straight lines. One, two, three, four, I do... That's where you get the think outside the box. Many of you have seen this a number of times. And of course, at no point when I gave you the problem did I say box or square. What happened is, you get the lens. Your mind framed this as a square. And what's inside the square is relevant. And what's outside the square is irrelevant. And this is a connect the dot problem. And I know how to connect the dots. I was a kid. You can't change direction outside of a dot. If you do that and you're doing connect the dots, you won't get a picture of a Dapodil. You'll get a Jackson Pollock painting. I know those rules. What I'm trying to show you with the nine dot problem is how automatically that happens. What stands out and what's ignored, bam, automatic. So fast and so quick that it's actually very hard to catch any awareness metacognitively of that. By the way, this is where think outside the box comes from. This is the experiments on this is where it comes from. Here's what you should know from those experiments. Saying to people, think outside the box doesn't help them to solve that problem. Because they have very, very little awareness of what's actually going on in their mind that causes them to fail. So simply knowing that they have to go outside the box doesn't tell them specifically how to do so. Now, just so you feel better, by the way, the statistical solution rate for this is not different from zero. It's a very hard problem. And it's not like... And almost everyone who does it learns how to do it. They don't do it on their own. How do we reconcile quantum mechanics with relativity? Because of the human mind's capacity for self-decession. So what also happens, though, is that you can break out of these mis-framings. You can break through, drip-broke. You can break through to see things more appropriately. So the second order of thinking is to use these psychotechnologies to probe for the processes of self-deception. And to try and promote these insightful processes of self-consent. And again, I think it's not specifically rationality that is your pathway, unlike, let's say, Sam Harris. Rationality is your pathway to get rid of self-deception. What rationality is, is a consistency tool, which is helpful in working out self-deception. But that makes it so that rationality isn't itself the antidote to self-deception. What starts to happen is people's vision of themselves and of the world starts to change. What this starts to say is we bear a tremendous responsibility for our own happiness, for our own unhappiness. We are responsible for the meaning we give things, and our actions are based on that meaning. The violence in the world and the suffering are not natural. They're caused by how we think. And now again, going back to the Genesis story, in this move you can see the Genesis story as saying, the suffering and the misery of the world are human-induced. That's built into the Genesis story. That's built into, especially, the theological layer beyond the Genesis story. That humanity, you find this in Christian theology, humanity is responsible for the suffering of the world. And now today, in our age, and we're going to have to get into our age at some point, we say, no, no, no, nature is responsible for the suffering in the world. It's the tsunamis and it's the death and it's the cancer. And now the Bible says, no, we are responsible. So we'll draw the line. Did we make cancer? Did we make? And see again in the story, it's humanity that brought this in. Well, you cannot talk that way until you first split the world in a sense. And Verveki is going to get there and show how we split it. The book, one of the central texts of Buddhism begins with, the mind is in the lead. See now, what happens in the East in terms of Buddhism and Hinduism, the split is different. All right. And you have illusion and oneness. But I'm focusing pretty much on the West here in terms of heaven and earth. That's where you're going to have the split world. Mind is the framer of all things. There's no greater enemy to you than your own mind. There is no greater friend to you than your own mind. See, and again, I would say that what happens in Buddhism is that that relationship is a little different because in Buddhism, OK, so you get the phenomenal and the numinal. In Buddhism, the phenomenal is illusory. In Christianity, in Judaism, the Judeo-Christian tradition, the phenomenal world is still reliable. Even if then you have to say, well, then what is the what is the nature of the difference between the phenomenal world and the numinal world? And so I can say so on one hand, I can say, yeah, this stapler, there's as much space between the particles, the atomic particles in this stapler. But yet it feels hard to me. So there's there is very much a disconnect. But yet I've got enough Thomas Reed's Scottish common sense realism to say it's still real and it's reliable and it's mathematical and you can construct science on it. They're both true. So then what then is the relationship between the phenomenal and the numinal? And again, in Christianity, you're going to have all of this become distilled then into the transition of Christ in Jesus in creation. One point out to the resurrected Jesus in creation to point out the transformation of heaven and earth where heaven and earth become one. But they become one in a new heavens and a new earth where you're no longer going to have this split. And you can very easily begin to see the relationship between the continuous cosmos, which, as I said, is not completely eliminated. And then the differentiation, the divorce of heaven and earth, which is what the Bible is actually about. And then the story about the the marriage between heaven and earth and in the book of Revelation, that is that is actually framed as a marriage between Christ and his church. OK, I still want to get to a point in here where he draws some things. I might have to speed it up. The central is the top of his cosmos. What starts to emerge is a new way of understanding reality that can make a place for our role in it, because now we have a significant way in how we see reality, how we relate to reality, how we engage in a particular action. So what happens is the beginning of the idea of two worlds that are different in kind, not a continuous world that is only different in degree, but two worlds that are different in time. There is the everyday world. OK, now remember we started with Paul Maxwell. This is the phenomenal world. Now this is the world beset by self deception and the attendant violence and suffering that goes with it. This is this world. It's also beset by decay, which the Greeks and Plato will pay a lot of attention to. Every day world that is beset, that is distorted by our self deceptive cognition and consciousness. And those distortions cause us to act against our own self interest and against our collective best interest. I think also within Verbeckis lecture here, you know, he's this is Buddhism and cognitive science. So there's he's not teaching this in a Christian college. So you can kind of see where he's heading with this. But but I like the way he sets up the frame, because, you know, in a Christian in a Christian perspective, the the everyday world is reliable enough upon which to find and generate things such as laws of physics and math and science and so forth. This is a world therefore of violence and suffering, frustration, senses of futility and despair. But there's another world. I'm not saying I agree with this picture. I'm trying to say what happens in the actual revolution. But there is a world that can be seen free from. There's a funny little R word, the real world. Distortion and self-deception. It is the real world with a capital R that you should pronounce in a slightly British accent. It's the real world. It's real. It's somehow the world. It's not only real in the sense that it's not beset by self-deception. It's the real world in the sense it's the world in which we could more properly flourish because it is a world that would be free from suffering and violence, the suffering and violence that we cause ourselves. And now, again, in Christian terms, many of us all that's heaven. OK, that's the real world. This world is not my home. Now, when not my tradition, but certain traditions of Christians of Christianity thinks this world is not my home. I'll fly away. We're going to the real world. Now, I nuance this differently. New heavens, new earth, creation 1.0, creation 2.0. Self-destructiveness that is endemically paired to self-deception. This world is real not only because it is free from self-deception, it is free from self-destructiveness. It is a world in which, and this is the right word to use, in which we can more properly be realized, realized as human beings. So all of the axial philosophies of religion in different, in culturally different ways propose this kind of fracturing. You don't have the continuous cosmos in you. You now have two worlds that are radically different in kind because there is a radical difference in kind between illusion and reality. See, and again, this is where your Christian and your Buddhist conceptions are going to differ because the Buddhist conception will be this is the world of illusion. This is the world of reality. And a Christian, this is a world of decay. This is a world of rebellion. But this isn't a world of illusion. The limitations of our ability to interact conceptually and articulate this stapler via the science of the 20th century doesn't make Newtonian mechanics illusory. Okay. It is just limited. All right. And that's a difference. I think in the comment section, you'll correct me if I'm wrong, the Buddhist conception is that the world of the stapler is illusory. And as a Christian, I wouldn't say it's illusory. I'd say it's, I don't want to use the word real. It's reliable and reliable enough. And so once I use the word agnuff, I'm obviously bringing in the pragmatics. Okay. And so when you look at the culture war that Jordan Peterson is fighting with respect to not losing science and Brett Weinstein and Peterson are together on this, in the Christian conception, this world down here is not an illusion. It is in fact reliable enough. But in a Christian conception, it's also in rebellion. And it's also subject to decay. And it is not real in the sense that heaven is. And again, now there's Platonism and the relationship between Platonism and Christianity is a very interesting one. And I don't want to go too much beyond two hours here because I got a lot of stuff I got to do today. But I think for Vickie is nicely laying this out. Let's see if he has any more before I want to stop in reality isn't just more illusion. Something other radically other than illusion. This becomes a difference in realness, rather than a difference in power. Project now becomes how to go from one world to the other. I go from one world to the other. How to get to heaven. Jesus says, and I talked about this quite a bit in my Sunday School class, which I haven't posted yet. I really do have to post those. Again, that's not on this channel. That's on my church channel. My church channel is a different channel. Jesus says, I am the way, the truth and the life. No one gets to the Father except by me. And then you have, so I'm doing the first epistle of John. You have all of these relationships that the first epistle of John sets up. And it's all tied up with this Axial Age notion of getting from the phenomenal world into the real world. And I'm going to stop for Vickie here and go back and again look at what I had here. So you have the continuous cosmos, which is integrated, enchanted. We small creatures live in the garden of the gods. And you have the Axial Age, which is the split world, the division of heaven and earth. Earth as pain, decay, corruption, illusory, especially in the Buddhist conception, somewhat in the Christian conception, our capacity to self-delude, and then heaven, which is ideally eternal and changing true. And I got this via Paul Maxwell, and he has to begin by setting up, okay, if we're going to understand Peterson, we have to understand the split world. And so he starts with Hegel, and he reads a little bit of Hegel, and then he goes back to Kant, and he says, don't forget, Kant has the world of phenomena and then the numena, the real, the true, the ideal. So you have this German idealism that's at work there. And you have these two worlds, and now that isn't new to Kant or Hegel, and the split world isn't new. The split world has been around since the Axial Age. But as I said, we never really got rid of the continuous cosmos, too. We have the continuous cosmos, then we have the Axial Age, and we actually have the capacity within our cultural frameworks and within our minds to manage these two conceptions. So when we watch the Avengers, we can inhabit the continuous cosmos and enjoy inhabiting the continuous cosmos for the effect of enjoying the movie and the story. But then we switch to the Axial, and then suddenly we've got the split world. And what happened in the, ever since, I think prior to the Reformation, but ever since the Reformation, these two worlds began to pull increasingly apart. And then you get into the 19th century where you have, well, now we have this Darwinian, we have this Darwinian world, which is the phenomenological world. And then we begin having, it begins growing further and further away from the world. And then with, in a sense, with atheism, secularism is a prioritizing of the world down here. Atheism then becomes a denial of the world up here. And so when we get to the point that we're at right now with Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris, and should Jordan Peterson talk to Christians, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, well, that's the dynamic that we're dealing with because Sam Harris wants to say, well, you know, all that stuff up there, that's not real. All we have is this. And so we're going to use rationality, and we're going to remake Utopia down here, and we're going to get rid of the numinal. We're going to get rid of the heavens. And all we have is down here, and we have to make our best world now. That's where we have this Utopianism. And as we say, when you bring down heaven, you bring up hell, and you bring it all into this world. And so now you can begin to see how this works and where Paul Maxwell is going. He's going to go through some history of philosophy and then theology, theology, philosophy, and then some psychology, and try and bring that all together. And that's, in a sense, where we've been at with Jordan Peterson. So I very much wanted to do this video. And I know it's a little crazy because now this is another two hours. And how many people will watch this video? Because even people who watch many of my videos never get to watch all of my videos. But I very much wanted to run through this verveci, this axial age, understanding where the split world comes from, how understanding how that functions within Christianity, understanding how you can see Christianity in some cases, in some ways located within this axial frame, but also the continuous cosmos before it doesn't really disappear. We, in fact, we add axial systems, but we maintain both. We just tend to switch between them. And now you can begin to understand a little bit of the story of Christianity, because what happens in the story of Christianity is that the split world then again becomes reunited. And at the end of Booker, the Revelation, you have the new heavens and the new earth, and they all come together. That's what happens in Christianity. And that's why, in a sense, if you listen to, you should bring in NT Wright into this, his Gifford lectures. He talks about Boltman and gets into some of that. But also NT Wright, one of his big projects is again to keep pressing the fact that when Christians say, I go to heaven when I die, you are reducing the total story because NT Wright says quite rightly, the biblical story is that heaven and earth become one. And then you have the question of hell. Well, what is hell? Hell is what happens to those agents that God respects enough to permit their decision to not participate in this. Well, where do they go? They go to this other place, which has a whole other set of symbolisms around it because of how it fits into the narrative. Well, that's that's enough for that's enough for now. That's a nice two hours to give you something to chew on. And I hope to I hope to return. See, now that we've done the laying out of what Kant is trying to address, then when I get back into Paul Maxwell, we can talk about Kant, we can talk about Hegel, we can talk about Feuerbach, we can talk about Rudolf Boltman, and we can talk about Paul Tillich, because you're not going to understand Rudolf Boltman and Paul Tillich without understanding Kant and Hegel and Feuerbach and this whole history of German philosophy slash theology and how that is all dealing with the split world problem. And that's why I wanted to go through Vervecki before we actually get more into Paul Maxwell's, I think, really helpful treatment of Peterson via this history. Now, again, as Maxwell said, we don't have a lot of indication that Peterson knows a lot about, especially Rudolf Boltman or Paul Tillich. But Peterson is a product of this long philosophical project that has had theology in many ways just following in its wake and trying to Most of these liberal theologians like Boltman and Tillich and Schleiermacher and others, they keep trying to save Christianity from what the changes are happening in philosophy. They say, well, now we can't believe these things because of philosophy anymore, so therefore we're going to remake Christianity into moralism, or we're going to remake Christianity into this sense of dependence so that we can decouple Christianity from the phenomenological world and have it up there in the numinal, but the distance between the numinal and the phenomenological are only bridged by a feeling of ultimate dependence or my moral action in the phenomenological world. And that then becomes the story of liberal theology. And again, when I use liberal theology, when I use the word liberal there, I'm using it slightly different than when we use that word in a political way because liberal as opposed to fundamental, modernist as opposed to fundamentalist. And again, as I've said before, my tradition, Roman Catholics, many of our older traditions are pre-modernist fundamentalist fight. And so actually those those divisions are implicit within the older roots. But yeah, we'll get into that in the next video. So as you can see, this took two hours. So that's Paul, Paul Maxwell in his video. And I think it's really well it's really worth watching if you can understand some Kant and Hegel and Feuerbach. And then if you have any awareness of Boltman or Paul Tillich, I think most of the people listening to my channel probably don't have much awareness of Boltman or Paul Tillich. And I'm not going to recommend that you go out and read them necessarily. I think it's more important to understand how they function in the history and therefore see why Peterson both has takes the shape that he does, but then also why he's important. All right. So thanks for watching. And until next time. Oh, I did want to say a couple of other things, just some housekeeping things. Just reminders that especially for these long videos, I do have audio only versions of them. And you can get the audio only versions of them from the links down below in the notes. So you can get it on your iPhone via iTunes. So my I have an audio only version of this on iTunes. I have an audio only version of this on Podbean. I am continuing to work through the Patreon stuff, as some of you might notice below in the notes that I now have links to cryptocurrency. I suspect that cryptocurrency is probably going to be an important alternative to MasterCard, PayPal, Stripe, Patreon. That's where a lot of that conversation is going. And I haven't made any big changes. I'm no longer listing my Patreon in my comments. Many people are still using Patreon. So I'm leaving it there for now, but I'm following the developments of all of this. So now I am playing around with cryptocurrency. In fact, my whole channel has been just a playing around with learning these ideas, learning how to articulate these ideas, sharing these ideas. And again, I keep doing it because I get many letters from you that things are being how that that this is being helpful. Next week, I start, in a sense, getting back into doing a lot more conversations with many of you who've been asking for conversations. And I've got some conversations with some other individuals like like Ron Dart. I'll be doing a conversation with him and so on and so forth. So that's what's coming down the pike.