https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=H2hPdC3Sceo

 All right, we're live. Paul, the first question for you today comes from our friend Luke Thompson. We were having a little bit of a conversation earlier today in the general chat about pacifism or Christians and violence. And Luke's question in true Luke form is, will you commit to talking to Preston Sprinkle about nonviolence and how all this relates to tribalism and wars and the Joker? I think the last part of that was maybe a little bit of a joke, but maybe not. So that's Luke's question for you. What am I, some kind of politician? Luke, Luke, yeah, he is a joker. I'd be happy to Preston about some of those topics. My, just a brief view, I don't consider myself a pacifist because in my opinion, pacifists are making a statement about the state and the sword. And I believe that the state has the obligation to use the sword. I think that there are times when individuals, when it's permissible for individuals to use violence for the protection of life. So I'm not a pacifist, but I very much understand the principles of nonviolence and the value of that. So that's, will you commit? I'm actually talking to Preston Sprinkle next week and we're going to be talking about the same sex marriage videos that I've been making. He sent me a complimentary copy of his book, People to be Loved, which I thought was excellent. I very much enjoyed it. So yeah, but I'll talk to Preston Sprinkle all day long about anything. So there you go, Luke, who can't be here. There's his question answered. All right. I think what I'll do there, there is a question in the chat, but maybe what we'll do is go back and forth between giving people an option to ask one by voice, and then I'll jump into the question in the chat if that sounds okay to everybody. So does anybody have a question they want to offer by voice? All right. I'll take that as a no for now, and then I'll go to a question that's in the chat. This is from gravewall858 Paul. It says, do atheists from non-Christian religions tend towards the kind of secular humanism offered by Sam Harris, or do they find themselves in a different value structure due to a different cultural context? If the latter, are there any prominent examples of this? Well, this one's written now because it's not a simple question. Do atheists from non-Christian religions, so right away, you, and I'm not disagreeing with this, but you have to try to figure out non-Christian religious atheists. Well, I suppose some Buddhists, see, it's so difficult to figure out the relationship between religion and the idea of God. So, okay, so to do atheists from non-Christian religions tend towards the kind of secular humanism offered by Sam Harris, do they find themselves in different values, in a different value structure due to the different cultural context? You know, when I look at the work of Tom Holland and his assertion, I think it is, and many other people in the world share this opinion, that it's very difficult to understand, Battle City's got a kind of a noisy mic there, it's very difficult to, the choice of discord, I viewed it. It's very difficult to understand things in the West that are not Christian. Christianity has been so pervasive that Christianity has been so pervasive that even for someone who is overtly attempting to be an atheist, the impact of Christianity is so profound that it's difficult for them to sort of figure out what that means. And it's easier for people from other cultures that have not passed through the Christendom or even Islam, because there's so much that's shared between the three major Abrahamic religions. So if you look to the East, but then again, as Tom Holland noted, you know, secularism pervaded those cultures. And so you really have to look at, you really have to look at cultures that are animistic and have not been integrated into the post-Columbian global system to run a thought experiment about non-Christian religions and perspectives. And I'm quite convinced Ross Douthat made a comment like this in a video where he said, you know, part of what I think happened in the 20th century was the Nazis were really trying hard to apply social Darwinian thought to culture and in an Anichian way, strip the culture of Christianity. And the experience of the West for, you know, and Sam Harris obviously would agree with this, the experience of the West was, you know, horrified. And just read history of the pagan world. I mean, this was Tom Holland's experience as a historian. He of course loved that period. But as, you know, without knowing it very deeply, he saw it through the eyes of romanticism and the Renaissance and all of these ways that our perspective of the ancient world is shaped by Christianity. And the more he read historically, the clearer he saw that world, the more he began to appreciate the kinds of changes that Christianity made in that world. So I haven't even gotten to answer the question yet. I feel like Jordan Peterson in his question and answer gives a long thing even before he can answer the question. So do atheists from non-Christian religions tend towards the kind of secular humanism as improper by Sam Harris? I think atheists in atheists significantly downstream of Christendom very much tends toward the secular humanism because Christianity has so deeply pervaded our moral imaginary that we find it nearly impossible to think outside of colonization that Christianity produced. Do they find themselves in different value structure due to a different cultural context? Yes. If the latter, are there any prominent examples of this? Well, I think the Nazis tried. I think, but you know, even if you look at Japan, you might look at the Japanese regime before their defeat in the Second World War. When you look at what, so hardcore history before he kind of paused his channel was working on basically the rise, basically Japan going into World War II. And whereas for those of us from a European perspective, World War II started with, in a sense, officially with the invasion of Poland in the East, the Second World War started in the East. The invasion of Poland in the East, the Second World War started with the invasion and the attempted colonization of China by Japan. And what you saw in the Chinese imperial regime was very much a non-Christian, was it non-secular? You know, Japan had such a shock when it was basically forced, like other Asian countries like Korea, forced to open up against its will only to discover that technologically it was in deep, deep trouble and that the colonial powers in the West could basically have their way with Japan. And so part of what, I think part of what forced the kind of secularization onto the world, as Tom Holland noted, was just the technological supremacy that the deistic, enlightenment, modernistic, scientific revolution created that gave the colonial powers in Europe just so, such a clear military advantage over the rest of the world, which if you read history before the age of exploration, the beginning of the age of exploration, really before the enlightenment, Europe was a backwater compared to China. And the only way to understand the, basically the globalism caused by Christopher Columbus and the age of discovery was that Europe was woefully behind the Chinese and very much wanted to benefit from the cultures of the East. Why did Europe leapfrog? And now that leapfrogging brought to the East, you know, their own traumatic period of, wow, we're being so completely dominated by these tiny little European nations, which culturally the Eastern cultures considered them to be completely uncivilized. So these are terribly difficult, these are terribly difficult thought experiments to run because we just don't have clean rooms to not, to see alternate worlds beyond the way that our world unfolded at that many, you know, Christian and non-Christian scholars. I mean, Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs and Steel is an important read. So I don't know if Grave Wall 858, if I helped answer to it all, but there was a shot. And I remember last time you don't have a mic, so if you have a follow-up, go ahead and type it in the chat. Just some quick housekeeping. I forgot to mention everybody, make sure and please mute your mics if you don't have a voice question. And I don't see a clarification or a follow-up, at least a notification that's being typed. So I wanted to mention, Nathan Woods actually asked the first question and I accidentally missed that. So I'll throw that one in here for you, Paul. It says, Hi Paul, what relationship do you see between affluence and the decline of capital M marriage in the West? It's a good question. I'm just taking notes as I go. When I look ahead to marriage in the West right now, the two groups for whom marriage will continue to be a valued and practiced institution are the religious and the wealthy. So for that reason, I'm, whereas I think affluence has deeply impacted a lot of institutions with deeply religious ties, I'm not sure marriage is a part of that because marriage law, I often will in these conversations try to distinguish between what I call universal marriage, which is the institution that with, despite great variation has been consistently practiced basically throughout human civilized history. And so much of that institution has to do with property rights and inheritance because marriage, even in cultures where, even in non-Christian cultures, where let's say there isn't a strong mandate for male sexual exclusivity to his wife, that's really Christians would say the Pauline insertion in there and very much a bent towards monogamy. You know, men had women, men had children all over the place and wives were about delivering legitimate heirs. But even if you look at the Roman emperors, they could adopt someone. The man who would become Caesar Augustus was adopted by Caesar, Julius Caesar. So I don't know that, I think, and what we've been seeing in terms of the studies that I've read is that marriage, it's the underclass and the working class and the middle class where marriage is in decline. You know, it's amazing to me, it's the upper class that are going to keep working marriage because it's basically how you keep your money. And the religious who have another value system that is rigorously enforced often against our short-term desires that hold people in marriage. So there are a lot of ways that affluence is changing our culture in religious terms, but I think actually with marriage, those who are the most affluent will continue to practice it. It looks like Nathan is typing. Oh, never mind, I don't think it was a follow-up question. He was just clarifying a question that Shelley had asked. I have a question here from David Jacobs that he emailed me. He said, I'll be on the server tomorrow. I find it extremely riching to listen carefully. Let's see. I'm interested in your thoughts and reactions to the churches opening up. I'm aware of several restrictions that are being considered by the Unitarian Universalists. What might follow is having small groups meet in the sanctuary. We'll get to know more about the pandemic and appreciate if we can meet with face masks and social distancing. So yeah, in terms of the meetup at some point, we'll have to deal with these issues too. My church at Livingstone, we had a council meeting last night, and you'd think that having 50 plus years of continuous services, you could just sort of turn the switch on and off, but you really can't. And it isn't just questions of medical safety that we address with masks and distancing. It's also questions of the fact that for the near, for probably a year or two, and maybe permanently, part of what COVID has done in churches is forced them to take online, the online world seriously. Before the churches closed up, Rod Dreher had made a comment that he was worried about this because he was afraid that people would just be online and not in person. And I responded to his tweet by saying, I don't think so. I think we're, right now what we're seeing is that their churches are going to increasingly be forced to figure out how to integrate on site and online. And because they're going to be, because one of the things I will tell my people, if you feel at all sick, stay home. And, you know, there's always sort of had that idea, well, if you're sick, stay home, don't go to church because you don't want to give to others. But now it's more important. And others who have underlying health considerations that very much want to be in church, maybe can't be in church. So what churches are having to do is not just say, okay, we're opening again, but having to say, we're going to be open on site and online and how can that be done well together? And I just by virtue of my last couple of years on YouTube and then meetups, I feel like I've been working on this issue a bit, but now it's, well, full speed ahead. We have to figure out how to integrate online and on site. And for my little church, part of that's going to be, we, you know, we're at a point now where deacons are getting nervous whether, you know, how viable and sustainable our on site only ministry might be. And so we might have to go to on site and online integrated just so on site can continue. So, yeah, the pandemic is changing a lot of things, but I think overall, this is a healthy, this is a healthy challenge and churches that figure out how to do this will be able to make a contribution. So, and when I think about, so I just, in fact, right before I got on here, I just sent out a meetup to, an email to Joey and Tyler and Rick and, you know, some of the guys of the, the leaders of the local meetup and said, you know, this is an issue for us as a meetup too. So, yeah, that's, I don't know, David, if that helps answer, I know you're in the, you're listening. So that's, that's what's on my mind. Okay. I see we've got at least one, maybe two questions in the text chat, but I just wanted to give the opportunity for anybody who has a voice question before I jump back to the next one. Or a follow up or a question for clarification. Part of why I like doing question and answer with the discord is because unlike if I did it sort of on YouTube, like Jordan and Jonathan and John have done, it's hard to do follow up. And so part of what I see the advantage here is if I answer your question and I'm not answering your question, let me know. Yeah, for sure. That's a good point, Paul. Okay. The next question that I see is from Mercury. He asks, how do we dump the bathwater of virtue signaling without also throwing away the baby of genuine group prayer? I'm writing down your question. Oh, and Paul, that I asked that because after I asked that the last time I joined one of these between you and I, and I got feed from someone else listening afterwards. And like the context was that we both love Paul. Paul's great, but we were both surprised by your answer last time about group prayer and virtual virtue signaling. So I'm asking on behalf of me and somebody else. It's a great question. I don't know that like many things in life, I don't know that we can eliminate this problem with a rule. And that's a real habit that religious communities have. And it's always a sort of limitation of wisdom. And the rule would be, well, we're not going to practice group prayer because it's really hard to not do community worship. And so I'm asking do communal prayer, which we do in church and I lead it obviously, it's really hard to not do communal prayer and not virtue signal. And, you know, I'm thinking about this right now as I'm watching what's happening in Minneapolis and I'm watching how social media is interacting in this. And, you know, I see so much of what looks like virtue signaling. But here's the thing. How do I know it's virtue signaling? Because in a sense, when I make the judgment in my mind that someone is virtue signaling, that is a judgment in my mind and heart. I can't see into their heart. And so when Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount says, when you fast, don't look like your fasting. When you pray, pray in secret. When you give, don't let your left hand know what your right hand is doing. All of those things are inside of us. But what Jesus is basically saying is that when you are performing your acts of righteousness, keep an eye on your motivations. Keep an eye on your motivations. Don't do these things and Jesus is right. Defining group prayer is righteousness though. What's that? Even defining their group prayer as a display of righteousness. Right. Like I asked you to pray publicly with me at the end of our podcast and I didn't see that as righteousness. I was asked to take advantage of the fact that I was with a pastor that I felt had spiritual gifts and was looking to the prayer you gave at the end. And after the last talk we had, I looked back on all of that and thought, was any of that perceived as virtue signaling? Should I change the way I behave publicly because I won't shy away from jumping into a prayer publicly if I'm with someone who wants to pray with me? Should I be correcting that behavior? No, I don't. Because I don't even see. Because you can't control if someone else sees what you're doing as virtue signaling. And that's the tricky part of watching each other. And so when I'm using the word righteousness there, and again this is tricky too, decaiosune is the Greek word for righteousness. And you'll find that word in Plato's Republic. And it was Dallas Willard's observation that when Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount is working on the question of righteousness, he was engaging in a far broader conversation that included Greeks and Hellenism and many others. Because righteousness is tremendously difficult to define. And part of the challenge that we have is today almost very few people know how to use that word without the prefix self in front of it, which changes it almost exactly into virtue signaling. So on one hand, Jesus is, so if you're engaging in public prayer, what Jesus' admonition for you would be, ask yourself, why am I doing this? And for the prayer that you see, now we're doing these weird things that of course are never envisioned by the book of Matthew, where we're having private conversations in public. You know, what's that about? So and that's why I continue to maintain the option of, well, we're recording this conversation right now, so we know it's public. But then there are other conversations that are private and ought to remain private. And I would never, as a Christian minister, say, you ought never to pray in public. And again, we're trying to address something very nuanced and important with a rule. Rules are helpful, but and I think for Vakie's treatment of this was excellent. Life is such a thing that you cannot finally fully distill it into rule-based algorithms. Jordan Peterson made that point to Sam Harris, for Vakie made that point. I think that is a point of wisdom. And so on one hand, Jesus says, steward yourself on this and God will judge you according to how well you steward yourself. However, other people will charge you with virtue signaling and might interpret what you're doing as virtue signaling. That's probably going to happen. Finally, as a Christian, I would say you are responsible to an audience of one. And that's one of the messages in Jesus' sermon on the mount that he says, you know, finally, the world is going to have lots of opinions about what you think and what you do and what you say. And you have to take responsibility for those things and steward yourself in the light of the culture and the community and what's going on. But you are not responsible for the judgments that other people lay on you. Each of us who make judgments are responsible for our own judgments. And that again is something that really gets lost in the melee of social media today. Paul, that sounds a little related to also when we think someone else is either arguing or entering a conversation in bad faith. Does that sound similar to you? Yes. Yes. And I think that's, you know, even figuring out what we mean by bad faith. So much of our language, we walk around with between a 50 and a 70% idea of the words we're using. I don't know, you know, really exceptional people can get above that, but that's sort of how we work. Thanks for the question, Mercury. Let's see, I see a couple more questions in the chat, but again, just want to offer an opportunity if anybody has a voice question first. Okay, here's a quick and easy one from the chat. Alexander G. Paul asks, how's your day? My day is good. I usually, I wake up early before anybody else in the house gets up. So I can do some writing and some praying and some reflecting. And that's usually when I, I kind of write the basic outlines for my sermons or my videos. So I did. And so this morning, I woke up thinking, this Friday, I usually want to make a video for Monday. I don't know if I'll get one done because I'm not very far in my thinking. It might be on the progressive Christianity versus historical Christianity and the deconstruction stuff. But I, for years, I participated in an online community called CRC Voices. And I still use them sometimes for when I have something on my heart that I want to write instead of necessarily make a video. So I wrote a thing, a reflection about Minneapolis. And last night at my council meeting, most of my church leaders are African American here. And one of my elders said, you know, we were doing prayer requests there. And one of my elders mentioned Minneapolis. And I just, and I was, I'm just always so impressed by how differently the conversations about race happen. My circles, which are, you know, led by and, you know, people of color. I don't really like that term because it's as if this pale pasty thing that I have isn't a color too. You know, and I just thought, so then I wrote a piece and I put it on my blog. And I thought about the last question that Nick had asked me and the verveky question and answer. And I thought about the, you know, the fights. I asked once, there was a Christian Reformed elder who was a member of the state house in Minnesota. And I asked him once, I said, you know, what's your take on church fights versus political fights? He said, Oh, I'd much rather be in a political fight because church fights just wound so deeply. And I, it just breaks my heart seeing what's happening, not just in terms of the rioting and the devastation, but the quality of the online conversation and contribution. The only way we're finally going to deal with racism, which I'm a Calvinist, which means I'm a racist. I'm a bigot. I'm a homophobe. You know, any kind of sin that you see common among man is in me. And it's in me in ways that I can't root out. And, you know, by the grace of God, you know, I'm going to have to make my journey through this world as a sinner, which means I get lots wrong. It's always so easy to see the sin in somebody else. It's so hard to see the sin in ourselves. Jesus made that point. And it just breaks my heart to see so many good things happen in race relations in the middle of the 20th century. And in my opinion, so much has stalled since the 1970s. And I, so much of the people who imagine themselves leaders in these conversations don't know that they're helping because I don't know that we're seeing progress. So, but other than that, I'm having a good day. And this is always fun. I enjoy this. So thanks for the question. 10 out of 10 answer. Who would ask again? What's that? 10 out of 10 answer. Who would ask again? Paul, I have a question kind of related to that. So I was thinking when I read your blog post this morning, I was, the thought entered my mind. How much do you think that this COVID lockdown, everybody, you know, stuck in their homes can't, you know, exercise their personal freedom in a way that they're used to is related to the situation in Minneapolis? Like, I'm just wondering if it's, if it would be as violent and as out of control, if it wasn't for that, you know, that being locked up in your home for two months beforehand, like, I'm just, I'm just wondering, do you see a connection there? I'm sure it's a factor. So with the very long video I made this week on Brett Weinstein and metaphorical truth. One of my big complaints about the supposed rational approach that I see, it's a very modernist kind of modernist rationalist approach that I see Sam Harris and others promote is the unit, the unit variability of the worldview or the unit. The, yeah, it's the unit variability. And I think Peterson was really good on this that is racism a part of this? Absolutely. Is class a part of this? Absolutely. Thomas Chatterton Williams on Twitter this morning had a tweet that basically said, you know, in all the looting video I see coming out of Minneapolis, there's a lot of white people in there looting too. And, you know, part of whenever there's a riot like this, and Peterson has said this well too, and part of it is just there's a certain population of people that, is there a riot? I don't care what it's for, you know, I'm down. They just, you know, and it's usually young men, you know, in some ways a byproduct of testosterone, probably a byproduct of fatherlessness, a byproduct of, you know, there's, there's, and again, verbeke stuff is really helpful in this. When you begin to look at causes for something like this, you very quickly have combinatorial explosion for every single individual that is participating and every single individual that is commenting. So the fact that this comes on the heat of COVID, yeah, I remember, oh, that movie, what was it? It was, it came out in the 80s, it was a Spike Lee movie, Long Hot Summer, you know, I, you know, New York City, blackouts, looting, yeah, there's lots of variables, and, you know, there's, there's lots of variables on the police side of that picture too. You know, who is this cop? Was there, I mean, almost any interchange between human beings, it goes back to Mercury's question about virtue signaling as well, what do we see as virtuous and what about what that other person is doing annoys me? And sometimes people who are actually very virtuous can't help but show the world that way, and people hate them for it. So no, that's, all these things are multivariable. And so in that way, in some ways saying this is, this is only about racism, sort of follows the script of the rationalist imaginary that says, I can step back from the world, see it from nowhere, understand what is really going on, apply a rational solution, and achieve the outcome, the sometimes utopian outcome, I imagine to be good. I look at that and say, I don't buy it for a minute. Thank you. I don't either. Yeah, life is too complex. It just is. All right, Paul, the next question in the chat is from Ike. Would love to hear what Pastor Paul thinks about Nietzsche's concept of slave morality, that the weak will recast their weakness as strength or virtuous humility, but only as a fig leaf to cover self-congratulation or to subvert the powerful so that the slaves themselves can become the powerful. This has obvious connections to the Beatitudes of the Sermon on the Mount. Yeah, that's a great, that's a great question. The, here's the thing about human beings. We're really good at finding, we're really good at finding self-serving justifications for self-serving and that virtual looking justifications for getting our way. So the, yeah, the fact that this, the fact that once you popularize and democratize a moral advantage for the weak, well, heck yeah. Now Nietzsche takes it a step further with his own assertion and I think this is, this is, this is where it sort of links up with social Darwinism and looks at nature and says, see, that's anti-evolutionary, that's unnatural and he's got a point. And this is where I, this is part of the reason why I believe in revelation and I believe that the life of Jesus Christ was revelation and I believe that the care for the weak as such, there's almost nothing you can find in Jesus' teaching that you can't find in the Hebrew scriptures. I know that will make Jacob really happy to hear me say that, but people who have done extensive analysis of Jesus' words have noted again and again how often he is taking things from the Old Covenant and putting them forward in a dramatic and powerful way. And so Nietzsche's observation is a really telling one if you're seeing the world through, through Darwin's lens. Sorry about that. Where was I? Oh yeah, so here's the thing, if you, see and I'm not even, I'm not even sure you can, you can really follow Nietzsche or at least this take on Nietzsche all the way from just looking at nature because every mother gives birth at the risk of her life, every good father gives to his children at the cost of his time and property and so there is a virtuous cycle that you can see in nature as well. But the nature is full of weakness that is precious and necessary for nature to endure. So I don't know if that answers the question well. So it's a good question. So it's a good question. Maybe what we're going to have to do is create a special little hashtag room here just for questions so that probably hard for Jeff to be finding them. It's not that bad because it's not, nobody's overwhelming the chat with questions, but yeah that's probably not a bad idea if people start flooding. Yeah. Did that answer your question? I don't remember who asked it. That was Ike. Did that answer your question Ike? Ike's muted. Okay, well let's move on then. Okay. The answer you gave me earlier. Sorry Mercury, go ahead. You gave me earlier, I was just wondering if this short phrase is catching what you were saying or if I'm off. To try to put it really simply was your point, could it be worded simply just as when it comes to a virtue signal, just focus on being virtuous and don't worry about the signals? Like is, am I off there? No, and I think Jesus would make a second thing that would be yes, focus on being virtuous, don't worry about the signal, but take care to take care of this because when Jesus says you've already received your reward if you're doing this to be seen by men and women, he's making the point that true virtue is finally selfless and humble in the way that God is. And so when you do this as God does, so here's a question, was Jesus virtue signaling when he was being crucified and when he prayed aloud, Father forgive them for they know not what they're doing? Was Jesus virtue signaling? And so you're right there in the crux of the question where you cannot take the ability of others to pass judgment on you away from them. The best you can do is steward yourself and steward your judgments. Made me think like isn't becoming a pastor or a priest dramatically virtue signaling in and of itself? Yeah, that's why we're so prone to hypocrisy. That's why every time I have to stand up and preach, you know, here I'm telling people to do things that I'm failing at. And one way to soothe a conscience is to not care about that anymore. So it's fraud. So here is a question from Sam Adams. Much of the IDW related truths between Christians and atheists seemed related to the shared enemy of wokeness. If wokeness goes into decline, will this alliance fray? Okay, I just found the question. Yeah, I think with most human political fights, the tribal alliances change rapidly. I think it's true that the shared enemy of wokeness is going to be the enemy of the world. I think it's true that the shared enemy of wokeness created a truce between Christians and atheists. But I think part of what has enabled that truth, and I think this is why Jordan Peterson was so integral in it, was that modernity was fraying anyway. And so that's why, and I think in many ways, Jordan Peterson was the tip of the spear for the IDW. And why all of the other imagined core members haven't actually manifest, well, maybe this is unfair to Eric because he coined the term, but in my opinion, what the IDW should have been, haven't been able to manifest what Jordan Peterson did. Because I think Dr. Jim was correct in his observation that the arising of the new atheists was a signal of the decline of modernity. And Jordan Peterson was further along in that, and he exposed many of the weaknesses of modernity. And so I think the alliance probably will fray, but what we see happening now in the the scrum between historical Christians or traditional Christians and progressive evangelicals is part of that too. And we're going to continue to see, and I think the rise of neo-sacramentalism is part of that too. And it's the continued working through, it's the continued working through the deep questions that in many ways the church has been working through through its whole history. And I think this can map onto some of the barfield history of evolution of consciousness ideas through different lenses or different ways into seeing the issues. So I don't know, I don't, if COVID sort of, you know, things are changing so fast. A month ago people were asking, you know, was, is COVID going to sort of kill wokeness? Well, the fires of Minneapolis seem to be stoking wokeness again. So these things are big and enduring. And so most of them don't simply completely disappear. They might manifest for a while and then subside. But because the issues are deep within the cultural imaginary, they're not fully going away. All right. I've got a question here from Hbomba. Paul, where do you see hyper agency detection going? Where do you see hyper agency detection going on in the secular humanist frame right now? Well, Neil Shenvy, who's on Twitter the other day said, you know, someone talking about me somewhere, I don't know why your ears itching, I talk about you a lot. Neil Shenvy made the observation that in some ways wokeness is a conspiracy theory. And so I don't think we can, I think wokeness is a terrific example of a principality. And many, you know, I thought I heard James Lindsay say this in my conversation with him when I followed up with him a little bit later, he sort of backtracked on it. But my understanding of what happened in New Atheism is they got split between New Atheism and then Atheism Plus. And that plus was basically wokeness. And so part of the reason you have this strange alliance between, you know, why Peter Boghossian is willing to do an event with me is, you know, Peter Boghossian is sort of the classic New Atheists who didn't take the plus route, see all the plus people and say, hey, that's a new religion over there. Oh, yeah, it's there. They're seeing agency and the patriarchy and white supremacy and Christian nationalism. And so on one hand, yeah, yeah, there's agency there. And I think the Apostle Paul would call it a principality and a power. But that's part of the reason that you're not going to say persons, the modernist move that says only persons we will recognize are human beings. I don't think you can live in a world like that. It's not going to work. Paul, I missed Grayball858's follow up question, so I'll read that now. Are there similar abstractions of other religions in the vein of what you're describing secular humanism to be vis-a-vis Christianity? Or has Christianity via globalism effectively suppressed slash out competed such developments? I'm not an expert on world religions. But if just from a college educated perspective on other world religions, you see interesting mergers. You look at the Baha'i faith, you look at Jainism, you can see similar things going on in Roman Catholic orders. Jansenists look almost like Calvinists. Human beings are incredibly creative and incredibly adaptive at reworking their imaginary to address what needs addressing. I think secularism by virtue of the power, I really like when I was talking to Lars, we talked about Odin taking out one eye in order to gain knowledge and sort of mapping that onto the manifest versus the scientific image. Science is essentially covering up the manifest image eye and seeing the world through that and finding astounding power and capacity through that move. Secularism is akin to that. Secularism is akin to that. And so there's a reason that whereas many other cultures that had significant commitments to historical large world faiths, which weren't seen as religions, because it was just seen as the way things were, the reason secularism went through like a side underneath and cut them out. And now suddenly there's Judaism and Hinduism and Buddhism and Shinto and on and on and on and on and on. I mean, when you begin to see that move, and I think Tom Holland, I didn't see it until Tom Holland talked about it, when you begin to see that move, you begin to appreciate the astounding power of Christianity to whether or not people realize it to fundamentally change the terms in which human beings live. And that happened through Western secularism and continues to happen. But I think on top of it, you're not, because secularism is kind of a patch over one eye, the accommodations that will be made and adjustments of the manifest image have to follow as well. And so the, in many ways, the progressive versus historical Christian debate that I might talk about in a video this afternoon, it's a function of secularism, undercutting Christianity itself in some ways. And that's just another echo of the modernist fundamentalist debates of the 19th and early 20th century. Oh, I don't, and I think, they've put these movements on steroids, because now they all have to deal with secularism. And is resurgent Islamism, the kind that has, you know, drove airplanes into buildings, that happened because of secularism. So a response to secularism, because Muslims, quite rightly, looked at how secularism has, and the powers that it unleashed, and the capacities it gave us, has, you know, in some ways, put the world out of balance. And so, well, how do you balance something really strong? You respond with something really strong, and legalism is really strong, and religion is really strong. So it's just a scaling up. Sorry, I'm scrolling through. There is another one in here. I just need to get back to it. There's at least, at least one. Here we go. From Gomer Day. Hello, Pastor. Hope you and your family are well. Question, or more of advice that I'm looking for. I have a friend of mine who's a pastor thinking about starting up a Jordan Peterson meetup. And since Jordan Peterson has been out of public discourse for a while, is it a good time to use Jordan's name for a meetup, or should we start something else? Thanks for your time, and all that you do through your YouTube channel. Right before the pandemic, we had this conversation at our meetup, and Joey, when he first said it, I didn't understand what he meant, but after a bit, I understood it. Oh, that's a good idea. He said we should rename our meetup a Jordan Peterson style meetup, because that made me ask the question, what on earth is Jordan Peterson style? I think of a lot of his quirky mannerisms that I find endearing as Jordan Peterson style, but I think what Joey was saying is a meetup where we dare to have what Rod Hare calls 10% conversations, where this is the part of the conversation that we can't seem to be having in public. And we're going to try and have it here and try and do it in a way that it doesn't blow apart in all the ways that it's been blowing apart on social media. So I, well, now you got a pandemic to figure out too. I said something to Esther on Twitter about this, that I think we're going to see a second Jordan Peterson wave. I don't know if it'll be as big as the first. Just by virtue of Twitter, I think he's getting stronger. I think he's healing. We'll have to see if the second book is any good. We'll have to see if he can figure out how not to get sucked into less productive culture war spaces, conversations and habits. But I'm optimistic that we're going to see a second wave. And for as polarizing as Jordan's name can be, I don't know, at least two years ago, if I've used any other name, if we would have gotten the response that we got. And I don't have another candidate or another way to publicize what it is we're doing besides Jordan's name. So I'd use it. We still are. And it's complicated. But because the hit job done on Jordan's reputation by the left and by the media of the left, that had significant, that was significant. And I bump into it regularly. There are certain people when I attempt to approach them, because I've seen some things in how they've conducted themselves or I see where they sort of line up. And I want to do a conversation with them. And if I mentioned that I have a YouTube channel that grew sort of in the wake of Jordan Peterson, they won't even talk to me. They don't want to talk to me publicly. And so that's real. So I notice it. And I know that I'm sure I've lost status among certain colleagues of mine in the Christian Deformed Church because of my, I'm Jordan Peterson adjacent, but sometimes you got to do what you got to do. And sometimes there's integrity in doing what you know will not necessarily be welcome, but you think is right. So do what is meaningful and not what's expedient. So yeah, if that's, you can do a Jordan Peterson style meetup, figure out how to do it. But every zip code is different. So figure out what works. That note, everyone. Welcome, Joe. Yeah. I wondered for a while if I should write like a long blog post by detail the last two years and how crazy that's been. Then I ran into Peterson who says, well, no, you should be the truth and don't lie, but you should also be careful who you share good news with, careful on who you share bad news with because well, in my fields of work and even how Peterson seen and then how people adjacent to religious religion I seen, I don't know. I'd be kind of wondering is as soon as I open that box, then wow, I can't close it anymore. Yeah. So be innocent as be shrewd as serpents and innocent as doves. Yeah. How to put those two things together. It can be. We have a local WhatsApp group where we plan our family holiday. And so my mom was wondering if you were still going to go. Maybe we could still go with the new regulations. And I said, well, if we can have churches open with a hundred people, surely we can have 25 people in some holiday home. But churches get an exception. That's my younger brother. My younger brother. Oh, yeah. But then I said, we can just follow James's advice where he says to wash your hands, you sinners and we'll be cool. And the brother just rolls his eyes like, yeah, it's this family holidays are also not going to be same anymore because well, there's a joke now who's religion adjacent and strange and we can't have the discussions that we used to have. Those are difficult waters to navigate. Yeah. What discussions do they think they can't have in front of you? I mean, I have this all the time as a pastor. Oh, well, I can't talk this way in front of a pastor. Why? Because somehow you're talking in front of God in a special way that I'm a priest. They would they would wonder that I come from a certain frame. And yeah, I don't know. So I'm horrible at explaining myself. Oh, no, Sherry, they won't. They can't find about it. They can't find out about this discord. I live a double life. Basically, if people who know me would find out about this place, it'd be it'd be the worst. Yeah, I rooted it. I'm terrified of the day when this my carefully, carefully managed double life also part like, oh, the joke is really religious. Oh, yeah. That's weird. Yeah. The my conversation with Dennis, you know, we got into this question of closets and, you know, Dennis's, you know, when does Dennis come out of the closet? That's the Christian closet. Hey, right. Oh, I'm looking forward to seeing that convo. Yeah. Right. Yeah. These are weird things, you know, because on the one part, it's haven't been, you know, I've never been better than this. And I think that goes for a lot of people on this discord. You kind of really want to talk about that. And the other hand. Oh, oh, no. Oh, my God. I've died. What? Oh, gee. It's in general. Oh, cutting out Joe who died. I've died.