https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8hyq-meSNAI

 Hi, this is Paul. Last night, I, my wife actually woke me up because I was snoring and she was frustrated enough that she woke me up enough that I decided to get up and let her fall back to sleep without the anxiety of me snoring and was able to actually put together a bunch of thoughts that I was working on tomorrow afternoon. I actually tried to make a video and I didn't actually delete the files so I might put them at the end of this video. They'll probably be far longer than the rest of this video. Some of you might find it interesting, we'll see. But I woke up in the middle of the night and wrote a, started responding to some stuff on Twitter and it's really dangerous waking up in the middle of the night and writing on Twitter because this morning I woke up and I thought, was I fully awake when I was writing this stuff? I'm not sure. Anyway, I started writing on Twitter and very quickly I realized that this was something that I would want to put on my sub stack and so that is the origin of meaning making as first person appropriation of the third, first personal appropriation of the third personal. And so what sort of developed last night was a little bit more language to try to get to understanding Jonathan Peugeot and what's going on in this little corner of the internet and get some more language for it. And so the subtitle of this sub stack is, why is Jonathan Peugeot so hard to understand for many? Now some of you know that I have this sub stack and what I use this sub stack for is usually to do video summaries or accumulate a bunch of things that I'm sort of disciplining myself using the structure of Twitter to write. And so if you're not subscribed to my sub stack, subscribe, it's free. I don't know if I'll monetize it at some point, but I'm not monetizing yet. All of my posts on it are free. You will get a message in your inbox about it. I usually post them on Twitter. If you're not on Twitter, you probably have email and you can get it there. Usually I write a sub stack after I do a video and in this case I wrote a sub stack after I did a video that I didn't publish. So a lot of this is to get an idea about, okay, what are we really doing here? Because a lot of human life is acting and behaving and talking before you really know what you're doing or what you're thinking or what's going on. And so the more I listen to Peugeot, especially when I listen to his take on the book of Genesis that he posted on Jordan Peterson posted as sort of an interesting addendum to his biblical series. Why is Jonathan Peugeot's take on the book of Genesis so different? And probably the best way to come to terms with it is that Jonathan Peugeot is approaching the world from the first person. Now I'm going to have to put on my headphones now. Some of you might also know that I have an on again off again clips channel and I've my reason for this channel continues to evolve. The channel's name is Vander clips and the link to this video and to the channel, the link to the channel is always in my notes below, but the links to this video would be in my notes below. This is just a little segment that I clipped from the four horsemen video. I've been playing around with reaping. That's grim grizzes term for, well, you can ask Grim Grizz exactly how he's using the term. My appropriation of grim grizzes term is grabbing these little tidbits from the internet. So I'm throwing them on my Vander clips channel. I'm also trying to get little two minute videos that sometimes I'll post in my Twitter feed. I'm playing with that in terms of posting Twitter, posting video straight onto Twitter. I've been off of Facebook for a while now over a year and I know some of you have continued to my volume is way down low here. That's better. Sorry. I'm going to pause with your volume again during this video. Some of you have written me on Facebook messenger and I haven't gotten back to you because I haven't looked at it for a year, but now I've been posting stuff that we're cleaning out in the church on Facebook marketplace and thinking maybe I should clean up my Facebook account, delete a whole bunch of past stuff like personal pictures and things that are in my Facebook account and then maybe use my Facebook account more for work because that's how I'm sort of using it now. Anyway, so here's a little clip of Jonathan Pujol making a point in the Four Horsemen video responding to John Vervecky. The image that you use, which is the idea that we project meaning on an objective world. Already you can see the alienation that is bound up in that very proposition, which is, okay, so where are we then? We're not in the world. We're like these, these kind of ghosts that are floating above reality. Now if you watch Jonathan Pujol's talk with rationality rules and Adam Friend did, those, both of those conversations are prime examples of Jonathan trying to articulate the fact that he sees the world through the first personal instead of what is now the public convention, which is seeing the world through the third personal. Okay, so the first personal is seeing the world as we see it, going chronologically through time from a first person perspective. And as Jonathan Pujol always says, the world lays itself out. Okay, and that's in many ways a lot of what his project has been is being an apologist for the first personal, let's call it. Ghosts that are floating above reality. That is exactly what I've been talking about for four years in terms of a monarchical vision. Mono, which is one, monarchical, which is highest vision, the one highest vision, which is exactly what science tries to do. And as Jordan Peterson talked about in the transliminal videos, we sort of de-personalize the world in order to gain this view. It's sort of like Woden losing an eye so he can have knowledge. That's the monarchical vision. That is the third personal. And what the public convention has been since the enlightenment has been the third personal because the first personal was seeing that it was part of, well, Verveki nicely talks about this in terms of, I'll see now I have to go back to the other clip I made now. I'm using some software that isn't really nicely recording the audio. I'll continue to work on that, but it saves me from downloading the file and going through that. I'm always looking for more efficient ways to reap, more efficient ways to take what I'm looking for. So here's this other video. Related issues around ideas of levels of being, which is, I think you're right. All of you have said this and this is central to the phenomenology of intelligibility, but it seems to be contradicted by something that starts with SCOTUS and goes through Ockham and goes into the heart of the scientific revolution. And so you can see the journey towards this, of course, actually starts, as Verveki is right, before the scientific revolution, before the Protestant Reformation, SCOTUS and Ockham and nominalism, and that's been pointed out by many, many people before this little corner of the internet. Now, I'm not mentioning these things to espouse them. I'm mentioning them to try and indicate there have been very profound philosophical historical developments that have challenged this phenomenology. Phenomenology, too, is in many ways sort of a first personal approach to philosophy. That's part of the reason phenomenology got going because it got to the point that the person was lost and people, to what degree people were conscious of that, but the attempt to try to reintegrate the subject back into philosophy. Again, that's pretty esoteric, which is why I'm liking first personal and third personal as ways of sort of scaling this thing down in a way that I think many, many more people can appropriate it because most people have an understanding of first person grammar and third person grammar. And in some ways, that's also a nice really shorthand map of the division of the four P's within Verveki's system of third person as propositional and first person as the participatory and the procedural and the perspectival. There's the third one. Task. Well, sorry, I don't want to be presumptuous. Part of what I see my task of being is to try and take the very best of science and answer all of those challenges in a way that restores confidence in the hierarchies of intelligibility and the phenomenology of connectedness. Okay. Now that all sounds for most of you. That's just way over your head. Well, what is Verveki trying to do? In many ways, he's trying to do sort of what the IDW tried to do in terms of the social culture war thing and their own little scientific disciplines that they felt in the university, that with the recession of modernity, that science was getting eaten away. Verveki does fit into that group, but he's looking at the culture war stuff and saying, more heat than light. He's got opinions every now and then you can pry one out of him, but for the most part, he's avoiding that because he's saying these things are manifestation of a much deeper thing. And Verveki says, I'd rather address the far deeper thing here than get lost in the distraction of all of this stuff. I mentioned, I did a bunch of writing on Twitter this morning. I mean, Jordan Peterson status rocket ride cost him his career as a university professor, cost him his career as a clinical psychologist. Verveki, I think wisely is sort of sidestepping the status rocket, even though he's having a nice little status staircase that he's working on, which I think is very appropriate and is actually a far better, humanly speaking, a far better way of pursuing an agenda and getting a message out there, a status staircase instead of a status rocket, because you can actually hold your life together and you're not going to get altitude sickness. So this is what Verveki is working on, a bunch of this really wonky, thinky stuff. Now that's one thing I'd want to say. But what the price of go on this particular clip that I just posted on my Vander clips channel, you know, Verveki has been talking a lot about neoplatonism. And so I thought, I want to do a little bit more background. I'm going to find some more stuff on YouTube about neoplatonism and these Arthur Holmes videos that Wheaton has put up and they've been up for years. He's really a fun lecturer. He's really an excellent lecturer. So these are also, when I think about sources, these are also things that Christians aren't, evangelical Christians aren't necessarily going to be all scared about. Oh, this is coming from Harvard. Oh, this is coming from University of Toronto. Okay. This is coming from Wheaton. Okay. And this is coming from Wheaton from like, I don't know, they took videotape of this guy in maybe the 1980s or something. So, you know, everybody can sort of settle down and not be too much too worried that some cabal of progressives or, or academicians are going to hoodwink them. This is Arthur Holmes just basically walking through the ideas of the great chain of being. Now I'm not going to play this here. I intended this to be short because I have a 1230 lunch appointment. And so this is going to force me to keep this short. It's already longer than I thought it was going to be because what I really wanted to talk about was what I wrote on the sub stack, which I am actually just sort of winding up, sort of winding up, just reiterating, which is the reason that I can never write anything because I'm perpetually rewriting what I intend to do as I go and never getting to a final draft. Anyway, so Peugeot in a sense stands on the shoulders of, of sort of the rising at the peak of modernity, the recession of modernity, the crisis of the subject and his entire approach is the first personal and he's okay. So the first personal is the way that he approaches the, the book of Genesis. And in many ways, Peterson is not as far into this as Peugeot is. What made Peterson's genet biblical series is Genesis series. So powerful was that Peterson is always trying to not lose the third personal maybe I will include at the end of this video, the dregs of an unfinished video that I worked on yesterday and never just basically abandoned because I didn't like how it was shaping up back to the, so, so Peugeot is much more disciplined on sticking to the first personal. Peterson can't quite do that because he's a university professor and because he's a scientist and so the scientific view sticks with the third personal, it sticks with a, sticks with the monarchical vision. And so the dregs of the video that I'm going to post at the end of this video, which has Gavin Ashenden and I knew, Skip, I was thinking about, I know you left a comment, Skip, on the video before, so if you're watching this, Skip, I knew you were going to react strongly to Gavin Ashenden because Gavin Ashenden has totally, you know, rejected Jung and of course, Skip, those of you who know Skip on one of the Jung channels, you know, Skip, Skip's a lover of Jung and so Gavin Ashenden has completely rejected Jung and so when Gavin Ashenden engages with Jordan Peterson's material, Gavin Ashenden has, you know, left the Anglican church rather high status in the Anglican church and went to the Roman Catholic church and so Gavin Ashenden is Gavin Ashenden, agree, disagree, he's just out there, but he's an interesting voice and so I included him in the whole video about the transcendental in many, or about the mystical. Anyway, so Peterson is, always has to deal with the third personal and so when Gavin Ashenden is watching Peterson process this stuff in a room full of Cambridge academicians, Gavin Ashenden is feeling the tension here. Peugeot basically sticks in on the first personal because he doesn't have to leave it because his entire theology can fit into it, his reading from Genesis can fit into that and so Genesis for him is always true because Genesis lays itself out in the world as we see it. Peterson was always flipping between the third personal and the first personal in his biblical series on Genesis because he is studying psychology, which is always sort of in the middle of the third personal. That psychology is basically attempting to study the first personal from the perspective of the third personal and we'll have to see if psychology and the other social sciences, how they actually endure with the continual recession of the modern. We don't want to lose the third personal, it has tremendous power and it's given us tremendous benefits, but what we've seen is that the third personal is inadequate and that's really at the basis for the postmodern crisis and if you watch Peugeot and Bishop Barron's video that they did together, that was posted after the four horsemen video, you'll see both of them, which is a position that I've had that said, you know, and this position that Jamie Smith over at Calvin University has maintained that and what John Vervecky is saying, you know, the postmodernism is also presented an opportunity for some breaking down and recognition of the limitations and the overreach of modernity. Anyway, back to the substack. The four horsemen video opened with a treatment and John and Jordan Peterson asked each of them to give a treatment of what meaning is about and actually that little clip that I made of Peugeot is from Peugeot's, is it? I'm not sure. Anyway, when Peugeot was asked to talk about meaning, he goes first personal and when I wrote this first tweet, I didn't quite have the personal suffix on which I think makes it a little better. Meaning is an appropriation of the third person to the first person and actually, so I worked on the video, the dregs of which or the tailings of which I will attach to the end of this video, so I worked on that video. I was frustrated and because it's really frustrating to put an hour into a video and realize, oh, this is crap. I don't want to post this. I mean, it's even bad for me, which is a low bar, and then I decided, okay, I'm going to post the deconstruction video because he gave me permission to share that. I was really anxious to get that video out there because the video I posted today was really a good one. Then my wife is at home and she's dealing with school and COVID in terms of all the COVID limitations at school and it's just wreaking havoc in a setting like a school. We have dinner and then she says, I've watched some TV, why don't you pick what we'll watch? I wanted to see the weather, so I went over to the local news and there's this interesting story about a standoff up in El Dorado County, which is up near Apple Hill for those of you who live in the Sacramento area, where there's a standoff and there's some gunfire and it was near a school. Actually, I couldn't find the teacher's aide who I thought gave the best interview because she heard the gunshots and up there in the foothills, they're a little less spooked by gunfire than those in the school. I was really upset about those of us who live down here in the middle of the valley in the city because if there's gunfire in the city, you don't want to have any of that. Up there in the foothills, someone may be hunting and a little bit more comfortable with guns up there in the foothills. But this teacher aide or someone heard some gunfire and so she stepped outside and said, I wondered what it meant and bang. Okay, that's the third personal. She heard gunfire. That's out there. That's the third personal. Gunfire, bang, bang, bang, objective, sound. A tree was falling and she heard it and she asked, what did it mean? She was in charge of a bunch of school children. She was going to have to make decisions about the safety of the school children. Now again, there was that school shooting in Michigan and so trust me when I tell you, anytime there's a school shooting in the nation, that grabs teacher salience landscape because teachers love their students, especially if they have little children like my wife has in her elementary school. They're concerned about the little hiring anxiety and it's like, honey, the odds of a school shooting at your shoes doesn't matter. Higher in, I'm very low in, in neuroticism and negative emotions. She's higher than I am and she's like, every time there's a school shielding, I always think what am I, what would happen if, if there was a shooter here? How am I going to keep my children safe? So, so this teacher hears the shooting. What does this mean? Okay. What is meaning? There's something out there in the world, in the third personal, and she immediately has to translate it down into the first personal. That's the meaning move from the third personal to the first personal. And that's, that's very similar to the transjective. Now, Peugeot had made, also made a video about, I, I remember him saying at some point, and I couldn't find it, I, I've some people say they have, um, photographic memory. My memory, my memory is more phonographic. And I think that's true because I'm a little dyslexic. And so when I learned the violin in first grade, I learned in the Suzuki method. So I have a pretty good memory for things that I hear. And that's part of the reason that I do these clip compilations, because I can, because I can, I could find things in books fairly easily. Kindle sort of messes that up, except that I can search for words in Kindle, but I can usually sort of remember a video and where in the video something was. And I remember Peugeot saying something about, um, you know, the sub or the objective subjective. And that's a lot of what we're sort of working on. And so when you listen to verveky and his transjective, that's really what he's getting at. And so I found in the Jonathan Peugeot November question and answer, a question about the verveky transjective. All right. So Maximus Maguiar asks, are objective and subjective useful terms for talking about reality? Well, consciousness plays a role in all manifestation. How about John Verveky's word, transjective? Um, that's fine. I mean, I use the words, I tend to use those words a little subversively because I obviously don't agree. I tend to, like, I'll tend to, for example, want to show that the subjective is objective in the way that people think about it kind of in a vulgar way. And then he goes on to talk about transjective and, and the fact that sometimes, I mean, if you want to figure out what John Verveky is doing here, I've got 50 hours of video. No, I'm not one to talk because I got a few hundred hours of video and I'm, I'm not even bothering to explain myself in a systematic way. So I'm certainly not one to point fingers at this, but again, this is Peugeot. It's the first personal that's where he leads. And he's trying to do a little bit of translating from the third personal. Again, Jordan Peterson in his biblical series was very much switching between the third personal and the first personal. And I think that is really where you have so much of your meaning making. And I, I think that's, I think that's true to a lot of what John Verveky has been saying. And I think it's true to a lot of what Peterson has been saying, but you know, my thick skull and now Bishop Barron, which I thought if you go back to my, I thought he gave a terrific answer to the meaning question. He went at it through value, which I think is another great way to go at it. But this is, I think a lot of what we mean when we talk about meaning, meaning making or sense making in the rebel wisdom language is, is taking that third person knowledge shooter out on the highway and asking, how do I take third person knowledge hearing gunfire and use it to act with respect to the students I love? That's exactly what was on that teacher's mind. The children heard gunshots are scared. That's sense making that the third person sounds of shots might impact the first person, potential pain, interruption of the personal narrative progress, our life in a sense, moving forward in time. That's really what our life is in a narrative way, how many of us really process and assume our life to be. It's a personal narrative progress moving forward in time. But as children don't process this very consciously, they just feel scared because we see patterns and, and we see opportunities and threats and children, you know, they might hear pop pop pop and they might not recognize, they might not know what that is. Maybe if they've had more experience with gunshots, they know so, but the teacher is an authority and the teacher right away, what does this mean? It's exactly what she said on the videotape. And I thought that's exactly the right word. And this is exactly the interchange, the third personal to the first personal. In two conversations between Jonathan Peugeot and rationality rules and Adam Friend did, there's a lot of frustration and meaning making. Peugeot confuses and frustrates people. And it's not clear that many people understand why. In fact, I've been listening to him for four years and I'm just starting to figure it out now, but you shouldn't feel embarrassed about taking time to learn this stuff. This stuff is not immediately apparent. And even if we can grasp it in our own skulls, whether we can articulate it in a way that other people will understand, that's the challenge. Perhaps a way to figure out Jonathan Peugeot is to see him as approaching the world from the, from the first person perspective, rather than the third person. Ever since the enlightenment, the third person perspective is the one that is sanctioned for public life and governance. In many ways, that's what happened first in the church and the Protestant Reformation. We're not going to listen to the hierarchy. We're not going to listen to what the Bishop feels should happen here. Now, a lot of that just sneaks back into Protestantism because you can't, you need to have both the third personal and the first personal to live. So the fact that this stuff sort of snuck back into Protestantism through the Reader, Oh, I believe in Luther that it's Sola Scriptura. Well, you're believing in Luther. So again, you never get rid of these dynamics fully. The scientific image is the one privileged for the public world. And again, that in a lot of ways really developed strongly in modernity and became the modern stance. Third person is public. First person is private. Now again, look at Jordan Peterson. He's deeply modernist, but he's just there on the cusp. In many ways, Peugeot is over the hill and can comfortably go over the hill because he's, you know, he's a YouTuber and an icon carver. And it's like, he doesn't have to be a scientist. Peterson has to deal with scientists. And so he has to deal with the third personal. Now in the recession of modernity, Peugeot reprioritizes, and again, this is a function of priority, the first person perspective that is most clear in his exegesis of Genesis one on Jordan Peterson's posting. Every time Peugeot says, the world lays itself out, he's invoking the first person perspective. That's really what he's doing. I remember Mary Cohen picked up on that right away and she said, every time he says lays itself out, then you know, I heard that what two, three years ago, and I still hasn't gotten through my thick skull. Now again, you might say, oh, Paul's being, you know, hard on himself. Do not worry about me being hard on myself. My wife will tell you I have an ego the size of Texas. I doesn't every now and then I'll think, I'm just not smart enough to manage this stuff. The slow list, the, the slow pace of my cognition and my learning is to your benefit, because if I can think slowly and work things out and discover language, I can share it with you. So high status and astronomical IQs are not necessarily something to aspire towards. So anyway, it takes me a while to figure this stuff out, but hopefully by the time I do, I have some language and some ability to share it with you. And again, for my tremendously rambly long videos, that's part of the process. And hopefully after doing it a few years, I will have better succinct communicable language to share and to refine with you all. Of the, of John Verveckis four P's of knowing the propositional is third person, but the participatory and procedural and perspectival are more first personal. See right there, see, this is part of the reason I like sort of thinking in real time, because someone might say, Paul, when did you develop the first personal, third personal language? I say, I did it somewhere around 2 20 AM on December 1st, and I'm not sure I am on December 8th. And I did it right there in the middle of that tweet, knowing the propositional is third person, but the participatory procedural and perspectival are more first personal. And bang, there's a little bit of insight and a little pair, a little tiny little paradigm shift in my little noggin. Well, it's not that little as far as noggins go. Meaning making is, is the transjective frame switching between the third personal and the first personal third personal applied to the first personal leading to the first personal knowing and acting back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. That's really where meaning happens. And this maps, you know, the monarchical vision. And then again, the personal just back and forth, back and forth. That's, that's how we live. So, all right, I did pretty well on time here. I think, well, that gives me a little bit of time to include the, the what's, what's coming now in this video, feel free to skip, because what it is, is pieces of a video that I abandoned yesterday. But it might be interesting to you because you can see I'm working through the language there, and I didn't really have it. And it took, you know, this is all insight and it's like, you know, the shamanic thing where things are disrupted. So I abandoned the video and I went home and I'm watching this random news question and this teacher comes out and says, I heard shots and I had to, comes out and says, I heard shots and I had to, what does this mean? Bang. And I had a usable definition of meaning. And I had a usable way to talk about Jonathan Peugeot. And I had a usable, usable way to talk about the difference between Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson. And I had a better picture for sort of the difference between Peterson and Vervecky in terms of a whole bunch of things. So yeah, this ends the intentional portion of this video. And what follows are the scraps of a video that I would have posted today, but I abandoned. And so I know how y'all are. YouTube shows me the analytics. You never, very few of you make it to the end. And so if you're a, if you're one of those who makes it to the end hats off to you. I don't make it to the end of every video by no means. So, okay. This is the end of the better formed video. This is the substack. If you want a link to the substack, it's down below. If you want to get these substacks in your inbox, subscribe to the substack. It just takes an email address. One of the things I like about substack is that there aren't any ads. I do have a WordPress blog that I use that doesn't have ads either, but that's much more a filing cabinet. This is sort of a way to get, I can only listen to one Paul video, PVK video a month, but I'm kind of curious about what he's working on and developing. Obviously you can find, follow me on Twitter for that, but I do a lot more playing on Twitter with all kinds of other things too. But this, the substack will give you a better sense of just little snapshots of what I'm doing. If you don't, if you're not the kind that has a job where you have to be in a car or work a trade or code or something like that. So, okay. This is the end of the other part of the video. The rest of this video are all the stuff that I abandoned, but didn't delete. So thanks for watching. Hi, this is Paul. Yesterday I made a video that eventually got titled Transformational Mystical Experiences That Are More Common Than You Think. And I went through some of John Vervecky's conversation with, gotta remember his name so I can get it right, Rick Rapeto. And I had Gavin Ashenden and Karen Wong on the meaning code. And I mashed up some of that back and forth because they were kind of a good, they were kind of an interesting pair with him being someone who left the Anglican church to go to the Roman Catholic church, um, very much having a concern about evil. And then the, uh, Rick Rapeto having, Rick Rapetti having very interesting experiences that are somewhat analogous to church. And I promised a second part and I was in the Bridges of Meaning, I was in the Bridges of Meaning open studio and a bunch of people dropped in. And Mark, of course, who leaves immediate comments on my videos, Mark LeFavor said, oh good, well you'll get to the second part. And it's like, I'm not sure I'll get to the second part that he thinks I'm going to get to. But that was a really productive conversation because one of the things that he mentioned that sort of put a lot of pieces together for me was the idea of the larger container and how that relates to the individual mystical experiences. Now I'm using mystical experiences for lack of a better term. Um, I'm using it very broadly. I'm using it to address experiences that are in some ways out of bounds in modernity. Part of what happened in the Enlightenment is all such, all such experiences would be labeled as private, not public, and therefore excluded from the public realm. And that's not without, that's not without importance. That's not without importance in that, let's say you have, so as a result of the video, of course, it's very interesting. Some videos flood my inbox and because people want to share their stories and that's wonderful. And as the point of the video was, many, many people have stories similar to that. It's not just psychedelics. Um, um, uh, Gavin Ashenden had a near death experience as a result of drinking alcohol when he was young. Many people have had lots of experiences that the Enlightenment says keep private. One of the, one of the really good comments that I received, that I received from Senor Cebolla, that's um, Mr. Onion, said, what grates me most about stories like the ones referenced here is not that they're fanciful or weird, but their significance is assumed. I've had such experience and, and they've been related to me too. What I haven't seen is a strong reason to show them to the public. And I think that comment in many ways illustrated the, the Enlightenment agreement that the upper register would stay private and the lower register would stay public. The difficulty that you have with that, and this is brought out by Wilfred Sellers' dichotomy of the scientific vision and the manifest image or scientific image of the man, is that the scientific image is all lower register, but meaning, morality, those kinds of things all come from the upper register. So what tends to happen is that the lower register just sort of sneaks into the upper register and then suddenly appears sort of sneaking through because you can't really keep them separate. So part of the point that, that Mark LeFavor had made to me was the necessity for, and then Manuel sort of brought this out, the necessity for a container as such, because he noted, maybe we'll get rid of this screen completely. What he noticed was that, let's go get back to Rick Rapetti's experience. So he had these dramatic mystical experiences. He, he very much needed them in community because the community held it together. And then when the community had a conflict and it broke apart, he left it. And this was part of Mark's, Mark's point, which I think was, was important where what happens in especially a world religion and what happens when you have a system that is large enough to have not just proximal goods, but claims of ultimate goods. And I, I don't remember which conversation, I think it was the conversation that Peterson had with the narrative guy. There needs to be interconnected things all the way from the ultimate good to the proximal good. And that needs to scale. And so what happens, let's say you have a situation like Rick Rapetti and he's with, I don't remember the guru's name, but he's with these three spiritual leaders and they basically have this fight and they all break up. Well, what happens generally, if you're a Christian is that, well, if there's problems in your local church, you break up. And if you're a committed enough Christian, you either found another church or you, you, you find another church or maybe after a time of healing, you, in other, you replace it. In other words, there's an entire ecosystem that affords reconstituting the search and the ideal and the practice. And so what I think you get with the emanation and emergence is that once again, you can get into that middle space. Now, if you're curious about this, I thought the conversation was really helpful. I was also experimenting with what would happen if I basically flipped from having a little discord, private discord conversation and pulled a few people onto the main channel on the internet to see how that would go. And it went fairly well. Again, part of what I'm doing with my channel is trying to develop things as I go. And so once Mark made that point, I wanted to reinforce the insight and share the insight and catalog the insight for myself so I could go back to it. And instead of let's say taking notes and finding a place to do it in some ways, the easiest way to do that was to pull it onto the main channel, put it out there on the internet and in a sense, store it in the cloud. Well, what's the cloud? The cloud is the collective consciousness congress of the community. And I know there's a lot of confusion about what I'm doing with this channel because the assumption is when people come to this channel that, well, Paul is trying to establish a large YouTube channel. Paul is acting in a mercenary way as a minister and he's trying to make more Christians. Well, I am because that's sort of deep into Christianity. But a big part of what I'm doing is trying to think together with these individuals on the Discord server and with other people on YouTube and with other people on Twitter, because what happens is that I say things and that goes into other people's minds and there's some mutations that happen and what comes back to me isn't necessarily what I was intending, but the difference with what comes back to me and from what I said is helpful for me to know the other forces and cross pressures and sort of the way that the collective in the community is thinking. And it's for that reason that I want to think together with people who both have heard enough of me so that they're sort of tracking with the conversation, have enough difference from me so that they can bring new things into the conversation that I can't know or don't know so that they will challenge me. I thought Sam, at the end of that video, the video was entitled, Follow Up on Instability of Mystical Personal Transformations, Sam I thought had a lot of really apt things to say about the whole psychedelic conversation. I thought Mark did too and there was a healthy difference of opinion in that group on this subject. But what we're doing is we're thinking together and as we think together, well, we grow in knowledge. Now, so again, what the insight that I really got from Mark in that was, was it an insight or was it a vision? The question is why does Christianity work so well? And I think that's a very good question. Christianity works so well. Now, both in the comments and in the conversation a bit, you would get the sense from maybe some of the hand wringing that I do and from some of the conversations that we're having here that Christianity is somehow failing. Now, while there are signs of trouble, certainly for Christianity in places like Europe and North America, and I spend a lot of time attempting to address those difficulties, Christianity is massive. There are billions of people who identify as Christians. There are 2000 years of thinking and writing and sharing that have gone into this. There's infrastructure, there's impact. I mean, Tom Holland in some ways in Dominion has really articulated this. So Christianity is struggling, but Christianity is not failing. And I want to, I was going to address the Ashenden video, but maybe I'll start with the Kings North video. Although before I get there, I want to talk a little bit about understanding Jonathan Pujo and the difference that he is bringing and what's happening in this community. One way to understand Jonathan Pujo is by thinking about first person, second person, and third person. Modernity continually tries to see things from the third person. So when Senor Saboya makes the comment that these things should stay private, on one hand, he's got a point because of the nature of mystical experience, they're solitary. I had this out of body experience or I had this near death experience. And so if you look at it, let's say from the perspective of Verveckian error checking, because that's a lot of what John Vervecki's program is about to get at truth better. So if you look at it in terms of error checking, there's so much that is boiled in to an individual mystical experience that there are very good reasons for the public to be skeptical. Now again, so often you get the sense that, well, Christians don't want to talk about this. People, evangelicals, charismatics, for all of church history and even reformed types and reformational types who are very rationalistic and biblicistic, we have always dealt with the question of individual perspective and interpretation. Someone comes to church and says, I just feel that God is telling us we should do this. We live in that context all the time in a church and churches have developed elaborate religio, elaborate practices and protocols and traditions in order to deal with the reality of individual mystical experiences, individual opinions, all of those things. Churches are simply awash in individuals who have different perspectives, different interpretations, conflicts, all of that. And so a lot has developed in churches simply to try to filter that stuff. Even if you get to, let's say, highly reformational, rationalistic, biblicistic tradition, they might not be aware they are dealing with individual opinion and insights, but there's vast machinery and practices that they have developed within their church to deal with those things. And they do. Now, part of the way in which modernity captured the church was the emphasis and sometimes over-emphasis on the third person, because the monarchical vision, the sort of being pulled up to imagine we're seeing the world as it is, that is the scientific vision, and that's very much third person. Jonathan Peugeot really is promoting in many ways in many ways the first person. And one of the things that much of his work assumes is moving from a first person perspective out. All of the talk about attention, even his interpretation of Genesis in the video that Jordan Peterson promoted, that's very much a first person perspective. Now, all of us simultaneously deal with first, second, and third person perspectives. What tends to happen is that a hierarchy will develop in a community in terms of the evaluation of those perspectives. So modernity tends to reinforce the third person perspective. Jonathan Peugeot, and then when you hear Luke and a lot of people talking about personalism, they tend to emphasize the first person perspective. And all of these perspectives are important. Now, what tends to happen with upper and lower register things is that part of the reason for the lower register and the development of the practices that come from the Enlightenment are because the propositional, the lower register, the materiality, the space and time coordinates all help us stay communal in a good way. Now, the communal is in many ways second person. It's I thou, it's me you. It might be me you, and then me you, and then me you, because time-wise consciousness is very monofocal. But that's the second person. And so what we often do is we sort of, with all the tools that we've developed of statistics, the tools we've developed in Moderna, we try to swoop up, see from the third person, do analysis, then switch back down into the first person and act. Because we can't really act from the third person. All we can do is see. It's from the first person that we act perspectively, participatorily, and participation is really very second person. It's I thou, it's me you. And so we're constantly switching between these modes. I haven't done a lot of talking about frames lately, but when I listen to a number of the conversations in this little corner of the internet, I think about frames. One of the things that we, as human beings do to an amazing degree, far more than any other creature that we know or have access to, you know, far more than the animals, is that we frame switch. I can mind read, to a degree, people that are around me, because I can sort of see the world from their perspective. Now, it's never done right. It's never done perfectly. It's always selective. There's a lot of relevance realization happening that sort of focuses and limits it, but we sort of frame switch and we see the world from another perspective. And we keep doing that. And that's essentially what we do when we go up into third person mode. Then we come back into first person mode. And then if we're relating in second person mode, we're simultaneously trying to express something, but also trying to imagine what they're hearing. And so we just quickly frame switch back and forth. I'm still on the fence if I'm going to go forward with the Kings North video first or the Ashenden video first. Okay, let's do the Ashenden podcast first. Now, part of the reason I had part one is because I wanted to do a little bit more biography with Gavin Ashenden. He's a very interesting figure. He sort of reached the height of the pinnacle of power in the UK and left it all, joined the Roman Catholic Church. And again, you can listen to Karen, you can listen to the Meaning Code channel for more background on him. He's a very interesting person. And whereas he had a radio career on the BBC, which basically it sounds like was taken from him, he wasn't allowed, they were annoyed that he was reading the Bible on the radio for some reason. And he no longer could be like a vicar to the Queen or whatever post he had with that. And then he converted to Catholicism and he's got his podcast. By the largest videos, the biggest video splash that he's had is his commentary on Jordan Peterson. And what's interesting about him is that he has a background in Jung, he's got a background in psychology, also has a background in theology. And so he's got a perspective to share on this. Now, Peterson has been able to go to Cambridge and the Cambridge Union video, I think was again, one of the best videos that we've seen on Peterson's channel in a long time. But apparently Peterson participated in a small group discussion, which wasn't recorded, but it makes this video, I mean, is he telling tales out of school? I don't know, but there's a lot of Aschenden mixed in with this. And of course, it has to be from his perspective. And we're all used to sort of filtering things in that way. So there's a number of interesting tidbits in here. A private conversation. What I want to do in this podcast is to talk about what I learned about Jordan Peterson. What more I learned about him through this visit and seminar at Cambridge. And then divide it up into three elements. The first one is his struggle with science or scientism on behalf of depth psychology. And then to look at his conflict with the will to power of counterculture, of wokeism, of cultural Marxism, of political correctness, which is of course what he's most known for, and for many most celebrated for. And then finally, to give some further reflections on his relationship with Christianity now that I know a good deal more about him and I've had a chance to speak to him. When Jordan and I got to speak privately to one another, it was obviously a matter for me of trying to decide what I could best say that would be most helpful. After all, I'd been hoping to meet him and speak to him for some time. My first impression as I met him was of a very tough man, but tough in the sense that he was very well defended. We've all seen him come through a very serious period of illness and fragility. We've seen too the tenderness of his heart and how deeply moved he is when people come to him and reach out to him and he's able to help them by giving them a greater sense of meaning in their life. And he has so many stories of the way in which people have turned their lives around. Just by the example he set them and some of the things they've spoken to them about. And we'll cover some of that as we look at his attack on wokeism and his defense of traditional, in fact, Judeo-Christian values, but also the values of competent therapy. So it seemed to me that he had moved past that period of vulnerability and he'd almost as if he'd rebuilt himself and was now presenting a really very muscular persona. And he was also taller than I thought he was going to be. As we talked together, I thought the most helpful way to say, I thought the most helpful way to say, to talk would be to say that I too had been a Jungian, but I had given it up. I'd replaced, for a while I'd replaced Jesus with Jung to some extent, or at least run them together in parallel. Now again, you can check out the meaning code where he goes into that in quite a bit more detail. It's got a very interesting story. It's more accurate. I've never replaced Jesus. But then through an experience of evil, which I'll refer to later, I found that Jung's idea of the shadow was really wholly inadequate, not just inadequate, but in fact, profoundly misleading. So I said, Jordan, given the fact that you've been through hell, you've experienced enormous opposition with something very personal, you must have found yourself reflecting on evil and the way evil has steam-rooted over you. And do you think that Jung deals adequately with what you've experienced? I noticed that during a time we were together all day, in fact, Peterson had two modes. One was when he was throwing a question that he'd thought about a great deal unprepared. And in those circumstances, he gave very well, highly honed answers, marvellous reposts and responses. But if you provided him with a question he hadn't thought about or he was uncomfortable about, he shook it off and didn't answer it. I know the difference. I'm a complete sucker for questions. I always, I want to answer the question very badly, even if it leaves me in a place I'd rather not be too vulnerable. But I could see that Jordan Peterson took a different approach. And so when I mentioned this problem I had with Jung and the fact that I had resorted back to Christianity and its more specific articulation of personal diabolic evil, he looked quite alarmed and said, no, no, this is all much too Manichaean for him. And he wanted to keep right away from that. Well, I've had this comment. Now that sort of surprised me and I'd love to know more context in there because Peterson can, in many of his conversations, be very much the story of the world is about good and evil. Peterson, in his meaning talks, talks about good and evil regularly. And of course, if you go back into the Cambridge Union talk, he talks a lot about evil. And he talks specifically about Auschwitz and the cruel joke and that each of us is capable of evil. So a little bit of more nuance and clarification would be helpful in terms of the comments that he just made here. A number of times with academics in the past, theologians, intellectuals and others. And I've come to realize that the moment someone uses the word Manichaean, it's a code word, Manichaean is a code word. It tells you immediately that they are proposing to place if what I suppose I'd call the Jehanine articulation of good and evil, light and darkness in a dualistic structure. And they don't want to. Now that's going to lose a few people. He's probably, not probably, he's definitely talking about the gospel of John and the the Joannine, the first, the epistles of John, the book of Revelation. I've spoken before about especially first John, which is there's a lot of debate as to whether or not it's a pistol or perhaps it's an appendix to the gospel of John to treat some sort of docetic or nasty key or interpretations of the gospel of John. It's it's in first John that you find the Antichrist. And if you read first John, you'll you will see all of this antithetical stuff, light and darkness, good and bad, Christ and Antichrist. It's very, it's very antithetical. And so that's that's his comment behind the Joannine. They want to go near it and they kind of they are proposing to place if what I suppose I'd call the Jehanine articulation of good and evil, light and darkness in a dualistic structure. And they don't want to go near it. And they kind of they straw man it by saying, well, this is Manichaean. It's interesting that C.S. Lewis, as I've said many times before, I'm sure you know, said that when it came to dualism, he wanted to call himself as much of a dualist as the New Testament allowed him to be, which in his view was a considerable amount. Now if you look at Ashenden, quite clearly the he told Karen Wong that, you know, he had this experience of demonic attack. And he called a Roman Catholic priest who was a friend of his and said, you know, you're going to basically have to recruit Mary. And so that was very formative in terms of his story. These are still very interesting comments he's made, because again, we we're seeing we're hearing these conversations through him. But Peterson went right away from that. And I can see why, because I think in one sense, this is if you like the the vulnerability in his armor, this is something that he hasn't thought through and doesn't want to think through. Well, that's absolutely fine. Ecclesiastes, chapter three, there's a time for everything. And he and I had a conversation that ranged widely. I heard him later talk in a podcast with Johnson Pajero and Bishop Barron and another American psychologist. I guess we just I guess we just brought Verbecky into the US. Congratulations, John, you're an American citizen now. He's never been to the V, I think, about how recently he'd been got out by a by a religious type and who showered him with dogmatic propositions that he found immensely difficult and wanted to run away from screaming. Well, I was glad it wasn't me, but it could have been except I wouldn't have done that to him. So, so, you know, Ashenden is a fan. He really likes Jordan. So so he's he's by no means. He's thinking about the thinking about these as as friendly critique. This we now have the recount of the morning session between nine. Well, actually, it's a whole day, two and a half hours in the morning and the same in the afternoon with nine other academics. Interestingly, three were I think what I would call agnostic agnostics. That's a very interesting categorization of whom Peterson was one. There was another professor who had written a very powerful book on the mind and another one who had who had come to lecture for me when I was at Sussex, who wrote out Morphic Resonance. That must be Rupert Sheldrake and was a extremely well qualified biologist, but wanting to move beyond the strict parameters of scientism as it presents itself. So we had these three and then around the table, there were six of the rest of us who I think would describe ourselves as orthodox theologians, intellectuals, academics, disciples, whatever. Small or orthodoxy. And so battle began. The morning session is quite difficult to describe. It was it was quite abstruse. It was intellectually a high octane, and I'm not sure it would have been a huge of huge interest to the general public. It was academics muck wrestling, crossing swords. And one of the things Peterson was trying to do was to set out a thoroughly intellectual rejection of scientism. It was a marvelous moment when he said the problem with I think he said you religious types or might have been some religious types, but it was a bit disdainful and I think was a moment of self-disclosure. When you're arguing with Dawkins, he said, you allow him to set the parameters of what reality is and then then you lose the argument because you've let him set the context and the terms of engagement. And that was a point when I said well actually Jordan, I think that's what you're doing with us now. I think you've done the same thing from an agnostic point of view. And then we discussed that for a bit. He said something really I thought very helpful. He said the postmodern conundrum is a problem of perception. We don't know how to reduce the infinite number of things we could perceive to those things we do perceive. And so one of the things he wanted to do. Now that's a very interesting take because it's obviously very much what he was discussing with in the Four Horsemen video. It's obviously what he's discussing with Bishop Barron. It's quite clearly the problem of cognitive science that the world is full of many, many things. And how do we deal with that? Now in some ways that's a problem of the third person perspective because the third person perspectives is sort of a frame shift by which we imagine we see all as it is. But we can't see all as it is. So in some ways Peugeot's first person is a way to address that because then we see what we see. And there's obviously limitations on that in terms of our capacity to perceive. But there's also pre-experiential filters going on. In many ways Jordan Peterson's first conversation with Sam Harris, no not his first conversation but his conversation at Vancouver, the first night was all about those filters. That was the argument that Peterson was trying to set up in that conversation. And Sam Harris, I've likened that conversation to two kids in a playroom and Jordan's trying to build something and Sam, trying to build something with Sam and Sam just keeps knocking it down. That was part of the problem of that. And I think Peterson addressed the dynamics of that well in the Cambridge Union talk when he referred to the Sam Harris talk and he said, I've stopped trying in a sense to win arguments and more to have a conversation. And it's right there that again we switch sort of from the third person perspective which is very much attempting to, well I'm going to, it's sort of like Satan bringing Jesus up to the pinnacle or up to a high mountain to show him the kingdoms of the earth. And what is forgotten when Satan brings Jesus up to a high mountain to show him the kingdoms of the earth and say all of these I rule over. And Jesus is like, you're not telling me anything I don't know. In fact I'm seeing all of this far more than you are and to sort of pull Rene Girard into the conversation you rule over them by your mode of rulership. Okay so this is where the first person and the third person help because the switch from the third person to the first person which is what I think Jordan is working on and why he really appreciates Peugeot because Peugeot has just kind of done it but Peugeot doesn't have science to contend with like Peterson does because to be a scientist is to be a third person to say here is the world as such and as such is almost, here's the world from a monarchical vision. Oh well how can you tell us? All the telling is coming through the first person because language is all you know it's all of my all of my words are rung through time. All of my words are paced through time. So there's some second person in there because I'm talking to you but it's all going serially. It's not this. It's not turning the light on in a warehouse and suddenly seeing all the boxes. So Peterson's stuck in this frame shift in that he's seeing how well from the first person the observer is obviously integrated into the view whereas from the third person as Peterson says in the transliminal videos before the status rocket ride you take the person out and you sort of imagine your god to do that and but you can only act really in the first or the second person. You can't really act in the third person because you've dis you've taken your agency away. You've taken your perspective away so it's it's clear that this is something that Peterson is is trying to come to terms with. To do is to suggest that the one of the great hierarchical principles that we needed to use to interpret perception and reality was narrative. Well this is very interesting of course because. Okay because narrative again is all first person and we watch each other go through narrative and again that Strahan wanted me to to do a full commentary on his conversation about narrative and I said I would rather hear Vervecki talk to that individual because you know John Vervecki is the one who has some has expressed some real questions about narrative and saying that we're overusing narrative because in many ways I'm I'm on narrative side because I think I think the way that you reintegrate the the subject is with narrative and that seems to be how we how we're deeply programmed to process the complexity and the multiplicity and the personal perspectives of the world. Certainly from a Jungian point of view the the narrative of of the archetypal struggles that that Jung and depth psychology profound are always enormously engaging and we find them in in all the myths of our culture myths are narrative and in that sense myths are some of the truest things we can ever experience. Wonderfully of course for Christians the idea of narrative as being the overarching hierarchical value takes us very close to Saint John and his description of Jesus as the Lord of the the primary principle who is spoken the word and the organizing principle behind the universe. Well because Peterson knows is only too well and treats Jesus as the most eminent of archetypes both as the logos and the supreme exemplar of narrative and also as an archetype in himself. As we'll discover later on this becomes a kind of belief in a in a proposition all the way through Peterson quite rightly was dismissive of Christians who take refuge in axioms and dogmatic principles and and also philosophers and intellectuals who use propositions all the time. Okay and so again you can hear the echoes of what Peterson's processing where at the end now in the recession of modernity there's a recognition of the over dependence on the propositional again the propositions verbal propositions are sort of lower register an attempt to bring lower register into upper register and freeze them so that they can they can be much more easily brought into the third person. And yet his belief in an archetype becomes really quite close to belief in a kind of proposition except I suppose. And in some ways archetypes are propositionalized narratives think about in that way they're propositionalized narratives because you have the archetype of the of the judging father or the devouring mother. There's you know a little while a few years ago Apple came out with these you know you could take a picture LG did it first I think it was LG or one of the other phone companies. Apple's usually late to the game with these things but you could take you should could basically take a picture and the camera would record a little bit for a little bit after and it's sort of like emotion still. In some ways that's what an archetype is so it's a propositionalized narrative and again we as human beings we're really adept at at working on these things and so you could see now with the recession of modernity propositionalized narrative would be a would be a very handy thing when you're dealing with the public that is that is a little fearful of a little fearful of narrative let's say. Is that archetypes are fluid and dynamic and they do their own work in linking consciousness and unconsciousness so they're not as static as most as most propositions are. He said a number of very helpful things during the discussion about the limitations of science for example although one of the things he was trying to do was to sell his credentials as a psychologist and an intellectual for producing a different map of meaning which of course was the title of his first book. He very helpfully I think said what science does is describe the terrain that we're in he says look this is how it's made up this is how it works he said but what it doesn't do is to give us a map. Okay so there's the lower register it's the terrain that we're in it doesn't give us a map well what is a map a map is sort of taking up the taking up the elements of the lower register into the upper register and and reifying them making them static so if you find I remember when I was a kid my mother had to go to LA for a wedding I always loved maps and so I told my mother bring me back a map of LA that's all I want from Los Angeles is a map now if I were to be able to find that map which I'm sure I can't and open it up today some things would be the same and some things would be different because the city is alive and it's changing and it's moving but maps in that sense are sort of we take things up from the lower register and put them in the upper register but we desperately need a map as human beings and one of the crises of our time is and then so we take maps in the first person and then we we bring them down and part of what you do when you learn to be a good map reader is you sort of see it up there in the third person here are the streets of Sacramento and then you translate it into the first person and you see you know the left and rights and the you know the intersections and then but when you're looking at them serially well now you're going to go through this way nihilism is without a map and with this great collapse of meaning we are faced with the nihilism of post-modernity and above all a vacuum the the the section in the little live stream we did today on more comments on the transformational mysticism you know part of what happens in post-modernity and I thought again Mark had a great point in this is that post-modernity this says there's no grand narratives and then we're just all simply reduced to being tourists I think it was Bauman Drear wrote about that I've mentioned it in a few videos we're sort of tourists but there's no maps we're just sort of wandering around the street one thing to another we're not pilgrims we're not heading someplace because it's the grand narrative that allows the emergence and the emanation to reconstitute meaning in lots of different places and into that vacuum has flooded will to power a Nietzschean value and he goes on to say quite hopefully again I think that the religious when it's not working properly collapses into the political and the way that's done is exactly in the way we experience post-modernity and that that's the whole in the culture where the church used to be anti-cultural marxism or politically correct movement which has become a kind of religion but it's not a religion of love it's a religion of dogmatism of propositions but above all of power what it attempts to do as we know only too well is to change the hierarchies in society putting minorities and the excluded at the very top as an attempt to produce a fairer and more egalitarian society of course as we discussed so many times it's a kind of three card trick die diversity inclusion and and he's he spent a lot of time on the culture war stuff here and that's been a big part of his story in his departure from the anglicans and his embrace of catholicism the section on the sacred was interesting but there would have been a shortcut in this particular conversation and interestingly Peterson was trying to build what he called a nest of priorities and right at the bottom amongst this nest there was those literary authenticity and and depth was was the sacred now now the sacred you if you understand the first person and the third person you can very much understand the difficulty of the sacred from the third person and and john vervecky talked about that i thought well in the four horsemen video where all knowledge is so you're up at the top of the warehouse all knowledge is accessible to you from everywhere it's in a sense flat whereas from the first person if you're walking through the warehouse well there's there's there's shelves and they're stacking and you can very much see the necessity of the sacred when you're coming through in this way as opposed to up here up here in a sense nothing is sacred because everything is flat it's all the same but that doesn't work because as you live your life you have to live it first personally and move in that way and and again Peterson is sort of trapped between the frame shift of the third person and the first person whereas Peugeot can quite easily inhabit the first person and can you have me talk about the third person but he's he's not trying to do especially social science which is is something that it could very well be does not does not last in the transition and the recession of modernity and so we had some discussion about the sacred but it again it seemed to me that Peterson hadn't hadn't worked his way through the implications of the sacred one of the things I I discussed with him was the influence of William James what William James did is to look look at the sacred and say this is one of the most important things that happens to people and we can judge our validities by whether or not it affects any changes in their ethical behavior this is a very good yardstick and Peterson laid himself wide open for a debate on this when he said that that for alcoholics there was nothing that worked to free people from alcoholic dependency except one thing and that one thing was a religious experience or or the the kind of program that AA embarks on which is effectively a form of of group psychotherapy set in a set in the context of a religious narrative now again now we get back into this question of transformations and we've been calling them mystical experiences maybe let's call them frame breaking experiences and so sort of link it into the shamanistic tradition because the shamanistic is in a sense the frame breaking it's the it's the moving the it's the moving the shelves in the warehouse it's the rearranging them and you know if you if you look at the song amazing grace I once was blind but now I see the appropriation of the word enlightenment those walking in darkness have seen a great light it's amazing how much visual reference goes into these kinds of things we say when people have these frame breaking experiences they're having a vision and and again this is very much sort of a first person perspective and you know what happens in let's say AA is that the the the frame must change from a person who is let's move this out a little bit the the frame must change from a person who is looking at the world and saying I am I am a victim everybody is wronging me you know resentment is sort of the warm water of the hurricane that has been their life and what you know AA's its steps are amazingly subtle and crafty in that initially the alcoholic doesn't have to completely let go of their victim status they are powerful they are powerless before alcohol so so they're still a victim but but they're no longer so much a victim of the the family that abused them or the family that disappointed or the people in their lives who have failed them and they they're a victim of something and then of course you bring in you know a higher power that can release me from this okay and and so you know the the talk about hitting bottom hitting bottom is in some ways a a frame breaking experience because because they they come to a point where they realize things must change the parable of the prodigal son there's a lot of debate as to that moment in the field and interpretively where that goes and those of you who've been with the channel long enough you know I've talked about this in the past but there's this there's this frame breaking and then now suddenly a difference of perspective can lead to new new practices and ways of living and so again at that point for those of us who are Christians this is a very good moment to say well you have to take the sacred seriously and as William James discovered there are plenty of examples of where the implosion of the sacred into the life of the despairing broken person is the one thing that really does remake them and therefore we have a lot of empirical evidence for the fact that the sacred makes an enormous difference and therefore ought to be one of the most important values that we look to as we interpret the human condition and we and if you if you talk to addicts for example who have worked through AA you know the little coin that they get with a certain degree of sobriety the meetings all of those things become sacred and well what is sacred sacred is always related to the frame because in many ways the the frame is the sacred in that it's the one thing you won't deconstruct it's the one thing you won't take apart it's the stance through which you see everything else and if you give that up then you can't see anything So make a hierarchy of values in order to establish the way in which we're going to live with meaning and the way and the map the particular map we're going to provide ourselves with in the afternoon one of the better parts of the discussion was an argument about the trinity and you might think that will be hard to pull off but it was because one of the agnostics wanted to look at the trinity and say they're great surprise that the reality modeled so much of the trinity in its tripartite aspect and we had a really rather enjoyable discussion because the orthodox among the table began to come in and say actually you've got it the wrong way around you're you're making the the foyerbach mistake you probably know that foyerbach said there is no god and the reason we think there's a god is because we project all our need for a father figure onto the blank screen of the universe like a like a like an inverted telescope and christians say well foyerbach got the telescope the wrong way around it's actually god projecting onto us his character and the reason why we think about god and respond to god respond to the models and archetypes of the sacred is precisely because as as sent augustian said you lord you've made us for yourselves and our hearts are restless until they find their rest in you only god himself can cure the god-shaped hole that we have within us and foyerbach was wrong to suggest that it was a matter of projection