https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qnHKM-e4P_A

 Hi, this is Paul. It's time to make a video. Yesterday, Esther O'Reilly put out on her blog a retrospective a bit. A year ago, she started writing about Jordan Peterson. And I thought it was a good retrospective in terms of five lessons Jordan Peterson has taught the church. And someone had a meme of Dwight from the office saying, No, the church never learns this fast. I thought it was a terrific meme. But it's a good piece by Esther. And it's prompted me to do a little bit of retrospection. In May 2018, Mouthy Buddha did what I thought was a good video, especially the first part. The first few minutes are devastating in terms of taking some bits from Sam Harrison, some bits from Jordan Peterson. And it just, I think, illustrates well in those first few minutes where, how we've gotten here. And over the last few weeks talking to James Lindsay and James Lindsay, who's part of the faction of celebrity atheists with Peter Boghossian, I didn't realize the deep connection that the Jordan Peterson movement had from the Sam Harris movement. And the more I talk to individuals, again, you can find all the conversations on my channel. And the conversations I post are only a sampling of all the conversations I have, especially things in the comments section, private emails sent to me, messages on Twitter, so on and so forth. A conversation I had yesterday, which may or may not get posted, depends on... After I have a conversation with someone, I'll usually send it to them and say, You watch it and you decide after thinking about it whether or not you want me to post it. Because there is hazard in posting these things. We all have reputations. Many people have jobs, careers to think about, families to think about. So they don't necessarily want everything posted. But the journey through Sam Harris to Jordan Peterson is a significant piece of this. For me, though, Jordan Peterson got my attention by his calm demeanor in the face of some outraged students. That caught my attention. And then I began to read the comments section and began noticing he was doing some things that I didn't see the church doing. The road to Sam Harris seemed to be a one-way street. And I saw people following Jordan Peterson coming back down that road. And I thought, this is a new thing. This is a burning bush of sorts. And I noticed right away that he was...that Peterson is trying to reconnect the split world for a number of years before that. I was wrestling with what it means to preach to people who on Sunday morning come into a church and listen to stories from Genesis about a man and a woman in a garden. And they...you know, the Genesis 1 representation, if you find videos before I started making some of these videos, the Genesis 1 representation of this flat earth and a dome, just read Genesis 1 and read it in the King James Version before later translations try to nuance it so as not to upset Christians. Read it in the King James Version in terms of what the cosmology looks like in Genesis 1. And here is Peterson, and in a sense for people who have gone whole hog with Sam Harris, he is bringing them back to the Bible. And I watched that and I thought, that's some serious stuff. I've seen evangelical apologists trying every which way, but all kinds of ways to get people off there. And I've heard this for years, and here's Peterson, this guy out of University of Toronto, whose relationship to church and traditional Christianity is complex at best, bringing these people to a point where they're seriously interested in the Bible and in church. And initially I didn't appreciate the nihilism and the depression that was so prevalent within the Sam Harris tribe and noticing how desperate many individuals have become for meaning in their lives. And so here's Peterson, and he's doing it, and I thought, I've got to figure out what he's doing, I want to learn from him, I want to be able to do this too. So maybe I'm, for those of you who know your Bible real well, maybe I'm like Simon Magnus looking at the Apostle Peter saying, oh, I've got to, I want to figure out how you're doing this, Jordan. And so of course in order to do this, I'd better study him. And I wanted to, I've spent the last, it'll be two years this May since I started watching his videos, just doing deep dives into him and reading the people that he's read and reading almost everything that's been written about him because I want to figure out how this movement has come about following him. Now, I'm a huge Tolkien fan and one person put in a comment in a recent video, not enough Tolkien references, so here's your obligatory Tolkien reference in this video. In The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien of course loved these little songs and poems that he would put in his book, especially The Hobbit, there's lots of silly ones there because it's a children's book, but there's more serious ones in The Lord of the Rings. The road goes ever on and on, down from the road where it goes. Now far ahead the road has gone, and I must follow if I can, pursuing it with weary feet until it joins some larger way, where many paths and errands meet, whither then I cannot say. Yeah, yeah, yeah, the road goes on, and this road has brought me to some places I had not anticipated. It's a dangerous business, Frodo, going out your door. Bilbo used to say, you step onto the road and if you don't keep your feet, there's no knowing where you might be swept off to. Do you realize that this is the very path that goes through Mirkwood and that if you let it, it might take you to the lonely mountain or even further to worse places? He used to say that on the path outside the front door of Bag End, especially after he had been out for a long walk. So I almost always read way too many books at once, and I've been paying a lot of attention to attention lately and relevance because, again, through this process I'm trying to figure out how my crazy head works. And in many ways what my videos are, are just a slightly more organized mental rambling than the mental rambling that goes on in my head all day long as I read things and write things and talk to people and so on and so forth. That's all these videos are. This is the record of this tiny little chapter of my thought life. And so I read way too many books at once and then usually what happens is I'm reading four, five, six books and one book, one, I keep starting new books, which means I keep kind of dropping old books, which I'll probably pick up at some point. Then usually what happens is one book hooks me and the book that's hooked me lately is How to Change Your Mind by Michael Pollan. And so here I am. I don't drink alcohol. I don't smoke tobacco. I don't smoke weed. I'm, you know, I'm a puritan when it comes to these kinds of things. And here I'm reading this crazy book on psychedelics. And after the video I made about psychedelics, I'm getting a lot of really interesting comments and emails from many of you. And I really appreciate it. Sharing your experiences with me. And I got a very thoughtful one yesterday from a Christian who was telling me that this person had gotten into psychedelics and had a couple of experiences and they can't talk about it in a Christian context, in an evangelical context for all the obvious reasons. And, you know, me with my high openness, my rule of thumb as a pastor tends to be I'd rather hear something heterodox or crazy or terrible from you if it's honest than not. So that tends to be my rule. So I deeply appreciated his sharing his experience with me and the difficulty of talking about these things within an evangelical context. And so I'm reading I'm reading Michael Pollan's book and just learning a ton from it and enjoying what a what a what a terrific writer. I never read the Omnivore's Dilemma, so I don't know much about it. But even the even the way that the cover art is done to me speaks so much of the implicit frames and narratives we have. And this is, you know, the cover almost represents the the subtraction the subtraction story that's been used about Christianity. So so here I am this pastor of a tiny little church who started making videos. And and now I'm I'm not taking any psychedelics and I don't have any plans to but but thinking about psychedelics and all this crazy stuff. And yeah, the road goes on and on down from the door where it goes. Now far ahead the road has gone and I must follow if I can to take a line from from Richard Mao that he gave at the Christian Reformed Churches 500 where he quoted Hendrik de Kock. Not Hendrik de Kock. I forget which de Kock from the from the offskiding. Now you're getting into really murky, obscure Dutch church history where this where this this local church pastor was was jailed because he refused to follow some of the modernist commandments of the of the state church of the Netherlands. And the split then became part of the the trickles that be that through immigration became the Christian Reformed Church. But one of the one of the models of of that man in jail was follow that lamb wherever he goes. And that's what Christians must do. We must follow the lamb. Yeah, boy, the roads take you in strange places. So early on in the Jordan Peterson thing, I found this video because John Verveckis name had come up in a bunch of different places. And I watched a little bit of it then and nothing really grabbed me. One of the things that I've learned is that so often I keep circling around to things back again because I'm not the same person I was six months or a year ago or a year and a half ago. I've learned a lot and I've gone down the road and things have changed. So often when I come back and I listen to the same video, no, obviously it's the same video. It's a different video, not because the video has changed, but because I've I've changed. And so that's also part of the reason that I read too many books at once. And and and then the books come together in my mind in different angles and they mix and I see different insights from them. And I'm always gaining new ideas and gaining new insights. And so I just listened to this video a couple of days ago and I commented and I did a blog post about it and I commented on it. And it was it was just so much fun to listen to because, of course, gosh, how much time haven't I given Jordan Peterson over the last two years of my life thinking about him and watching him and listening to him and at my consciousness committee just absorbing all kinds of things about him. And here he is in 2015 and it's before his carnivore diet and he's he's got quite a bit more weight and it's before his status rocket ride. And and so he's kind of relaxed and just freewheeling and interrupting and and do it all that do that all that, you know, pre status rocket stuff Jordan Peterson would do. And it's just a fun video. And and for Vicky is there trying to trying to deal with the fact that the moderator here is lower status than both of them. So he can't really corral Jordan say, OK, Jordan, you be quiet for five minutes and let John speak. But it's a it's a delightful conversation. And for Vicky is everybody's got a good spirit about them in the conversation. And for Vicky is generous with with letting Jordan be Jordan. But Vicky's trying to get his points in. So, you know, I've been paying more attention to Vicky and I think it's quite the quite the the thing that University of Toronto has to such amazing professors. And it's a shame. It's it's the loss of University of Toronto that, you know, they handled the Jordan Peterson stuff so poorly. Now, it's the Jordan Peterson, of course, his book was released in January 2018, 12 Rules for Life, and his timing couldn't have been better. And so he's on this 18 month book tour, which is not really a book tour. It's more of an evangelistic crusade. And he's there's Jordan J.B.P. daily that I signed up for. I don't know if I'm going to keep on to that. I was I was hoping there would be more videos from the book tour, but I don't know. I don't know if those, you know, I've been to two of the book tour events, one in Sacramento and one in San Jose. And I'm still trying to get my head around that whole thing to figure out what it means. And basically, my point is that Peterson, there's been a lull of YouTube content coming out from Peterson. Now, I just did a new one with with with the general who so Jordan Peterson is clean up your room and the general says make your bed. So I haven't watched that video yet, but I probably will. But one of the first comments on that video was, oh, Jordan, I thought you'd abandoned YouTube because he's been on a status rocket ride and he's traveling all over the world. And he's doing these nightly shows. And, you know, if I had that kind of, you know, I'm not going to I'm not going to criticize his decision to go that way. But it is different from YouTube. And I'm still trying to figure out what to make of it and evaluate it. But my basic point is that Jordan hasn't been putting out the kind of content that he did, let's say, when he was doing the biblical series weekly and then monthly. Now, there's a lot of question as to whether he'll ever do the biblical series again. He says November 2019, and I think he's well intended on planning to do that. The thing is with him and the crazy things, you know, the reason I coined this term status rocket for him, because that's it. And rockets can kind of go like this. And it's part of what makes him fascinating to watch is the Truman show effect of this. Where is he going? What is going to happen to him? We have no idea. Planning this poor guy's life. Who knows where he's going to be and what he's going to do. The book tour has been the most predictable thing. And this, you know, Owen Benjamin's hated CAA has been, you know, lining all this stuff up for him. So we'll see where all of this goes. But in the meantime, you notice that a lot of the people who who follow Jordan Peterson, well, they're they're YouTubers and they're coders and they're stay at home moms and they're stay at home dads. And they're truck drivers and they're retired people. And they YouTube someone made the comment on Twitter the other day that I've replaced Rush Limbaugh. This woman grew up listening to Rush Limbaugh on her father's radio. Now her kids are growing up listening to me and I just think what a crazy, crazy world. But that's that's sort of what YouTube is. It's disrupting AM radio and daytime TV. So people tell me they sit down with their kids and and watch Paul VanderKlay and I think, oh, those poor kids. So people are looking around for new content and Vervecky is out there. And it's it's interesting because in many ways he's he was kind of mining a parallel track to Jordan Peterson. They're both working on this meaning question. Now, we're deeply within the secularist assumption, the iron box of secularism. And and the question that I have is I work through this stuff. And again, I've been interested in this stuff for years. Reading Charles Taylor's A Secular Age, which is a monster of a book. Number of years before far easier book to read. Really an amazing book. Victor Frankl's Man's Search for Meaning. What's the relationship between meaning and metaphysics? That's really what we're trying to get down to. And in many ways in the secularist, the secularist assumption keeps us in this box. And if you're teaching in a public university, the as opposed to, let's say, a Christian college in a public university, you have to maintain the the discipline of the box, whether or not you're a maybe you're a Christian at home or maybe maybe you have some other metaphysical beliefs that you talk about on the side. But on the in the public stage, in order to have a certain status and to receive a certain receive a certain welcome, you have to maintain the secularist assumption. And and that then it's interesting because when we get into the meaning conversation, well, how does that change? What meaning is, is it sufficient to have mere to have the mere feeling of meaning? And I'd always noticed that whenever the Sacramento Freedom from Religion organization would put up billboards at Easter. Do you know what it costs to put up a billboard? That's no small thing. Putting up billboards, it costs serious money. God free, happy and inspired by wonder. And so the idea is that there doesn't it doesn't matter if there's a metaphysical. It doesn't matter. All of those things don't matter at all. I can have the experience of meaning. Meaning is a feeling. All right. But once you locate meaning on the feeling level, the rest of your consciousness committee starts to starts to get uncomfortable, starts to feel some dissonance. Why? Because that's not what meaning longs to be. Meaning is is a wild animal and it longs to be free and and we beg for it to connect at a much deeper level is meaning not just built into us but also built into the world. Now, this gets philosophically complicated and this gets into Jordan Peterson trying to heal the split world because when you get into philosophy and phenomenology, you might say, well, all we have access to are our representations. And I was having that conversation with with Adam on Twitter this morning. So, you know, we can't we can't get beyond these representations. We can't even get beyond what is out there. And then suddenly we're kind of not only in this iron box of of this iron box of secularism, but we're within this cocoon of phenomenology. And and can we talk about what is out there? And of course, by then you're you're sucked into the Grand River of philosophy and and that huge conversation. But most people are not philosophers and and most people are are they're just living and you can have all these little rules about what you're allowed to think and what you're not allowed to think. And people, quite frankly, won't care. They're going to think what they want and think what they will. And it's usually within the realm of social constraint that they they clip their wings and they and they frame their conversations and they say, well, we'll talk about meaning, but we can't really talk about whether or not meaning goes all the way down. We can't really we can't really go there. But something deep inside of us longs for meaning to, in fact, stretch out to the the to to all that there is. We simply meaning itself begs for it to connect with absolutely everything I was I was talking to. And again, it depends on whether this person wants, you know, wants to release this video. I thought it was a good conversation I had with him yesterday. But, you know, I mentioned the Book of Ecclesiastes. So again, in in March 30 and Melbourne, St. James Cathedral, I think it is off to look it up. Sorry, organizers, I'm going to do a video with far more details about what's happening March 30 and Melbourne. They're going to put up a website. So I'm going to Australia and I'd be in Melbourne. And and part of since I'm doing it in a church, we're going to frame it a bit with the Book of Ecclesiastes. And if you don't know much about the Bible and never read the Bible, read the Book of Ecclesiastes. You'll really enjoy it, especially if you're following the Jordan Peterson thing, because here you have here you have, depending on which translation you read, Coalath or the King the and he's an alpha male and he's done everything and nothing's been. He's had the opportunity to taste everything that there is under the sun. And and then you have in Chapter three, this this beautiful poem. There's a time to live and a time to die. Beautiful poem. And then in the few verses after that, God has placed eternity in our hearts. Well, what does that mean? And that's directly tied to meaning that that something in our hearts longs for eternity. And I think that is what that is what the sense of meaning is. We long to be relevant. We long to know that our lives mean something. And as Victor Frankl noted and others that those in the concentration camps and the Nazi death camps, if they if they knew that there was meaning that the death camp couldn't touch, they could survive that. And that's how we are. And that's how you know it's it's by meaning that we survive the sufferings of this world. And so to to tell us that meaning is merely a feeling is a betrayal of the word meaning. We our hearts, our hearts won't take it. And to live in that box, it's ironic that the you know, as Victor Frankl noted, those who had those who were victim of the Nazi concentration camps with meaning in their heart, they could survive it. But but people today and in the most affluent, comfortable, choice laden places of the world within the concentration camp of secularism, find it so find it so grindingly nihilistic that they don't see any reason to live. Now, if you begin to realize the stark contrast of those two frames, you should have an insight into what a human being is and why this is important. And then suddenly the journey from from Sam Harris to Jordan Peterson isn't all that mysterious. And the status rocket ride of of Jordan Peterson isn't all that mysterious. We can't live in the suburbs of San Jose, which when I was doing a sermon on on on suicide noted, you know, there was a suicide going epidemics. You know, there's a suicide epidemic going around in one of the most wealthiest, highest status areas of the United States. While when I ministered to Haitians in the Dominican Republic living in desperately poor places, I never once heard of a suicide. Well, why is that? Because we blithely imagine in America today that our happiness is a function of an hour of our material welfare or the amount of choice that we have over our body and our capacity to secure our immediate desires. When you compare people who have on the scope of human history had about as much opportunity and choice and affluence as anyone in human history and compare that to people at the absolute at near the bottom of that same pile, those Haitians who are cutting cane and picking coffee as illegal immigrants in the Dominican Republic. The Haitians have meaning and the Americans do not. Jesus has very interesting things to say in the sermon on the plane about about blessed are the blessed are the poor and and woe to the rich. Well, you see that happening now. Americans who who have you know we have we have the Internet and we have air travel and we have any food we want and and we have any movie we want and we can spend our days binging on Netflix and and and computer games. Well, as we get into the the John Verbeke video. Yeah, why are we binging on stories and games because we're we're starving for meaning and we're starving for meaning because of our affluence that offers that that imagines that choice offers meaning only to realize that some of the people in the world with zero choice at all experience far more meaning and the suffering of their lives than fat happy North Americans. It's crazy. It's just crazy. But there it is. And that's why meaning is wild. It will not be contained. You say, well, I experienced meaning to. That's why that's why Bilbo's Road out of Bag End beckons us and Tolkien knew what he was doing when he wrote The Lord of the Rings that you know why I as a child junior high I read The Lord of the Rings for the first time just completely fell in love with that that book and its world and you know on with the video. So when I got into Jordan Peterson, I knew I needed a companion. And if you've ever read CS Lewis's The Great Divorce CS Lewis had a guide through had a guide through the the foothills of of heaven and his guide was was was McDonald's was George George McDonald. And so I figured that when I was going to start my Jordan Peterson Odyssey and I was going to step out of Bag End the Bag End here on the Bag End here on Florin Road and my little office on at Livingstone's Church. I wanted a companion. I wanted a guide. And so I picked CS Lewis. Now CS Lewis of course was it was an ardent Platonist if you if you read him if you read enough of him. And of course Nietzsche has the question is Christianity just Platonism for the masses or Platonism for dummies. CS Lewis of course said we are only living in the Shadowlands and the book of CS Lewis's where this comes out most clearly is I think that the last of the Narnia Chronicles in the last battle. It's it's probably my favorite book of the Narnia Chronicles and someone keeps recommending this book about CS Lewis and the heavens and meaning and and I've got that book and I've started reading it. That's one of those books that I've been reading Paul and skyrocketed up to the top but it's it's on my list and I'm going to read it. But CS Lewis's point of course CS Lewis trod this road. CS Lewis's mother died when he was seven and his father was not emotionally capable of filling the shoes of his mother for what he needed. And CS Lewis of course grew up in a series of bad boarding schools. And and and along the way now this these were you know North Northern North Ireland that's where he grew up in North Ireland and then and then over to England. And of course at that point end of the 19th early 20th century these boarding schools were all formally Christian Christendom at the height of the British Empire. But but CS Lewis gave it all away didn't believe it became an atheist and you know looked around you know went to World War One had exactly the right kind of wound that would take him out of battle but he would survive the war and his friend Patty didn't. Again if you want to read a good biography of CS Lewis I recommend Alan Jacobs the Narnian. There are lots of good biographies of CS Lewis and different biographies fulfill different needs in telling the story of CS Lewis but I really recommend Alan Jacobs the Narnian. And so Lewis of course. He becomes he becomes an Oxford Don. He's you know teaching English he's a he's a tutor for students and and through Tolkien and Dyson and others he converts and becomes a Christian. Well why does he become a Christian. You know he from his boyhood on he longed he loved Norse mythology and he loved mythology of every kind and he knew you know he knew all these ancient languages and so he read everything from the classical period in the original and he had the kind of mind that he could remember all of it. And so he loved mythology and and you know Arthur Greaves is one of his best friends growing up you know he and he and Arthur Greaves became fast friends because they love this stuff and of course when when Lewis is at Oxford he's going to he's going to run into Tolkien and of course Tolkien loves this stuff and and they have this group called the Inklings and they would sit and they would share their writings and and poor Tolkien had no stomach for Narnia because oh Lewis is Lewis is like a child pulling all of his toys together and playing with Iron Man and and and dinosaurs and it just put put them all together in his little box. Lewis actually did this with warning you can read about that in his biographies of course Tolkien that was horribly undisciplined and it bothered Tolkien but Lewis just loved Tolkien's work and so there at the Inklings Lewis would continue to encourage Tolkien on to to write that book and write that book because of course it was crazy. It was crazy Tolkien basically reinvented fantasy literature and brought it into the modern world but no one no one knew we would have appetites for it now of course looking back we realize that's that's all we have appetite for because this world can be so starved of meaning. So you know Tolkien comes in first with the Hobbit and then the Lord of the Rings and Tim Keller who I've mentioned in a bunch of my videos Tim Keller also knows a ton about Tolkien and one of the comments Tim Keller made was that he he reads Tolkien almost continually and for a Christian that basically means is that for CS for for Tim Keller who was also a huge CS Lewis fan Tolkien is you know is practically reading devotions it's almost reading them. And so it's a very interesting thing to see in the Bible same for Peter creeped and you know no wonder I gravitate towards some of these you know creeped and Keller both you know a bit older older than me 10 to 20 years older than me but both of them huge Lewis fans and huge Tolkien fans and you can find plenty of their stuff on on Lewis and Tolkien but but Tolkien writes this fantasy literature and it's just it just grabs the world and of course in the 20th century there were these. At the end of the 20th century these you know what's the most important book of the 20th century and they did popular polling and Tolkien kept winning and this kept bothering a lot of the a lot of the English scholars but the last battle we hunger for real things. What does that mean and again when we're we're talking about this word real well what is it what do we mean by real. And read a little bit from from the last battle. I see she said at last I see now the garden is like the stable it's far bigger inside than it is outside and you can find that in Dr. Who and you can find that in Harry Potter that tent that the that the that the trio use it's it's bigger on the inside than it looks on the outside. Of course daughter of Eve said the phone the further up and the further in you go the bigger everything gets the inside is larger than the outside Lucy looked looks Lucy looked hard at the garden and saw that it was not really a garden but a whole world. And here don't we have that experience you look at a garden you start looking into the garden I was reading again Poland Paul and Poland Michael Poland you know he was on he was on some some he had made some mushroom tea and then he went out to his writing house and he was looking at the garden and it was it was more than a garden it's a whole world. And you don't need to be on magic mushrooms for that just sit quietly in a field and watch the and and watch the watch the dragon flies and watch the ants and and just pay attention you see that garden is low resolution it's a it's a whole world and the world is bigger on the inside than it looks on the outside. Lucy looked hard at the garden and saw that it was not really a garden but a whole world with its own rivers and woods and sea and mountains but they are not strange she knew them all I see she said this is still Narnia and a more real and more beautiful Narnia down below just that just as it is more real and more beautiful than the Narnia outside the stable door. I see world within world Narnia within Narnia yes said Mr. Tumnus now remember Mr. Tumnus is her friend Mr. Tumnus was who Lucy met on the other side of the wardrobe. Yes said Mr. Tumnus like an onion except that as you continue to go in and in each circle is larger than the last and Lucy looked this way and that and soon found that the new and beautiful thing that happened to her whatever she looked at however far away it might be once she had fixed her eyes steadily on it became quite clear and close as if she were looking through a telescope. She could see the whole southern desert and beyond it the great sea of Tashban to eastward she could see Carre Parvel on the edge of the sea and the very window of the world that had been once her own and if you know anything about Lewis's life you just know that this is this is the child Lewis now with the capacity of an adult author with immense power and knowledge writing for him the story he always wanted to read as a child. He sees a new world and he's sharing that world with us and we write about psychedelics and opening worlds but isn't this what literature does yeah but you know in order to really enjoy literature what do you have to do it's like the difference between listening to a master play the piano and becoming a master on the piano yourself. What does it take to become a master it takes work and effort and years and discipline it's freedom to write it's freedom to dream it's freedom to see and far out at sea she could discover the islands and again if you read Pilgrim's Regress one of C.S. Lewis's early books I don't think it's his best book but some of the things that he did was he was a master. He was a very colored cloud cut off from them by a gap but she looked harder and saw that it was not a cloud at all but a real land and then she had fixed her eyes on one particular spot of it she at once cried out Peter Edmond come and look come quickly and they came and looked for their eyes had become like hers. Now again through the psychedelics in a sense that's a psychedelic thing that you through the use of this drug you now see but there are other ways of seeing years of discipline of studying literature years of discipline of working the mind. Now suddenly they see far off and Lucy and Peter and Edmond they have new eyes why exclaimed Peter it's England and that's the house itself. Perfect Sir Kirk's old home in the country where all our adventures began. So I thought that house had been destroyed said Edmond ah now they're looking back in time well that's not a strange thing for us if you look into a telescope far enough into space aren't you are you not looking back in time. But can you also travel back in time. Not the time that was but maybe the time beneath the time the time is that time should have been. So it was said the fawn you are now looking at England within England the real England just as this is the real Narnia and in that inner England no good thing is destroyed. Suddenly they shifted their eyes to another spot and then Peter and Edmond and Lucy gasped with amazement and shouted out and began to wave for they saw their own father and mother waving back at them across a great deep valley. It was like when you see people waving at you from the deck of a big ship while you are waiting on the quay to meet them. Can we get to them said Lucy that is easy said Mr Thomas that country and this country are all real countries. All the real countries are only spurs jutting out from the great mountains of Aslan. We have only to walk along the ridge upward and inward till it joins in and listen there is King Frank's horn we all must go up. And soon they found themselves all walking together and a great bright bright procession it was up towards mountains higher than could be seen in this world even if they even if they were there to be seen. But there was no snow on the mountains that's like there's no sea in the book of Revelation. It's the same symbolism remember the winter in the lion the witch in the wardrobe there's no snow there's no see what is what is what is Lewis have against snow nothing understand the language understand the representation. There were forests and green slopes and sweet orchards and flashing waterfalls. One above the other going on forever. And if you read if you read the abolition of man. They were sublime. So for vacay's taking on the meaning crisis and I've really been enjoying his work and he's he's just you can find Buddhism and cognitive science that's out there. It's on its own YouTube channel and you can go through those and I don't know if this is the an update of that course it's been fun watching Peterson because he videoed a bunch of his courses so you can see how his course changes. If you're if you're a real nerd into these guys it's always fun because in a sense what we're doing when we're learning from these guys is where we're tracking them in their thoughts and we're we're tracking them in their language and we're we're thinking in their language. And what a joy what a what a pleasure. So if you if you want some more bite size things I think big animation another channel they jumped subscribers fast. That he's doing some really nice little summary videos. I never turn off my phone anymore. It's usually just telemarketers. He's doing these lovely summary videos in of of verveky stuff. So the zombie one I used in a sermon recently a little bit of and and so the axial the axial revolution. So all these stuff so so that's a good channel too. But let's dive in I wanted to do some walking through verveky's video I've listened to it three or four times now and I've been watching it for a while now. I've listened to it three or four times now and you know again what I do is I'm reading this book by Poland I'm listening to verveky I'm keeping trying to keep on top of all of my other stuff going on and they all kind of come together. So let's let's dive in and do some listening here. So if I were to ask you come on, you can do it. This played on a commercial in the New York metropolitan area growing up so every time I hear this I always think of a commercial wasn't particularly happy commercial. Beautiful song. Welcome back. I'm John verveky and this is a video series on awakening from the meaning crisis. So last time we were assistant professor give the man tenure already come on you have to put a little gun shy after Peterson beginning our historical examination of the origin of this capacity for meaning making to try and get a clearer picture of what it is. And today I'd like to continue on with that we were talking about connections between meaning making enhancing cognition. Now the first lecture doesn't seem to be in this series which is a little disappointed about so but I understand that sometimes I forget like last Sunday I forgot to hit the record button on my sermon. Those of you who are following my sermon you can still find it on the church Facebook page and maybe I'll try and take the Facebook recording and put it on YouTube but you know, altered states of consciousness wisdom and we were talking about that in connection with the upper Paleolithic transition in which human beings seem to have gone through this radical change which was not so much a biological change but a change in how they were using their cognition. We talked about important ideas such as cognitive exaptation and psycho technology and we talked about how the upper Paleolithic transition was probably driven by the way shamanism was a set of psycho technologies for altering states of consciousness. And right now it's like yeah you know never in my wildest dreams that I think I'd be making videos talking about shamanism and psychedelics but here we are baby. To cognitively exact the enhanced abilities that trade rituals and initiation rituals and healing rituals had already been creating. And we talked about the way the shaman engaged in various disruptive strategies to try and alter their framing of reality because how we frame reality is both the source of our adaptivity our ability to define patterns but it is also how we can get locked in. How we miss frame reality and how we are in need of insight and we talked about that in connection for something like that the nine dot problem. And again if you go back to Buddhism and cognitive science you can find some earlier versions of these talks and go through some of that. And that led us to realize that there's kinds of knowing that are independent from the knowing that we capture in our statements of our beliefs. There's knowing about knowing how to do something what it's like to have a particular perspective and what it's like to know something by identifying with it and participating in it. And I was starting to show you how the shaman altered state of consciousness was also enhancing and altering meaning making affording insight and improving the ability of the shaman to help in hunting and health care. And I found that interesting because again you look at it from say a Darwinian point of view where you say OK well why would all these tribes have shamans what what are they doing. Well they are now as we get into this they're going to be they're going to be reframing reality so you can look at reality from different purposes. But if if these this is again part of Adam who does think club and Adam friended his his effort as an atheist saying basically you have to understand that religion. Religion obviously had its at its usage because what if a tribe with a shaman what if a tribe with a medicine man what if a tribe with a priest what if a tribe with a with a prophet outperform tribes that didn't have them. You look at the ancient world let's say because when you say shaman you're thinking about different places the world. Let's look at that early biblical context. All the ancient courts had magicians as they were called. You can find them in the Book of Daniel you can find them in Egypt. The court in Israel you had these prophets going through. So they're basically functioning in the same way. Part of part of what the so the letter from the evangelical Christian about his experiences with psychedelics you know part of the things that he said was you know that there doesn't there there really isn't a we don't really have the category or the infrastructure to deal with those within Christianity and I thought that's that's true to a lot of degree. But if we go back in the Bible and you know we don't find we don't find Elijah taking magic mushrooms. But if you go back in the Bible and you look at the prophetic class and you look at Saul. Saul getting you know when the spirit comes down upon Saul and Saul is numbered among the prophets you know we're not far off from any of these things. And so then you begin to ask the question well what are the functions of these prophets and priests in the ancient world. Well they obviously had functions that we understand. In fact Nancy Reagan understood it until Don Reagan put an end to it in the Ronald Reagan White House. But but they they understood it as you know trying to predict the future practicing divination all of these kinds of things. But but what these prophets and these priests even in the Israelite context where they weren't practicing they had the Urim and Thummim they were only practicing divination that was permitted by the Mosaic law of the the ifad and the Urim and Thummim. And then the Lord of the Lord coming and speaking to the prophets. But but what the function of these of the shaman of the priest of the prophet what they're doing is they are obviously looking at the world from different perspectives and in Israel looking the world from God's perspective. And obviously you have the competition between the prophets of the Lord and the prophets of Baal and so on and so forth. So so even though we listen to this stuff and we think well where is that in the Bible where's a shaman in the Bible. Well look at the Old Testament prophets and look at the company of the prophets and read closely the books of Samuel and the books of Kings and the books of Exodus. And you know here you find Melchizedek and here you find Balaam. If you actually pay attention to the Old Testament you will find that these worlds are not far apart and you can understand the function of a shaman in a tribe and of course let's say a medicine man in a tribe in a pre-Columbian North America. Okay so so these worlds are quite strange to us but they're not that far to understand and I think what Vervecky does is really help us flesh out well well what adaptive advantage did the medicine man or the shaman give and how did they give that to the tribe. And obviously in terms of hunting and healing when we hear medicine man in our nomenclature we tend to think healthcare but but obviously with just a little bit of digging you'll notice that in Native American spirituality and tribes medicine men medicine basically meant you're getting in touch with the bigger narratives that are governing the world. Now one of the things that I think he doesn't talk about in this video but I think you can begin to see is that you have a medicine man for a tribe and so this medicine man is giving a representation of a broader world in this tribe. What happens with these massive religions like like Judaism and Christianity and Islam and Hinduism is is really a family of religions and then Buddhism is that these stories get very very large and they can actually encompass different tribes and and and and there can be many sub traditions within the big tradition whereas as the shaman you know he's he's kind of working on the local level but his world his world never gets that much bigger than the tribe and the tribe might not get too much much bigger than a few thousand whereas today's religion scale up to the billions. Two things that would radically improve survival I want to continue now and talking more healthcare and improving the ability of the shaman to help in hunting and healthcare two things that would radically improve survival. I want to continue now and talking more about that more about what's going on in shamanism in order to get more explication of this meaning making wisdom altered states of consciousness different kinds of knowing and how they're all interrelated together. Now even when we say meaning making you have the question of is the mind does the mind make meaning or does the mind receive meaning is the mind more like a computer that's working on things inside of it or is the mind more like a radio that's bringing things into it now of course with our computers and our cell phones with radios built into them. It's both and but but even when we say meaning making where we're already kind of bowing down before the box of secularism and say oh yes I will observe I will observe the public protocol I will keep my speech within the iron box of secularism meaning is made it is not discovered. Alright and that's why I introduced I started with Lewis because Lewis of course will say no we we don't make meaning we we discover meaning. So typically the shaman engages in practices that are putting significant changes in their attention as we mentioned there's often significant disruptive strategies sleep deprivation sex deprivation social isolation the use of psychedelics extended chanting all of these dancing all of these things are designed to bring about radical changes in the way in which the brain is operating. And again that's part of the reason why I read some of that literature because literature does this movies do this and we're going to talk about flow states in a minute but. John Verveckis point here is that in order to see the world better and actually to be more capable in the world. What do you mean by that to to to be able to achieve outcomes that are desired or at least to achieve experiences that are desired or to achieve. Change that is desired in the world you need to begin to see the world from different perspectives Jonathan height continues to make the point that the reason we should value diversity is because diversity allows us to know things from different angles. That's the purpose for diversity. The definition of an idol is to make a good thing and ultimate thing diversity itself is not the diversity itself is not actually the goal diversity is a strategy to achieve a goal well what is the goal the goal to is to. As clearly as we can as sharply as we can to see what is to have our representations again Don Hoffman we use these interfaces to have our representations get better and better and better and better. In terms of closer and closer and closer to the world. The the the subjective world this real world that is out there now you can begin to understand well. Okay from a from a Christian point of view why do you go further up and further into God well if God is the source and if all of these worlds are mountains out of Aslan's country. Well you want to get further up and further and you want to get to real Narnia and real England and real Sacramento and real Paul van der Kley that there is actually something under here and even though we're dealing with representations we want those representations to get better and you can say well science. Has a similar project towards this objective order that we cannot penetrate with a monarchical vision because of course we have subjectivity one of the most fascinating things about reading Michael Pollan's book is that in the area of psychedelics you have this the question of subjectivity and and science in the book is that. And you go into a and you go and look and toy with these psychedelic drugs well you're just going to you're just going to you cannot you cannot help but have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have to have these expectations and you're going to have these expectations and you're going to have these expectations and you're going to have these expectations and you're going to have these expectations and you're going to have these expectations and you're going to have these expectations and you're going to have your experience be influenced by the expectations that the set and setting that you bring to it and I think that's an amazing illustration of what I talk about when I talk about this monarchical vision what Nietzsche talked about in terms of the view from nowhere we can't do it okay that's not how we are and this this desire to do so well it invites us to folly anyway let's keep going now part of what a shaman is doing is I would argue also getting into the flow state so the flow state has become something that is discussed both academically and in the popular culture it was made famous in work by chick sent my high his book flow the flow experience brought it to the forefront in 1990 so what is the flow experience so the flow experience is the flow experience people get into they often describe it as like being in the zone so you are involved in a task that is very demanding in fact it has a particular structure to it so these are your some nice editing here boy they've upped their game since Buddhism and Cognitive Science pretty sharp or skills and these is how demanding the situation is right and the flow state is one in which the demands of the situation just slightly go beyond your skill abilities and so you get what's called here she sent my high often represents this by the flow channel right when my skills can just through we'll talk about this through like sort of insight and restructuring when I can just enough exact and extend my skills to meet the demand so I have to put everything I've got into it then I get into the flow channel if my skills exceed the demands I fall into boredom if my demands exceed the skills I fall into anxiety now of course the thing about you is you're very good at learning in situation so you need a kind of context in which your skills as your skills improve your environment also improves so one of the things we've created in our culture if we have created a flow induction machines because we what what those machines have are a situation where your skills are constantly improving and the demands of the environment are constantly improving and the skill induction these are these flow induction machines have other properties that are very important in them there's a very tight feedback between what you do and how the environment responds you're getting very clear information and failure matters it's like at least symbolically because you can die and of course some of you probably realizing that I'm talking about video games video games are one of the most reliable ways of inducing the flow state in people so he's going to start talking about the relationship between meaning and flow state because that's that's obvious and in fact part of the reasons why video games are addictive and they now being considered to be a bona fide addiction by the World Health Organization is precisely because they engender the flow state addictions and we'll talk about this later when we talk about addictions addictions run off machinery that is evolutionarily adaptive that's why it's compelling so the flow state what are other things that people do to get into the flow state they play jazz they do martial arts I'm a martial artist right one that's particularly interesting because there's no other explanation for it's interesting because what do it what are some other things that people do to get into the flow state that's not why we do it or is it why we do it because you might not have ever heard that anything about the flow state you give a child a little a little video game a little Nintendo and you say the child says mommy I want to get into the flow state here have a Nintendo no I want the Nintendo all right but so then there's this flow state and this this flow state is something that's terribly it's it's the flow state is is food for a hunger that we have or what is the hunger that we have well the hunger is is is meaning what's the relationship between the flow state and meaning what's the relationship between flow state and this environment that we have and I thought the graph shows it nicely for why people do it other than you get into the flow state is rock climbing because rock climbing otherwise would be like it's it's like some sort of torture from Greek mythology right you presented it like here's a rock face what I want you to do is I want you to go up that it's gonna be really physically demanding it's gonna hurt you you might fall to you and harm yourself and once you get to the top you come back down it would seem like a torturous thing to do well we know why people rock climb they rock climb because they get into the flow state and the flow state is deeply deeply positive for people it's not the same thing as physical pleasure right in fact the flow state is much more connected to meaning in life in fact the more often you get into the flow state the more likely you will rate your rep your life as meaningful the more the more you will experience well-being now it's interesting here because why do we binge on netflix why do we play computer games why do we look at high adrenaline sports well it's because of this and it's because of meaning and we've said many times that we will we will exchange we will we will we will allow we will take suffering in order to get meaning and that's what sports is you're you're out of breath you're running after that ball boy we'll we'll see if we'll see if my friend had a conversation with yesterday let's me post the conversation because we got into a lot of this kind of thing because he got into the Sam Harris Jordan Peterson part of the conversation talking about soccer and Sam Harris just dismisses soccer as you know all these men grown men chasing a ball and Peterson's like that's not what soccer is soccer is soccer is soccer is sacramental to much deeper things okay it's sacramental to much deeper things which is why and we get into the flow state well we begin to imagine that well what will what will the what will be the life in the age to come I mean I'm a naked axial endorser what will the life in the age to come mean well we're gonna we we think we tasted in this flow state and you get a sense of of Lucy and Peter and Edmund and in New Narnia seeing the other hills on the mountains of Aslan and you know right away boom it's it's dialed in right into that sweet spot. And what's interesting also about the flow state and remember we're doing this because I'm talking about that shamanism is probably a practice for practicing getting into the flow state so remember that right. The thing about the flow state it's a universal. People across cultures socio economic groups genders language environments age groups report being able to get into the flow state and they describe it in detail almost exactly the same way that's a universal and universals are important in cognitive science you pay attention to the universals because they give you profound insight into the machinery. Why do we want insight into the machinery. This is this is this is the move, this is the move that always gets interesting, why do we want insight into the machinery, so we can work the machinery who's we. I thought I was the machinery no i'm working the machine see right there and that little move right there that's always where I see Brett Weinstein we're going to transcend the assassin robot who's we. I thought I thought we were the robot no now we're a step aside of the robot well to get what we want well what do we want well isn't it what the machine wants what we want the flow state well. Again read the last chapter and see us lewis's. abolition of man. what's it like to be in the flow state. Well, when you're in the flow state right you feel like you're deeply at one with things. So, for example, i'm a martial artist and when i'm sparring now again read Michael pollins book what what do what do the psychedelics gets into what one of the unit one of the. One of the common things that comes out of the psychedelic is my sense of being at one, while we get that in the flow state to well. What are all these things leading us towards. And it's like my sense of connectedness to my opponent is really enhanced and i'm really at one and. That comes with it this kind of spontaneity so when when when when when a strike is coming toward my hand is just that I don't sort of raise your hand now john. It flows out of me, hence the word right and the block is there. And in fact i've often made this comment about basketball players if we know that martial arts or playing basketball or playing almost any sport. The relationship between the you that is shooting the basket and the you that's thinking about shooting basket, one of the one of the great ways, sometimes to miss a basket is to think about shooting it and. So then we have this strange question of well well what am I that there are these multiple needs that are that are doing this and and what tags, can I use to discuss to describe these different parts of me. The hockey player the goalie just puts out his hand the glove hand and the puck is there there's this tremendous sense of at one minute and then closely allied to it is this right. At one level you know, like the shaman dancing or chanting that there's tremendous. At one level you know, like the shaman dancing or chanting that there's tremendous metabolic energy at work effort you're making at one level all this effort. But at another level, it feels effortless that's the spontaneity again it just seems to flow from you. Your sense of time is passing differently. Your sense of time is passing differently. Yes, me after six hours of playing civilization. Your sense of self is being dramatically altered. So when people are in the flow state right there self a kind of self consciousness disappears that that self consciously you know we carry around that self consciousness. That that's always doing this this sort of thing it's constantly sort of doing our autobiography how's my day going how I doing who am I what am I doing blah blah and it's also checking how do I image management, how do I look what are people thinking me how am I doing my under threat. All of that mattering and all my failing I knew and that of course and that can get out of hand and like when you're in depression you ruminate on all that stuff and it overwhelms you. But we all carry that burden around it's taxing and the thing in the flow state. it's gone. Because there's no space for all of that because you're so right engrossed. In the task, the other thing about the flow state is it's super salient like it's like it's like like it's like the kind of brightness and vividness you get in a video game the world seems more intense. And people really like this experience. And not only do they like it, it seems to be where they do their best work, so the flow experience is an optimal experience in two ways many people regarded as the best experiences, they can have. But it's also where they're doing their very best at what they want to excel in. that's why it's so motivating to get into the flow state. So. Why is the flow state so good so this year 2018 I published some work with Adrian here Bennett and Leo Ferraro in which we tried to argue for. What the cognitive mechanisms are in the flow state see chick sent my high tells you the environmental conditions what you need in order to get into the flow state. You need skills and demand to be matched. You need there to be very tight coupling between you and the environment, like in the video game, you need very clear information it can't be ambiguous or vague and failure has to matter, it has to be costly to you in some fashion. specified all of that he also specified the kind of training that helps enhance you get to get you into the flow state. And think about this thing about what I said again training it's really important here because you don't you don't just do it and that's, in a sense, the difference between let's say a psychedelic or even a computer game. Computer game or computer games are really good at scaling you start out as a newbie and very quickly you you. You improve it's not near as much the case of let's say learning a musical instrument. Or or learning to use a language or learning literature to the degree that you can say do and write like CS Lewis writes that kind of training actually takes years and decades and hours and hours and hours of development. Last time and we're going to explore this more training and mindfulness, the more people have training and mindfulness increases their capacity to get into the flow state and can we come up with a unified explanation for all of this, I think we can. Both for the phenomenology why we're experiencing what we're experiencing when we're in the flow state. And why is it improving your cognition and therefore why would the shaman be enhancing their cognition by getting into something like the flow state through their ritual practices. Okay, so think about the rock climber. Okay, the rock climber is climbing. The rock climber is climbing. Remember, we talked about how you frame and find patterns last time, remember the nine dot problem. Right and that these patterns aren't just patterns in your mind, they're patterns in knowing how to make sense of things so you're rock climbing. And if that breaks down you impasse you're stuck and I don't mean just cognitively you're physically stuck. And this is a nice illustration on this, you know, when you ask me why. Why my last year and a half of working with the Jordan Peterson stuff has made me even more. Committed to the physical resurrection of Jesus, this is exactly it because that which is more real is more real on every level. And so to think that well the resurrection is a nice metaphor. Yeah, it's a nice metaphor, extremely valuable metaphor. This metaphor can get played out in how many different ways and can be used and how much different literature. But how much more powerful, this is Lewis's point, how much more powerful is it when it's real? What if this is the myth? What is this? What if this is the myth that has become true? Because this is what we want. You can play a video game, a rock climbing video game, but everybody who plays a rock climbing video game, maybe not everybody, but thanks. I sure would love to have those kind of skills video game doing it in real life. My kids were playing a video game with this dude. What was the name of those games? The dude was just, you know, the guy could just climb up everything and you just watch him climb and he'd shoot and guns and all this stuff. He's climbing up everything. And just watching that, that boy, I wish I could, I wish I could climb. It's like parkour on steroids and it's pretty, pretty famous video game. There's been two or three of them out. And you look at that and say, wow, I wish I could do that. Yeah, why do I wish I could do that? In fact, I get into the flow state just doing it, watching someone doing it or doing it virtually, watching a YouTube on someone doing it. It just kind of gets me into the foothills of it. But actually being able to do it. Well, now we're now we're getting somewhere. In other words, the more layers at which it's real, the better it is. It's just obvious. If you want to be a good rock climber, what you have to do is you have to break that framing. You have to train yourself to break the frame, restructure, change what you're finding relevant and salient, and then change yourself to fit that. And then you refit yourself to the rock face. I love this point. This is, this is a great, great point. And for me, when he made this point, all kinds of things came together. They had to deal with it too long. They have to pick up on it. They have to reframe again and again and again and again and again. Do you see what's going on with the rock climber, the jazz musician, the martial artist is this idea of a cascade of insights. You're having an insight that's leading to another insight that's leading to another insight, right? It's priming. So you know when you have like an insight, you have like, aha, and you get that sort of burst of energy and it's like a flash. That's why we put a light bulb over somebody's head when we want to show them having an insight. It's like that flash. Now imagine if I took that aha and I extended it. Aha. That's the flow state. It's an insight cascade. So the more you flow, the more you're training your ability for insight. And again now, to bring in Aristotle and his causes, to what end? See, so we experience this. We find this experience very meaningful. And something within that is begging us to say, this is from another world. This is pointing to something. This is why meaning just as feeling leaves us so disappointed because there's, I want to have this insight go, but I want it to go further up and further in and I want to become more and more real. So maybe I'm playing a video game at which I'm on my PlayStation. He's jumping, jumping, jumping, jumping. But now actually I would want to actually be jumping, jumping, jumping, jumping in not just this two dimensional foe three dimensional world, but to actually do it. To smell it and to taste it and to see it and to be in the moment and to be in the action. In fact, it's to me, it's the reason the ontological argument. We can't quite see it working, but we also can't quite dispel it because something deep inside of us knows that the more layers, the more real and that inside our hearts are haunted by eternity. And we hunger for this to be bigger, better, more true, deeper in deeper in. And again, see, it's just nails that in this section in the last battle and our hearts long for this. And direct interacting with your environment. Now the trouble, of course, with the video game is the environment isn't a real world. But in the shaman's world, of course, the shamans flowing in the real world, the real social world, the real ecological world. And now again, the shaman is the shaman of his tribe. So you've got your your hundred or two hundred people or maybe a few thousand people. Now these religions scale and they get up into the whole world. And one of the one of the things that you see happening in the transition between the Old Testament and the New Testament is that in the Old Testament, it's a nationalist division. You get into the New Testament. One of the things Jesus does in the Gospels is he transforms this from a nationalist vision. At the beginning of the Book of Acts, the apostles ask, when will the kingdom be restored to Israel? And Jesus pivots. It doesn't answer their question. He says, power will come upon you and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria, and to the ends of the earth. What does that mean? And then, of course, the Holy Spirit takes the gospel out into the Roman world and it starts to spread. And then suddenly they have to deal with the Jew Gentile thing. And and it just keeps going. We've got eternity in our hearts and the shaman, he's playing with this in this little world. What happens when the world gets bigger? But there's something more. It's not just an insight cascade that's going on in flow. That in and of itself would be great. There's something else going. This has to do with your capacity for implicit learning. Now, notice what's happening here. Notice, although even I'm doing the history, I'm always also doing the cog sigh, because while I'll be emphasizing the history, the historical account, I'm starting to build what I need to give you the structural functional account. OK, so implicit learning. This goes back. Now, I think he's going to make a point a little bit later, but the point about structure and moving and changing with the with the rock climber. And so so there's the question. And this is a question that's haunted Christians. OK, so you've got the shaman. Why? This gets really complicated. I got to be really careful. Augustine and City of God takes apart rogue Roman paganism in a devastating way. But the question lingers. Why did a tribe with a shaman or medicine man or a nation with a priest or prophets or magicians? Why did they outperform others? Well, I think what what Verbeke gives us here is an is an insight into that, that they outperformed others because the practices of the shaman and the medicine man and the priest, even the pagan ones, invoked new ways of thinking that allowed the tribe to see from different perspectives and that gave them an adaptive advantage against their rivals. And in many cases, the rivals was just simply the natural environment was the lions and tigers and bears and hunger and starvation and drought and rain and forage that the that the practice of getting into this flow state helped the groups adaptively succeed and survive. Well, that makes sense. And it also makes sense in terms of what is the greater goal? Well, OK, what does the apostle Paul talk about in terms of the other religions? In fact, Paul quotes, and him we live and move and have our being, which is which is coming from a from a pagan prophet. And Paul appropriates that and says, now Christ is the he's the son of man. And he comes and he raids Satan's house and God claims as his own. All that is his. OK. But you can you can understand the mechanics of this that Verbeke is is pulling out and you can begin to say, OK, I can see lines of trajectory that are helpful. For me, that's going to get into some of this tacit learned stuff. And this stuff is cool, too. To work done in the 60s by Arthur Reber and a whole bunch of other people. So what Reber was doing is he was really trying to understand how people learn language. What he was doing was he was generating an arbitrary set of rules, completely arbitrary, just make them up on the spot set of rules for how you can link strings of letters and or numbers together. Like the rule might be you can't have more than three vowels in a row or you have to have two consonants and then you generate you generate letter strings. Eight, nine long. These are so long that you can't sort of easily hold them in your working memory. And then this is what you do. You take you generate you can generate an indefinite number. You generate a huge number of these strings and you show them to people. Here's one. Here's one. Here's one. Here's one. Here's one. Here's one. Here's one. OK, that's the first part of the experiment. Then you do the second part of the experiment. Now you generate a whole bunch of strings, but two kinds. One set of strings is generated by that artificial set of rules. And so follows the same rules as the first string. First set and then the second set is generated by a completely different set of rules. OK, and what you do is you mix up the first and the second together. And this is the task you give people. Can you tell me the strings that belong with the strings you saw before? There you go. Now, Reber originally thought what would happen is people would because it seems like so random. What he found was people score well, well above chance consistently on this. People can tell you, oh, no, those strings. Yeah, those belong with the old ones. No, that one doesn't. That one does. That one doesn't. Now, here's what's interesting. You now ask people why. How do you know that? And they'll give you one of two answers. They'll say, I don't know. I don't know. I just I just feel it. Which is who or they say they give you some explanation. They'll give you some rule or procedure they're using. And here's what we know. They're deceiving themselves or lying to you because that rule that they're using wouldn't actually predict their success. I wouldn't say they're lying. They just don't know. And so they're making up an answer. This is what our brains do. We know this about our brains. So you are picking up. You have this tremendous capacity outside your conscious awareness. Right. To pick up on very complex patterns in your environment. This is what I call your consciousness committee. You say, OK, why? What does this have to do with shamanism? Well, hang on, because we talked about the shaman picking up on patterns last time. Let's go back to this. Let me talk about an experiment that's really interesting. So there was some work done on this idea that people have psychic abilities and there's the feeling of being stared at. People can tell when they're being stared at. People reliably report that they think, oh, I knew somebody was staring. I could just feel it in the back of my neck and stuff like that. And so they ran an experiment in which they did the following. They'd have somebody in a room blindfolded, earplugged. They can't sense anything. Nobody's allowed to wear perfumes or anything. That person can't see or hear or feel. And they're just standing in the room unbeknownst to that person. And then people would come in and stare at them. And then they had to report if the person at the center of the room had to report if they were being stared at or not. And people were reporting this well above chance. They were saying, I think I'm being stared at. And there was somebody there. And of course, first of all, I do. Right. But then it turned out that if you made a slight change to that experiment, it wouldn't replicate. So what was going on? You bring people into the room and they say, I think I'm being stared at. And the researchers would tell them if they were correct or not. They would say, you're right or you're wrong. So what? You say, so what? Well, here's the thing. The researchers thought they were introducing people, the viewers into the room randomly. But it turns out they weren't introducing them randomly because, you know, it's very hard for you to do random stuff. They were actually introducing people as view. Now, even that point, why is it hard for us to do random stuff? Just think about that. Think about that in terms of the definition of random. So the researchers, the viewers, they were actually introducing people as viewers in a complex pattern. And the person that was blindfolded and earplugged was implicitly learning the pattern because they were getting feedback. If you take the feedback away, if you don't tell them whenever they say I'm being stared at or not, if you don't tell them they're right or wrong, their performance drops to chance. So it's almost like psychic abilities are your ability to pick up implicitly on complex patterns in the environment without being aware of it. So Hogarth in his book on educating intuition made a really, really cool, really cool claim. Makes a very good argument, in fact, I think, for this. He says that what we call intuition is a real thing, but isn't anything sort of magical about it, like the psychics say or something like that. We've got to watch our, we've got to watch our, see, I'm a Christian pastor. I have to watch the people in authority over me. He's in a secular university. He's got to watch the people in authority over him. And again, I'm not saying that to dismiss it, but it's, if you, again, you go back to Dallas Willard's comments about how worldviews are communicated. And I see this in preaching too when I ever do any preaching coaching. It's all these little throwaways that that subtly communicate the group, the group assumptions. OK, of course, this is what we believe. This is our frame. That's exactly that's essentially how the frames get communicated, not explicitly, but implicitly. And you only really notice it if you're in a group that's a little bit outside that frame. And again, Jonathan Haidt's point, that's why diversity is so critically important and so helpful, because if you can listen to groups outside your frame, you can learn about your frame, because the hardest frame to learn is always your own. Your intuition is the result of your implicit learning. You pick up on all kinds of complex patterns, not knowing how you have done that. But you get an ability to detect patterns and you don't know how. That's why your intuition feels the way it does. You just sort of know. You know things, you're doing it all the time. To use a famous example from Dreyfus, you know how far to stand from somebody. And what angle to like where you should stand, how close you should stand, what angle you should stand, how as the conversation or the context changes, you're allowed to move closer or farther away, what angles you're allowed to be at. But if I were to ask you to tell me how you do that, you wouldn't know. You would just say, I know how to do it. And yet, when people don't know how to do it, it creeps you out. It creeps you out. Okay, so intuition. Now, Hogarth points out, and this is something very common, right? Hogarth points out that, you know, we have two different terms and we don't realize we're talking about the same thing. We have intuition when we think it's going well, that implicit learning. But we also have bias and prejudice for when we think that implicit learning goes bad. And Bigot has got intuitions about races that are wrong. Now, why is, how is it that implicit learning goes wrong? Well, here's the thing. You have some complex pattern in the environment, right? And your implicit learning picks up on it. The problem is there's two kinds of patterns in your environment. There's correlations. There's correlation patterns and causal patterns. What do I mean by that? Now, this is something that, like I said before, I hear things. I listen to this thing. I just listened to this video when it was first released. That wasn't very long ago. And this is one of the things that I picked up on and it's been churning around in my head. Causality and correlation. And we like to differentiate them. We don't really have a good handle on cause. We seek correlation. And sometimes it's easy to dismiss them. But sometimes we dismiss them prematurely. Well, let's get into his examples because they're good. Correlations is when any two things are related to each other. So let me give you an example of a couple of correlations that you shouldn't confuse with causation. There is a correlation between how large your wedding is and how long your marriage will last. If you have a bigger wedding, your marriage will last longer. Now, you would be a fool to therefore think you should have the biggest possible wedding. Because the reason why bigger weddings predict longer marriages is not because bigger weddings cause longer marriages. It's because, right, they're only correlated. It's because bigger weddings reflect a bigger social network, more financial resources. And having a bigger social network for the couple, having more financial resources, actually does cause a marriage to last longer. OK, let's look at this example because it's a good one to illustrate my point. So you've got the big wedding and we think, well, big weddings cause longer marriages because maybe someone did a study. And the bigger the wedding, the longer the marriage lasts. And his point, which is true, is that, well, the big wedding itself doesn't cause the longer marriage. What he points to are underlying things. OK, bigger social network. More people can bring more resources to it. You could also look at a whole variety of other factors. Perhaps if you've got a bigger wedding, it shows that you actually, the partners within, one or both partners within the couple have broader social skills, have better social skills. And they can bring those social skills to bear in terms of dealing with the inevitable conflicts that arise in the marriage. And you can find a whole variety of what we might call causes. But what makes that story interesting is that implicit in the story, it's that, well, I want to have a more successful marriage, so I am going to have a bigger wedding. It's the agency that you bring to the picture that out of which we have this idea of cause. OK, I don't think I'm communicating this very well. We don't have a good handle on causation. We can see correlation. And so what we do is we try to figure out causation. And as he's going to point to in a minute, this is where science comes in, because we then set up experiments in order to replicate. Or if these are things that are not really something we can experiment with, we do these studies in terms of isolating variables to try to eliminate the difficulty with human beings with almost any experimentation is that, well, there's two difficulties. One is that we are so enormously complex and there are almost always multivariable causes. There's so many variables in play. The other is the problem of us being within this experiment, which is why they try to do these double blind experiments. And again, this is exactly where Michael Pollan goes with his, with the question of psychedelics, because you can't have a control group with a psychedelic study because that group pretty much knows they got the placebo. Yeah, I took it, but I ain't I ain't feeling any. But but and then they talked about the fact that scientists who have never had the experience can't judge it. But once you've had the experience, you also are now no longer unbiased in terms of judging it. And the psychedelic question so beautifully illustrates the difficulty of the subjective when our goal is to eliminate it in order to find knowledge. But why are we trying to eliminate the subjective in order to find knowledge so that we can be so that we can manage the cause so that we can determine the outcome? But again, in this whole frame, at some point you have to ask, who is we? Do you want to have a long marriage? Why? People every year decide they don't want their marriage to go on any longer and they get out. Well, what exactly then are you hoping for? Well, I want to have a happy marriage. OK, you want to have a flow state marriage? It's not exactly the same as happiness. You want to have a meaningful marriage? And right away, we we don't know what we is. We don't know what we want. So right away, when you're dealing with human beings and nothing we deal with is uncontaminated from human beings, these are all the issues that weigh in. You know, again, his basic point is exactly correct. And you find this again and again. Well, there's a correlation and causation, but causes way more difficult than that simple distinction. And the way we usually introduce that distinction into a conversation. Betrays. Here's another one. So I'm old enough, right? And I was brought up in a religious household that I was, you know, when prayer was taken out of the schools. And of course, people were very upset about that. Taking a look at crime is going up as we've taken prayer out of the schools and things like that. By the way, crime hasn't been going up. Read some of Steven Pinker's work. But let's say it was. That's only a correlation. Because here's another correlation. We know that greenhouse gases have been going up. Steadily, that's part of the environmental crisis we're going to talk about. You know what has been also consistently going down for the exact same time period? Caribbean piracy. Having pirates in the Caribbean and wooden ships with cannons and stuff. OK, the wooden ships are really important here. And again, this is another one of my illustrations. And he's going to make the point. You can't reduce greenhouse gases by increasing Caribbean piracy in wooden ships. But if you went back to sail in wooden ships, there's something underneath that's pushing this that actually both things share. And so correlation and causation is a very tricky business. That's my only point in this. As that went down, greenhouse gases went up. Now, I hope none of you think that we could solve global warming by bringing back piracy. OK? But maybe by wooden ships. That wouldn't be enough, obviously. So there are many things that there are many. And yes, in the comments section, I will hear from the climate change deniers. And I've had I've had phone calls and emails from a number of you. Any patterns in the world that are illusory because they're only correlational. They're not causal. See, the bigot has picked up on correlational patterns, not causal patterns. So what you want to do is you want to train your implicit learning to pick up on the causal patterns that are real rather than the correlational patterns that are illusory. Now, here's what you can't do. You can't tell people to look for patterns explicitly. Go back to Reber's experiment. If you put people into that experiment where they're looking at the letter strings and you tell them explicitly what they're supposed to do, try and figure out the rules consciously, deliberately. Try to figure out the rules. Their performance doesn't get better. And which I think is a fascinating point. And I don't think it's a very different point from sit there and think about your free throw. Well, you might sit there and think about it when you're tweaking it and fine tuning it. But the point of practice is we call it muscle memory. We have all these different words, but to get into this other state that when I always tell my kids when they're driving, the hardest driving you will do is when you're learning to drive. And basically you you move that knowledge from your rider to the elephant. And the elephant's got massive capacity for this kind of thing. It gets worse. OK. And Hogarth notes this in his book on educating intuition. We can't replace implicit learning with explicit learning because it is precisely by being implicit that it works so well. What can we do explicitly then? What we can do is set up the right context, the right environmental factors so that my implicit learning machine will tend more likely to get onto causal patterns rather than correlational patterns. Now, this is tricky because again, to bring in Jonathan Heights, Rider and the Elephant, if you really want to tinker with your implicit learning machine, you really have to train the elephant and not just talk to the rider. And when I talk to people about, well, why do you go to church? Why do you worship? Why do you have a discipline of prayer? Why do you why do you make these things repeated things in your life? Now, if you tell somebody if you want to be a great basketball player, you have to practice. If you want to be a great violinist, you have to practice. Well, if you want to if you want to get into a flow state, like for me at this point in my life, I read that part of The Last Battle and I just drop part of me drops right in or is at least in the foothills of it. I'm you know, physiologically, adrenaline is probably pumping and I don't know all the physiological things that are going, but I can feel it. You know, I'm just it's inspiring. Well, why has that been? Well, it's because I've been training in this stuff all my life. And so many people have have talked to me and they said, you know, well, I've been watching Jordan Peterson and I want to believe, but I can't believe. Well, that's because your elephant doesn't believe in and you're going to have to give some time for your elephant to believe. Now, sometimes things happen and you have a conversion. It's just instantaneous. And I think that's part of the interest in psychedelics is that, well, maybe if I take enough psilocybin or DMT or LSD that bang, I'll get into I'll have this experience and then I'll OK. Well, you might have an experience and then you might change categories. And I don't know. I'm not not an expert in any of that. But so much of this is in fact training the elephant and it's it's the it's the repeated things over time that actually trains the elephant and reshapes this this intuitive level of us. So I'll get good intuition rather than bad intuition. How do you do that? Well, Hogar says the way you would do this is the way you do science. You want to control the context. Right. Because what science is, you know, there's a lot of science. Look, look, science is a way of distinguishing causal patterns from correlational patterns. You set up an environmental situation so that you can distinguish the causal patterns from the correlational patterns. What do you do? Well, in an experiment, first of all, I make sure that everything is very clearly measured. I get very clear information, very clear information. Now, I think this is a wonderful part and everything he says here is true. But now apply this to your marriage and say, honey, we're going to we're going to set this up in our marriage. See how that goes. I make sure I'm looking to see that right that the change in one variable is closely followed by a change in another variable. And also notice and again, I'm not criticizing it, but but notice I think is how now reason comes into where intuition and reason begin to play together. And I think this is exactly right. We use them. And I've been thinking a lot about reason. What is reason? Now, C.S. Lewis tends to think reason is more of a an expression of of, you know, God's gift to us. It's also a correlative pattern. Reason helps us see relationships and and track. It helps us compare. So I change your drug dosage. Do your symptoms get better? Right. So I look for clear information. I look for clear feedback. And in science, failure matters. You test a hypothesis and disconfirmation has to be possible. Failure matters. Now, notice this. What Hogar says is, well, what I want to do is I want to I want to put you into an implicit learning situation where you get clear feedback like you do in science, where there is a tight coupling between what you do and how the environment responds and where error really matters like in science. And he says what we should do is we should try and do implicit learning in those kinds of contexts. Well, here's what myself and my colleagues argued. Those three criteria that will turn your intuition into good implicit learning are exactly the conditions for flow. Clear information. Tightly coupled feedback. And error matters. The rock climber is looking for needs clear information. Tightly coupled feedback and error really matters. That context really means that there's a much greater chance that their implicit learning machinery is going to pick up on causal patterns rather than correlational ones. So notice what we've got going on here. The shaman is getting into the flow state, is developing all these techniques for getting into this deeply immersive comprehensive flow state. And they're getting an insight cascade. And they're also getting enhanced. Implicit learning. Picking up a very complex, real complex patterns. Now this is intuitive. They don't know how they're doing it. Now it's also though that the shaman is practicing this within a tradition. That there's the shaman or the religious person or the priest or the prophet or the pastor is working on all of this within actually a very long tradition because that's how they're getting into the flow state. And so it's important to not lose that contextual piece in that. In that it's actually, again, it's not different from training the elephant. If you want to train the elephant, listen to Jonathan Haidt, you work on the path. And the wise rider figures out, you know, you train the elephant by managing the environment. Well, how do you manage the environment? What are the rules for managing the environment? Well, these come from your tradition. And so if you listen to Jonathan Peugeot talk about liturgy, that's what he's talking about. That over centuries, the liturgy changes and shapes the elephant. OK, that's that's how religions work. Here's what's interesting, too. These two are reinforcing each other because the insight gets your cognition to explore for new patterns. And then the implicit learning picks up those new patterns. And then those new patterns enhance your ability to restructure. And then, right, you keep exploring for new patterns, acquiring the new patterns for implicit learning, and you keep ratcheting your skills up. Getting into the flow state is deeply, deeply enhancing of your cognition. Somebody who's an expert at getting into the flow state is going to be an individual you want to have around. Now, that individual is going to have some really serious challenges facing them. They don't know how they're getting a lot of the information they're getting. They don't know why they're so insightful. They don't. And they're experiencing this radical at one minute with the world, this loss of sense of self when they're enacting the animal. Right. You have to understand these insights aren't verbal insights like in the nine dot problem. It's not words, it's not beliefs. Getting an insight in how the deer moves. It's getting an insight, an intuitive insight in how to talk to this person, to trigger the placebo effect, to help them to heal right now. It's the 10,000 hours. It's Malcolm Gladwell's 10,000 hours. It's all of that training that has gone on in this person. And now again, when you're looking at the scope of human history, it's all of these traditions coming down and doing that work. And they're all tweaking and learning from each other if they're connected in one way or not. Now, obviously in our contemporary society, since the since the the Colombian, the Colombian exchange, the whole world has been connected. Okay. And increasingly so. But this is all happening. So getting into the flow state, notice what's going on here. Notice you're getting something that's almost like a mystical experience. It's a powerful altered state of consciousness. It's enhancing your cognitive processing. And the shaman is making meaning. They're singing, they're dancing, they're telling stories. They're altering people's sense of what matters. They're altering people's sense of identity. They're healing and transforming people. Well, then that's that's where making meaning, meaning is making meaning for him or herself or he's making meaning for the tribe. I would say making meaning for the tribe, which means that what we do is we get meaning from each other. What does that mean? Why would that have powered the upper paleolithic transition? Well, first of all, this is enhancing your cognition. But and this is goes towards the work of Michael Winkleman and also Matt Rossano. What's happening in this state is your brain is learning to get areas to talk to each other that normally don't talk to each other. This is especially the case if you've gone through a massive disruption strategy, fasting, social isolation, taking psychedelics. Because what if you look at a brain scan of somebody who's having a psychedelic experience, areas of the brain that do not normally do not talk to each other are talking to each other now. Now, if I were just to do that to you, if I was just to get areas to talk to each other, you'd experience that as noise. But if you've got enhanced insight and enhanced intuition, those areas are now talking to each other and you can bridge between them. You can connect them. And now this is an ability you take for granted. You think it is just the normal part of your cognition. This is your capacity for metaphor. And he goes into a section here on metaphor, which I think is good, but I it doesn't hold my interest because this is already known territory for me. So and then he goes into the axillage, which is where I'm going to pause it. I'm going to pause the video instead of having you sit here and have me search it. OK, maybe I will play some of it, but partly because if you go back into the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversation, one of the one of the one of the little tensions between Peterson and Sam Harris has been about story and capacity. And so then Bret Weinstein comes in with this idea of metaphorical truth. And I can't help but get the sense that whenever Bret Weinstein comes in with metaphorical truth, he's assuming that this is a second class truth. And this is exactly the point Jonathan Pujo keeps wanting to make to Bret Weinstein that it's not a second class truth, because the truth is we don't know anything apart from metaphor. It is so built into our language that again, what I said to Adam on Twitter today, whether it's it's mysticism or mythology or science, these are all representations and they're all metaphorical. You say, well, math, well, we can't appropriate math without, you know, without these connections. And so let's have Ravik talk about this a little bit. I hope it's not too hard for you. Do you see? It's pervasive and profound. All of your cognition. This is work done by Lakoff and others. I have some criticisms of some of their theory, but the idea that your cognition is filled and functions through metaphorical enhancement. That's just, I think, the case. Now, why is metaphor so powerful? Because metaphor is how you make creative connections between ideas. So in other words, this is how we think. You don't you don't get beyond it. This is how we think. Metaphorical cognition as is at the heart of both science and art. That's Peugeot's point to Brett Weinstein. When the shamans are enhancing this machinery, they're connecting areas of the brain that normally don't talk to each other and affording a massive enhancement in metaphor. One of the ways in which your cognition and meaning and altered states of consciousness come together is in how your mind, your embodied mind is generating a new, your embodied mind is generating metaphor in order to make insightful connections. There's a deep connection between how insightful, how good a problem solver you are and your capacity for metaphorical thought. That's why when somebody is facing a problem and they need to restructure how they think about it, we tell them to use an analogy, to think of a metaphor. So this is the point. The shaman is developing psycho technologies for altering the state of consciousness to get into the flow state. And that flow state. And I wouldn't say just the shaman. That's what the shaman is doing. He's the illustration here. We are all doing it. The preacher does it. The prophet does it. The magician does it. The king does it. The priest does it. The magician does it. The king does it. This is what we do. Now we use each other. And so the king will use the, the chief will use the shaman. The king will use the magician. The king will use the prophet. Okay. It is already making them more insightful and more intuitively powerful. But it is also making them generators of metaphor. And this is why. So why does Jordan Peterson in his use of the Bible turning all these people from Sam Harris? He's thinking he's helping them think. And in many ways, Sam Harris in the debates with Jordan Peterson, deprecates and dismisses this type of thinking. And I think implicit in what Brett Weinstein says is something. Well, this is metaphorical truth. All truth is metaphorical truth, my friend. You cannot live in the monarchical vision. You can't get in. You contaminate the room. And again, back to the psychedelics. The thing that as I listen to this book, it's just, Michael Pollan keeps making the point again and again and again. The setup by which we have done so much, discovered so much good work in science. It's wonderful. But it has its limits. And it's interesting that when you get to the psychedelics, this is where we really begin to see some of the limits. And they're just, like, they're really, they're not just a bunch of words. They're like, the words that they use. They're not just the words that they use. They're the limits. And they're just, they just become obvious. And this is what Pollan makes through the book. The point he makes. I think it's really one of the primary points in the book. But I haven't finished yet. Early providing people with the forms of thought that will allow them to connect ideas such that making inscriptions on a piece of bone can track the moon. Carving this figurine can connect me to ideas of fertility. Okay. Now, now we're getting into something very biblical, something very interesting. We're getting into representation and we're getting into agency. And okay. This is us wanting, expressing, colonizing. And so here, here's the thing. And so here, now we're getting into some stuff. We want things. We're seeing a lot of the themes that we're going to develop coming to the fore here. How much, right? Let's go back to, let's go back to the little idol. Now we're getting into this question of a sacramental worldview because we see the patterns and we start to pick up the patterns. And so we represent the patterns. And by representing these patterns, we hope to, we hope to what? We hope to achieve outcomes. We hope to have our desires reach fruition. Okay. And it's at this moment that, but I just don't have the words for it right now, but I'll keep working on it. This figurine can connect me to ideas of fertility. See, and connect me to ideas of fertility. We don't just want to be connected to those ideas of fertility. We want to, we want to master fertility. And this gets back into CS Lewis's book, miracles in terms of miracles of the old creation, miracles of the new creation, those two chapters at the end where in the biblical story, what happens is that. So there's this hierarchy and there's the maker, which is God, and there's the vice regent with us. And then there's the rest of nature. And what happens in the fall is that we rebel from God, which is over us. And nature looks up at us and takes a clue. Oh, I can rebel too. And rebels from us. And this is where you get this picture of the fallen world. And so the story of the Bible is actually putting this back in order. And that's where CS Lewis gets into his miracles of the new creation. Right now, my hand is, is in submission to my spirit. Now we use the word spirit here because we don't know what other word to use because spirit is me, soul, persons. I mean, we don't even know what we are basically. But from, you know, after I was born, I started working on this and I've been working on this ever since. And in fact, it's so implicit and intuitive. I don't even think about it. And I can do both hands at once. Oh, look at me. But if I start trying to do something like this, you know, I so then I got to go to a Waldorf school and learn how to do this crazy stuff because my wife teaches Waldorf. But, you know, anyway, so I've been I've been colonizing my hands since I was a child. And, you know, my mouth and all of this stuff on now we want to colonize the rest of the world. And so, well, there's a representation and there's a metaphor. And if I if I if I can make this representation, then I can I still got to post this the last two weeks Sunday school class on the church thing. But but last week I was getting into the the question of, you know, of of colonizing. And if I can if I can represent this, well, then I can well, then I can what what am I seeking? What am I wanting? What am I looking for? And what is the eye that wants and seeks and looks? And and what if I don't even know? I'm so disconnected, disassociated from this eye. So the shaman is weaving together, enhancing cognition, altered states of consciousness, and improving our capacity for making sense of the world, literally making more meaning. I'm still working on that. There's a section in in Paul and spoke that I was I was listening to and I couldn't outline it. But you get into this meaning section in the book and you get into this, you know, this is the most important thing. You get into this meaning section in the book. And if you have your 100, rather group and you have a shaman, you're going to outcompete groups that don't. There's a reason why it's universal. There's a reason why the flow phenomena is universal, because this exact some of our most basic machinery enhances it in a powerful way. Now, the shamans have a very interesting kind of experience. They go through this transformation. They often experience what's called soul flight as if they've gone to another world and they're flying through it. This is the origin. I mean, think of how we've come to this. But this is the origin of getting high. And the shaman does this. The shaman experiences themselves as if they're flying above the world. Why? Why would the brain generate that? See, and again, and this is where we get into this, this this weird question of the of the psychedelics and what's actually going on. Because, well, is the shaman flying above the world? Well, the shaman seems to be seeing above the world. Or let's talk about. So again, I got into near death experiences with that conversation I had a little bit. And well, no, the shamans not flying above the world. They're there on the ground. No. But here's the question of what is the shaman? Well, what do you mean? What is the shaman? What is the locus of his consciousness? Now we're going to get into really, really spooky questions because now we're we're at the we're right there at this question of, OK, well, when I die and they put my body in this box, am I in this box? Well, what am I? Am I a story? Well, what kind of story am I on the story with agency? What does that mean? And so then I'm you know, the more I listen to if. I don't think we're as convinced of the secular frame as we like to pretend we are in our settings where we're all keeping up appearances. And and that's especially true when it gets to the psychedelic conversation, because the psychedelics powerfully suggest that the world is not exactly as it should be. And so part of us is drawn to that because we deeply want it to be. But while we're keeping up appearances with each other, at least in the secular world, at least in the secular university, we've all got to play this game, because if you cross that line, you will be censured. Because you will be you might be one of those strange Christian people and go all the way back to the beginning of the of the mouthy Buddha. And, you know, you've got you've got Sam Harris scoffing at the Roman Catholics eating the body and blood of their Lord scoffing. OK. But then you take a psychedelic and you have this experience and then suddenly you're not quite so sure that this materialist frame is what it is. And then suddenly you have to ask the question, well, the materialist frame, if this if this if this thing that we're all keeping up appearances isn't necessarily what it is, then what is it? Then what is, in fact, the frame of the world? Then now now now you're suddenly open to a whole different ranges of questions. And then you start to grab, well, how do you decide what group you want to be? Well, sociology of knowledge, you usually look at that which is useful and that which is desirable. Well, what do you mean desirable that which we are drawn to? What do you mean drawn to? How do I know what I'm drawn to? OK, that's massively intuitive, too. So this gets weird very quickly. Well, think about this. The shaman is getting a much more comprehensive grasp of more complex patterns, but they're experiencing it mostly intuitively and metaphorically. Where are you when you get a bigger picture of things? You're above them. Now, what's what's interesting here is that we're looking at the shaman from within the secular box. And and that's no, yeah, I'm deeply secular. And and there's really wonderful things to be gained from this perspective. So, gosh, this video is going on a long time. Deeply wonderful things to be gained from this perspective. And in fact, in some ways, the secular the secular room makes a nice hallway for lots of other different rooms. But what we're learning is it's really hard to live in the hallway. Let me go back to what he just said, because that'll. How when you but they're experiencing it mostly intuitively and metaphorically. Where are you when you get a bigger picture of things? You're above them. OK, that we're talking metaphorical. But now what what actual what do actual shamans do? What do actual shamans believe? What do actual priests and prophets and pastors and religious people believe? They actually believe that they are in connection with. Other beings. Other agents, agents that have more power. And this is where, again, it's that line that secularism really fears because, you know, Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris are talking, talking, talking, talking, talking through the debates. But then Sam Harris gets to the end of it and just I'm not going to pull it up and play it again. I've played it so many times. Sam Harris is like, well, what about prayer? When you sit down and you pray and Jordan Peterson, he's working that line and he says, yeah, but, you know, you said at the end of that bed and you really, really pray. And well, then what? Well, how do you know? And the line that we really observe is there cannot be other agents that have power over us in our realm. We must be the top dog. I think that's psychologically motivated to be what is the desire and even the fear at the heart of secularism. If, you know, Freud says that, well, we believe in gods because we're projecting our fear into the sky. Well, secularism in some ways, we're agreeing about our fear together and we say there's nobody here but us. There's nobody here but us. There's, well, maybe there's aliens, but boy, I hope they don't open the sky and come down and destroy us. And then we make all kind of movies about that because that's our fear. There's nobody here but us. How do you know? Because the shaman, what was the shaman doing? The shaman was getting in touch with other agents. Why? Well, that was just metaphorical. OK, maybe. Well, it was certainly metaphorical. But what else was it? That's the difficult question. And how do we often explain this even to ourselves metaphorically? You have oversight. Somebody who is in charge of things has oversight of them or has supervision of them. Do you see that? Those are metaphors. Those are metaphors that are little whispers, little echoes of shamanic flight, flying over things, getting an intuitive, insightful grasp. That is expressed metaphorically of a deeper connection to the world. Now, at some point we have to ask, was just the shaman deeply fooled? OK, so theoretically we can say, well, the disruption of the old pattern, like with the rock climber and the getting into the flow state and having the new pattern. Well, that gave them an adaptive advantage because they could see the difference. Well, is that all? Well, that certainly wasn't all for the shaman. That's not if you ask the shaman what he was doing, that is not what he would tell you. The shaman not be aware that there were patterns in the world. Of course, you know, there are patterns. But but there is, in a sense, a dismissal of something by secularism based on our fear. We don't want to be the shaman. We don't want there to be agents that we can't control. We don't want there to be an author. Neo says it. I don't like to imagine that. I like to imagine I make my own decisions. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I don't want to be the shaman. I love that description. Iscer called the atencin to I like to imagine I make my own destiny. That's what Neo says. Yeah, that's what it means to be an American. We're going to pick up on all of these themes as we investigate more the machinery of meaning making machinery metaphor making metaphor. And I need to move forward now. this really cool stuff, but that's where I wanted to drop it here. All right. Anybody watching Russian Doll? And I, my wife and I went through the, went through the eight episodes really good. I picked it up, I thought, oh this is good, look interesting. It's a metaphysical second chance comedy, might even make a whole video on this. Maybe not, because I don't know. Why do we love Russian Doll? Now, Russian Doll is clearly set in a much more Hindu frame, and it's, it's not unlike Groundhog Day, where, I don't want to give away any spoilers, but there are things they have to work out, and so they go through, they don't die, they keep coming back, they keep coming back, and there's, there's actually a little bit more progression in Russian Doll than there is in Groundhog Day. Tim Keller called these metaphysical second chance comedies. They have happy endings, that's why they're comedies. Oops, I didn't told you. Oh, there's a happy ending. But it's, it's well worth the, the four hours or so that it's going to take you to walk through, to walk through this episode, this, this little series on Netflix. Why do we love Russian Doll? We love Russian Doll because we long to live in a story where even, even the rotation of the lives and the engineering of that rotation and how that works, there's meaning, and again, we live in a, we live in a society that has been so adamant about pushing back against Christianity that, well, we'll take almost anything from anywhere else, so we're going to take the, we're going to take the Hindu frame, and we're going to take the reincarnation frame, and what's, what's kind of nice about Russian Doll is that it shows, yeah, you, if this is your life, you certainly want escape, but part of what makes the Russian Doll thing work is that consciousness, the, the character or characters that are in fact cycling through death and rebirth are having a conscious continuity, all right? It's not the case that, well, somehow there's a thing that is me that, that there's no conscious continuity or memory that has been going through endless process of reincarnation and I'm trying to get to a higher level and so on and so forth. These people in these stories have conscious contact throughout their multiple cyclings, and so in fact they have a project that they are working on through their multiple cycling, cyclings, and they're working on it consciously, but we're deeply attracted to this, and in fact this was from Huffington Post, we're trapped inside Netflix Russian Doll and it's great in there. You want to live in that story, it's deeply meaningful, what's meaningful about it, well, we're making progress, we're, we're gaining insight, we're into a flow state and we're, we're, we're, well, what do we want to do? Now what happens is that the main character is trying to figure out what is making the situation work, all right? She's using agency. What's, what's the goal beneath trying to figure out, trying to make that work? Well, it's mastery, because once she can figure out how it works, then she can be in control of it. Well, once she's in control of it, then what? I'm probably gonna have to do a video on the last chapter of, of the abolition of man, because this is exactly where C.S. Lewis goes. The question is who is, who is she that she is, well, she's trying to fix her life, and she's trying to fix, now it's very psychological, she's trying to fix stuff in her past, and she's trying to fix critical relationships in her life, she's trying to fix her life, but what does a fixed life look like? How do you know? Because when you were six, you thought a fixed life looked like this, when you were 25, you thought a fixed life looked like that, when you're a third of five, you thought a fixed life looked like that, you thought if I could only have this then, and then maybe even you got that, then you realized, oh, that didn't do it. So again, we're mysteries to ourselves, so okay, maybe we can get into the flow state. Well, even that, well, okay, play computer games your whole life, get into that flow state, just stay right in that flow state. We look at someone who plays computer games all of the time and say they are wasting their life, why? Well, they're very deeply into the computer game, and they're certainly enjoying their flow state, and that certainly feels meaningful to them. We say, oh no, but that meaning that you are pouring into that, that black mirror, that meaning that you are pulling into that black mirror is less than the meaning that the shaman was enjoying out there in the three-dimensional world, in the world with hard objects like cell phone holders, and like staplers, stapler by Stanley, they're the product endorsement, so okay, stapler. We long for more levels, we long to know, we long to, we long for all of creation to be as subservient to our spirit as our hands are to our minds. This is why the secular age won't last, we will discard the secular age because why not? And this is why Sam Harris's kingdom falls, because what he finally has is pride, so I was, I was talking to this young man, and he was talking about how as a young man he was watching Sam Harris, and he was, well, let's talk about it psychologically and emotionally, he was feeling superior to all of these stupid religious people. That's powerful motivation in us, we love to feel superior, highly attuned to status, and when we can do things that make ourselves feel like we're higher, we're at a higher status than other people, we feel good about ourselves, or there's meaning, there's flow, there's, you know, there we are, and we love that, but it doesn't last, then it becomes known territory, and then we begin to learn things, and so, and so actually what people get stuck on is just pride, well I'm smarter than those religious people, well congratulations, you're smarter, there's some people who are smarter and some people who aren't as smart, there you go. The subtraction story says, oh, only those primitives through the world are larger, only those primitives thought the world, typo, thought the world was larger and stranger, we can reduce it into a space for objects. Once the world is merely a space for objects, we find ourselves depressed, meaning is gone, and so we seek a flow state. We hunger to live within the game, but we hunger that the game won't be merely a game, characters on a screen, other people's stories that we feed the brains off vicariously from Netflix, we long to live it, we long for it to be embodied at every level, that's why knowing how to really rock climb is better than rock climbing in Uncharted, ah, I remembered it, thank you consciousness committee, Uncharted, one, two, or three, we long to live the game, we long to hunger, we we want it to be, even if as in Memories of Al, I'll hammer, I'm going through that one too, even if he was Zhu Wan in Secret Garden, if you've never watched the K-drama Secret Garden, gotta watch it, my favorite K-drama, even if Zhu Wan, he's you, he's someone else there, but even if he's, we long to leave Bilbo's door, we watch, we read Lord of the Rings because it puts us in a flow state and our hearts hunger for real Narnia. I was struck early on in Michael Pollan's book how often psychedelics are called a sacrament, why? Because they seem to offer an experience of translation into another world, okay, and that world seems to be connected in our world, now it's very interesting because it was talking about the fact that when some of the mid-20th century people who were looking for psychedelics went down into Mexico and found the people who had continued the pre-Columbian practice of these psychedelic mushrooms, they didn't regard it as sacrament, what was sacrament for them? They're all Roman Catholics, they all went to church on Sunday, they all celebrated the mass, that for them was sacrament, the mushrooms were playthings to, you know, find lost stuff, they were, the mushrooms were for shamans, the sacrament was in the church, well why? Well, I think if you would, if you could frame it properly and ask them, they would probably say, well, the shaman is helping for local things, what we're dealing with here is the whole world, well what is a sacrament? Well, let's go all the way back to Lewis, what is the sacrament? We are living in the shadow lands, we hunger for real things, we are looking for the real Narnia, we are looking for a Narnia that will last, we are looking for a Narnia where there is, there is no end to the flow state because it's further up and further in, and in fact, you look back and you see it's Professor Kirk's old home in the country, I thought it had been destroyed, oh, you're now looking at the England within England, the real England is just as this is real Narnia, and in that inner England no good thing is destroyed, and they see their parents, their father and mother waving back across the deep valley, if you read the magician's nephew, it begins with a mother's death, is it Diggory? I think so, Diggory's mother, so we look for that real home, and one of the things I love about Gene Wilder's Willy Wonka, which is one of my old favorite movies, it's this little morality tale, basically in the story the children sell out sheep, they could be masters of the magical chocolate factory, but they sell it for dipping into the chocolate river, or grabbing a goose that lays golden eggs, or, and what's what I love about the story, that even Charlie has broken the rules, Charlie is a sinner just like the other naughty children, Charlie is given the kingdom, don't sell out for anything less than the kingdom, C.S. Lewis makes the point, it's not that we want too much, it's that we want too little, we're like children who are satisfied playing with mud in the backyard, because we can't see enough to know what a day at the beach is, so don't sell out short, want it all, but make sure the everything that you want is everything.