https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=I1iwohzZ9Bs

 Well, how have you been? I've been watching a ton of your stuff lately. I've been extremely busy. I came off sabbatical in the beginning of January, so I've taken on teaching four courses and continuing all the research. And at the same time, both the quantity and the quality of the requests for interviews and discussions has gone up considerably. So, and then there's been some rather serious situations in sort of my personal life and my family. And so it's just been kind of a hectic time. But everything is resolving well. I'd like the universe seems to be smiling on me right now. So that's fine. Good. I know the feeling I just this morning finished your conversation with Andrew, which I thought was just tremendous conversation. Really lovely. Oh, thank you. I mean, I really hope more people watch that because Andrew gave me and also afforded me trying to discuss this issue around the religion that's not a religion in much more depth and nuance and detail and to avoid some I think mischaracterizations that have been occurring about what I'm intending when I'm trying to talk about that. And so I was very grateful to Andrew for that opportunity, actually. Well, communication is really hard. I mean, you can do 50 hours of video and think I'm just touching everything. Yeah, that's for sure. I mean, it's interesting in that, you know, as I turn from after the meeting crisis towards after Socrates, I've just realizing, wow, like, I just, yeah, I know it sounds pretentious and heuristic to say the 50 hours only sort of skimmed on the surface of what I really want to get into that. Some of your viewers are probably going, oh, no, he's already so dense. So what I can promise them this time is I'm not going to try and be as expansive. I'm trying to, you know, really zero, zero in much more limited historical philosophical scope, much more limited sort of cognitive science scope, and a clear sort of practical aim running throughout. And I'm hoping that will and also not as long, only 20 episodes. So that should hopefully help people somewhat. I'm also in the process of starting to film some instructional videos, you know, how to do Vipassana, how to do meta, things like that for people says how to do, you know, the journaling I've been talking about, how to do, you know, authentic discourse, because I've been doing so much participant observation and reading and learning about it, practicing with people. And then I'm also just going to do a lot more of these discussion videos where I meet with people and discuss and upload them onto my channel. So I'm going to try and give people because I appreciated some of the, I don't have to call them criticisms, there's somewhere between comment and criticism where people are saying, this is challenging the way you're presenting this. And so I'm going to try and give people a more varied style, a very more variation in the styles of presentation. So hopefully that will make the material more accessible and also generate more discussion. Which so that's that's the intent, at least, but you know, the best laid plans. So we'll see. Yeah, yeah. Well, and and I appreciated your comments with Andrew about the fact, I think you and I in that way are sort of in the same boat, how so there's my pastoral job and identity and task and role. And then there's this other thing that over the last two years has sort of come up. And, and in some ways, they're together. Because a lot of what I do is, I would call ministry in the conversations I have with people and working through the ideas. And, and, you know, there's a there's a long and I mean, Martin Luther was both a university professor and a monk, and then a pastor. So there's a there's a big tradition with these vocations. Yeah, yeah, that's for sure. Yeah, yeah, I definitely do that. Do share that with you, that sense. I also share with you the sense of, I guess everybody maybe sees themselves this way. I don't know, I'm worried about confirmation of my side bias. But you you have explicitly declared yourself a moderate, which means, as you said, to be in between. And I find myself that I constantly feel like I'm in between religious people and the atheist, the new atheist and the Enlightenment thinkers. And that sometimes is a lonely place to be. But I part of it, part of it is just I'm too old to change, I suppose, in some ways. But part of it's also that that's I am by vocation, I'm by inclination, and vocation and now training, I'm a person that works on the boundaries, right? Are on the connections. So that is where I'm at home. And so but I did appreciate when you had, I think it was it was it was it the most recent one you did when you said like, I'm a moderate, and you sort of had that look of like, I don't, you don't you don't make the purists happy on either side. I mean, it's very problematic. So there's a lot we could potentially talk about here. There's a there's been a lot going on in your channel, I try to keep up with it as much as I can. I haven't been commenting quite as frequently because I've just been starved for time. But there's not that I wouldn't have enough time to watch everything I put out. You're very, you're very prolific. I wish I could have shared with Chris, your most recent video, because I thought it was that it was very kind and generous of you the way you described him in his work, I think was completely accurate. And you know, I deeply agree with it. Like, you know, Chris has just an astonishing gift. But unfortunately, he's in commuter carter right now. He's in Tunisia. Oh, yeah. So he's on sort of a, you know, an adventure right now. So I'll let him I'll put him on to your video when he gets back, because I'm sure he'll want to see it. Yeah, well, he's it's part of what I mean, part of the reason I put out so much is because you don't really know what's helpful until you hear stuff coming back at you. And, you know, you can't you can't be too thin skinned in that you have to be your skin has to be thin enough to be sensitive, but thick enough to, you know, allow yourself to continue in this. And that that video I made with Christopher and that comment in particular, that has come back from a number of people that said, you know, boy, when when he said that, you know, yeah, it just they just felt it. Yeah. And that's his particular gift. And you very astutely and I think very correctly noted that that's why our partnership was a very powerful one. You know, we have, I think complimentary sets of strengths. And so, yeah, we do very good work together on a deeply appreciative of the two of us having found each other and, you know, built this very living relationship that seems to be generating useful and helpful stuff. Well, and I like I mean, I listened to your question and answer video, I re listened to your conversation with David Fuller on Rebel Wisdom, one of the recent ones that you did that I used clips in the video. I just finished listen to Andrew Sweeney's, you know, and I had, you know, a few weeks ago did some videos on, you know, nomenclatures always difficult with this stuff. The, you know, the post Christian, you know, even even the post evangelical community, the nuns and yes, that have been leaving the church, you've mentioned them quite a bit. And and they, they too are, you know, part of the meaning crisis. One of the things that I've been noting also, you know, you and I are about the same age, we grew up in, in sort of the great, the decline of the church in the West, as it's coming down from its, its Cold War high. So in many ways, people either had, we at least had deep exposure to the church and Christianity, the the millennials, many of them have had significantly less. And so, you know, because all of these communities are, of course, they're not, history doesn't work this way. It's, it's been interesting trying to figure out how to talk about these dynamics. And having more and more conversations now with one of the things I do on my channels, I always try to keep sort of an open channel to, you know, randos can talk to me that I have zero preparation with because I get such interesting feedback from them. But, you know, more and more people now who they've, they, they're, they had no connection with church as a child, they had no connection with Christianity. They have, you know, in many ways been gripped fully by the meaning crisis because they, they had a child, they, or maybe they had a divorce, you know, something happened in their life that undid the thin foundations that the culture offered them. And now they are looking for, you know, a full 4P answer to, well, what does it mean to be a human being? And, and, and, you know, right away, they see, I need a community, I need a frame of reference, I need all of these things. And, and whereas, you know, some, you know, the relationship with the church that they have, that some have, and others have not had in the past, then gets interesting too, because some, of course, sort of return to it, some push against it. And, but, but when they grab something else, all of that church stuff in their past, they simply transfer over to the new reality. It's been fascinating watching this progress through the, the demographic generational divides. I think that's, I think that's very, very accurate. I tried to indicate, I can't remember who I was talking to, how this is also, you're seeing this also, at least in North America, about, if for, for religions other than Christianity. So I pointed to, to, for me, are exemplary cases. I talked about Stephen Batchelor and Evan Thompson. And I talked about, here's two people, Stephen in particular was deeply, deeply trained, he was in Asia and lived in the communities. And, right, he was, he was at one point, I believe, the editor of Tri Cycle, one of the big Buddhist magazines. And then here's Evan, who's been practicing, you know, for decades and works, you know, worked with Francisco Varela and the Dalai Lama to, you know, and the Mind and Life community. And, you know, these are not dilettantes of Buddhism. These are people who are deeply, have been deeply within it in powerful ways. And then they have both written books, you know, Stephen has written after Buddhism, and Evan just sent me his copy of Why I'm Not a Buddhist, which of course is echoing Bertrand Russell's Why I'm Not a Christian. And so it strikes me, as I suppose as a scientist, I want to understand the more general phenomena. I understand as a pastor, you want to understand a more specific phenomena, and that's fine. We're not in competition about this, I think. I think these are complementary. And so I'm trying to figure out what is it that's lacking in both of these, because they're so different in a lot of ways. So there must be some common theme that's making them non-viable for people. And I'm trying to do that without making simplistic claims. Well, you know, it's that Christianity is false, or Buddhism is false. I want to try and understand this more and more deeply, because again, I think that's part of what's going on in the meeting crisis. I tweeted today, I don't know if you saw it, but I because and that was meant, I hope you took it that way. It was meant as a respectful response to you, right? Because you've been doing this very interesting stuff on Holland, who I was only introduced because of you. I'm familiar with the style of argument, because I mean, Holland gives, I think, a much clearer version than Jordan Peterson does. Because the acting as if, right? Yes. And Tom Holland, if I misunderstand him, please correct me, because you know more than I. But it seems to me his argument is much more specific in that, no, no, you you're acting as if in a very deep way in terms of a lot of your moral commitments and your value structures are deeply indebted to Christianity. And so that's a that's what I've been taught to call a performative argument, right? Right. And I think the meaning is clear. But then I try to point out, but there's a flip side to this, right? You know, you know, yes, you know, Jordan may sort of get into a debate with Sam Harris and sort of show that he's performative this way. But then you also have to ask the question, well, if it's so much in our grammar and in our blood, why do so many people find it a performative incoherence to try and go back to these religions? We have to ask the flip side question too. We have to, right? Because we're not being fair to people, we're especially not being fair to people as brilliant and sensitive as Stephen and Evan, right? And I've got, I know personally quite deeply and Stephen and I got to meet and had a conference, we had dinner together. So I got some sense of him as a person. I've read, you know, familiar with their work. So that's my that's my thing is, okay, yes, granted, I'm not, I get it. The Peterson and Holden arguments, they do deserve to be taken seriously. And one of the things I think what they've done is show how, for lack of a better category, the new atheists have just ignored that aspect. And of course, for me that that that lines up with, you know, the perspectival and participatory aspects of knowing, but then I want to also say, yes, but the reverse is the case. And this is the case, because I've done research on the nuns, right? I tried to make, you know, I think, okay, so I'm going to say something, and I'm happy for you to challenge it, right? But I see the about the nuns that both the theists and the atheists are sort of getting it wrong, right? It's the theists seem to be saying, but don't they understand the truth? And the atheists are saying, yes, they understand the truth, right? That the reason why they're not doing this is because they get that it's all just false. And it's all just a fairy tale. And the theists are saying, but they haven't encountered the truth. And it's like, no, that's, that's, it's much more that this is, it's before they've even gotten to this is propositionally the case for them, this is performatively not viable for them, they find it performatively incoherent. And again, I'm using these two case studies as to really deepen this argument. And I'm trying to do it outside of Christianity, so I don't immediately get everybody's right. I'm saying, look, here's two people who go in with the, you know, as much good faith as anybody possibly can, they're deep, sensitive people, they commit decades of time and thought and discussion and they're, and yet, in the end, it's like, nope, I just can't make this work for me. It just doesn't catch. It's just not performatively coherent. So I'm asking people, that was the intent of this tweet, you've got to take that seriously, too. If you take the Jordan Peterson argument, and the Holland argument seriously, and you should, you should, you should, by, by in fairness of thought and argumentation, you should take this argument that I'm making also seriously. Well, I think that's right. And I really appreciate, you know, again, in some of the last videos mentioning Bachelor and Thompson, because that then, I mean, part of the difficulty, obviously, in the West is that Christendom and the church and Christianity has been so pervasive and formative and deep that we can't see without it. We can't understand. And then when you walk into the ongoing, what I think is the, this, the culture wars, the Christendom civil war, in many ways, then locating this dynamic saying, look, here are people dealing with this as, you know, hey, you know, why I'm not a Buddhist after Buddhism, I, it's going to show up a little bit in the sermon video that I'll do today, my, my rough draft for Sunday video, but I also I ran into a, just a video on YouTube of someone doing on the street arguments with the Japanese about, you know, religion. And you listen to these young, you listen to these Japanese millennials, and they, you know, they might as well be, you know, millennials anywhere in the United States or Canada. And, and so I deeply appreciated when you answered the question in your question and answer about the need for this, that, you know, we're, you know, obviously, we, we can never fully get our minds, hands, heads, sight around what we're dealing with. It's just obviously always too large. But this is this is a worldwide thing. It's obviously deeper in some places than others. It's definitely connected with the enlightenment, the ref, I mean, it's connected with all of these things that sort of got permeated throughout the world via, you know, via colonialism. I mean, and it's not just post Christian. No, it's this is, you know, this is something that humanity as a whole is going to have to wrestle with. And as, and as you've noted many times, and, and I agree with, you know, you and Brett Weinstein, both on this, the challenges we are facing today are in, in the, in the sense that they are global, and that power has been democratized to the degree that it has. We are requiring of human and I love how you've been phrasing this and, and setting this up in terms of wisdom institutions, because that also sets it up far more broadly than just the religious institutions within their own religious silos. And I as a Christian, thank you for recognizing that. Thank you for recognizing that. Well, and I as a Christian pastor can very easily make an argument from two, you know, conservative Christians and say, look at that, read, read the book of Proverbs carefully. The book of Proverbs is made up of wisdom from the ancient Near East. And there's a reason the the Hebrew scriptures, the Old Testament had a collection of books called wisdom literature. In other words, you know, there are, there are resources, as JP always says to bridge, or as I would say to connect and integrate with many of these conversations, even if they're with other historical religious communities or non formally traditional religious communities, there are resources and bridges by way Christians can, you know, engage in these conversations without getting a reactive sense of betrayal to their confessional commitments. That's good. I'm glad that's the case, because in the question and answer, I tried to make very clearly, I've had to be very clear on how is answering that question. And, you know, I really do think that the for lack of a better adjective, the established religions can be places in which individuals can turn. But and find meaning and cultivate wisdom. And I want to talk about something that's more sort of systemic. Why again, I want to explain why it is, again, why does Stephen leave? Why does, why does Evan, you know, why I'm not a Christian again, echoing Russell, right? Why is it that Chris feels the way he, you know, Chris is, and I don't treat him as a specimen. So I don't mean it to sound it this way. But he's an excellent, because he's, I love Chris deeply. He's an important and central friend to me. But like, why is it that somebody as sensitive, as reflective, as genuine, as authentic as Chris, as someone who can deeply appreciate the depths of Christianity, this is all true of Chris. And yet, like I said, he it's not performatively coherent for him. If we're going to invoke and again, I welcome that Holland and Peterson have done this, if we're going to invoke the performative level, we better start invoking it, like we better start looking at it very, very carefully. It's way more problematic than we might think. That's, that's kind of what I wanted to say right here. Well, and there are plenty of examples, I would point to an individual like, let's say Bart Campolo, who Tony Campolo was in the 80s, a A-list Christian evangelist, apologist, he would come to Calvin College and gave a beautiful, you know, wonderful speaker. His son Bart, following in his footsteps, gave up the faith and there he and his father wrote a book together. There's a really interesting video on YouTube about he and his father having this conversation. Bart Campolo gave up the faith, became for a while at Berkeley, I think, a humanist chaplain because part of the problem when preachers give up the faith, I got to figure out what to do. Yeah, yeah, I was gonna say it's too much in the blood, right? Well, that's right. It's in the blood, it's your, I mean, it's the way you make a living, you know, part of the world. Right, right, right, of course, right. So, I think, you know, obviously there's a tribal reactivity, an understandable tribal reactivity within Christians to look at these people and, you know, condemn them, hate them, you know, do all of that. I mean, tribes, human beings have tribes for a reason, they're very functional. And so then to pour, you know, pour scorn on the likes of Bart Campolo, it's also, I think, a more productive posture to take to say, hmm, you know, what, where, where have we gone wrong, that someone at this level would have felt the need at high personal cost to themselves, there was no reason to imagine he had a poor relationship with his father, to strain the relationship with his family, to grieve his parents, and his father's very, I mean, they're both very healthy individuals, they're talking through this, you know, to grieve, you know, the relationship, the loss clearly that his father has, and that they actually have a very honest dialogue as they talk through it. But for the church to turn around and say, you know, we had the West, and the West was ours to lose, and we're losing it. Instead of hating on all the usual suspects, why don't we look in the mirror ourselves and say, hmm, what have we done? What is really going on? And I really do think that, you know, I found, again, I found your work tremendously helpful in terms of, and part of the problem of doing this work within your own tribe is that within a tribe, all of the ready answers are always promoted. And it's difficult to think clearly and creatively, unless you actually have people you're talking to who are not in your tribe. And but yet they want to be and that's I think where you and I have sort of these middle positions, we want to be, you know, have understand both communities well enough so that we can engage productively with them, but also then not lose ourselves as we're functioning in this middle space. I agree. I think that's well said. Part of my motivation is I've already admitted to all my personal motivations for being a moderator, or being a a bridge builder to say, to pick up. Oh, I'm talking after I'm talking later tonight to Mary and JP again, by the way. Oh, good. That was another wonderful conversation. Oh, well, let's speak. I mean, just because they're both wonderful. And JP has been doing some really cool stuff. So I'm excited about that. But I was going to say, you know, part of it is because you know, civilization shows that this is possible. I mean, civilization is premised on the idea that we can live with strangers, we could live with people who aren't in our tribe. I happen to share with Jordan Hall and others, you know, the idea that we've got to sort of restructure civilization. That's why I call that sort of a cultural cognitive thing. Because we do have to figure out a way of going, you know, I don't want to say post-tribal, because I'm not trying to imply that people will give this up, as you say, it's evolutionarily wired into us, but sort of maybe trans-tribal. Maybe that's what I'm trying to get at. Because I agree with Jordan Hall that we got to get there, or we can't address the problems that are threatening us, the global problems that you alluded to. And that, you know, I agree with Thomas Bjorkman that there's a meta crisis. And I take well into consideration your point about every culture likes to think, well, at least in the West, every generation likes to think, not every culture, every generation likes to think that it's living at the end of the world. And, but as you also very correctly said, but of course civilizations do also fall. So it's, right, so you got to somehow get a balance between that. That's why I'm very sort of, I'm taking it that I find a lot of the evidence about the signs, you know, this comes from what's called complex systems theory, the signs of civilization stress that many people are pointing towards, I think are becoming apparent. And therefore, we need to take very seriously the possibility that we might be in a meta crisis. And therefore, we need to go trans-tribal. And so this isn't just sort of Canadian politeness on my part, or even ultimately, that I'm a sort of cognitive scientist and bridge builder by temperament and vocation. I also think that there's a utilitarian, but nevertheless, an important utilitarian reason here, which is we got to get trans-tribal, or we're not going to get what we need. We're not going to get the collective intelligence, or even more importantly, the collective rationality and the collective wisdom we need in order to solve these problems. I wanted to say something about that because I think I released, I haven't checked a video where we did a conversation with Jordan Hall, and Jordan paused and made an editorial note. And I just want to reinforce it, because we were talking about this performative aspect. And I tried to caveat it ahead of time because I didn't want to be insulting, but I just want to reinforce it now because he stopped and said, John doesn't mean this. I just want to reinforce that because he was talking about, you know, we're talking about how you get, I forget the name of the book, The Innovator's Dilemma is the title, and you get this change in which innovation gives way to optimization. And then I was talking about it this, I've talked about other people like this with O'Shaun and others. You can get a reciprocal narrowing until you get something that's collectively very analogous to addiction. And Jordan was giving an example of like oil, how oil is easy at first and you get all this innovation, and then because of diminishing returns. But the thing is, precisely when we're sort of getting the most we can from the oil, we're actually in the most dangerous because what we've done is we've reciprocally narrowed so that it seems impossible to us that there could be a world without oil and all of the interest structures and think about the car and the ways of life, and it's like, oh, and that's like addiction. And then I asked this question that I tried to copy out and say, I'm trying to, I kept saying I acknowledge the light side, but then I said, but is there a way in which we're also sort of addicted to Christianity in the West? And I didn't mean, you can see what I'm worried, right? I can't understand why you'd be worried with a statement like that. But what I was trying to say is, because I was again worried, I was thinking about again, Tom Holland, because of the excellent work you've been doing. And I was thinking, yeah, yeah, I do see how much it's given and how, but the fact that it's so interwoven means, you see, that's like the way oil is interwoven. Are we so woven to a way of thinking and being that we can't get, because that's the problem with the addict. That's the part of the analogy I was trying to pick up on. The addict says, well, I can't be any other and the world can't be any other. And that's the basis of the compulsion. And so that's what I was trying to say. So I'm sorry, I'm being a little self-serving here. I'm using this opportunity, but I wanted to make clear, because Jordan also stopped Jordan Hall, he said, editorial note, for those of you who are watching. John means this, right? So I just want to really reinforce that, because I was trying to get at, yeah, but we, yes, again, and you've seen in my series, I know, I remember there's times in the cities where I say, we're walking on the ground of Christianity and we don't even realize it. So I acknowledge all of that. I acknowledge the grounding, if that's a positive way to put it. But I'm also worried about the tightness of the binding, like that we can't, there's something, that's my concern, that yes, yeah, that's true. But like, are we so woven so tightly to it that we can't really talk to people from other cultures in the way we need to, in order to solve these problems? That's what I was trying to articulate. Well, and I, at one point, you made a comment about Augustine, which was tremendously important. And it's something that I was reading, I always look up where I know my books are. Peter Brown, his biography of Augustine, reading that a number of years ago, and recognizing, if you, this is why I really do want to get more historians into this conversation. Because it's interesting, even with the Jordan Peterson IDW phase, there were no historians present. And I thought that's a real problem here. Because I did so much history in my series. Yeah, yeah. So, you know, Augustine coming around in late antiquity, the, you know, when Augustine embraces Christianity, he does so because he is hungry and thirsty for wisdom. And that's very clear with Augustine, that this is how, this is what he understands Christianity to be. You know, and if you read, I read Fox's, I think it's Robin Fox's book that he put out a few years ago on Augustine, which sort of set, you know, Augustine within the context of late antiquity. And, you know, had a good, gave a good thorough chapter on, you know, some more detail, higher resolution stuff on the Manichean perspective. And you read that, it's like, Whoa, and then you look at the Neo-Platonism. And it's like, Whoa, because if you like me grow up within, you know, post-Reformation, confessional, Dutch Reformed, you know, well, Augustine is one of the great heroes of the faith. And so when you look back at Augustine, you see, you know, you see your parents with an Augustine face mask on and say, Oh, I know who Augustine is. And then if you actually do the work of reading Augustine or reading around Augustine or reading competent historians working on the continual project of history in that time span, you begin to realize, Oh my, you know, the world is by no means as simple as it seems to me. And you get a sense of the incredible capacity for human beings to live in different worlds. And that second, I think Brett Weinstein does a beautiful, he says, you know, we have this genetic information code, information that we pass along, but then this cultural, and you cannot imagine a human being without both of those tracks or channels. And they actually, they play off against each other. Yes. Right. Yes, exactly. I mean, this is part of the scientific work I do. Yeah, I agree. And I mean, my point with that is that, you know, addicted to Christianity, well, again, I'm, you know, I probably both get into trouble. You don't have to use my phrase, Paul. I was trying to draw an analogy between the addict, our cultural relationship to oil, and a potential problem with our relationship to Christianity. Right. But it's the right metaphor, I think. And, but also to addicted to a particular kind of Christianity, because what you see, that I would be more, yes, yes. Because, you know, so I'm a pastor, and I am always dealing now, especially my parishes all over the English speaking world right now. And I am walking with people as they are, they continually do the work of, okay, so they have this world, and then they have this faith. And this faith is obviously encapsulated very heavily in propositional, or obviously in propositional truths, but also very much in other ways of knowing, which are not anywhere near as manipulable as the propositional statements. I mean, we people, you know, I watch people deconvert from Christianity, and I think, yeah, you used to be a fundamentalist Christian, now you're a fundamentalist, all these other things. Yeah. So, so the, and I think, I think Christian, I think any competent reading of Christian history demonstrates that part of, you know, part of the amazing, part of the reason Christianity has been so popular is that it has been so incredibly malleable in ways that, say, some of the other religions have struggled with. Christianity is viral in that it hops cultures repeatedly, and you look at these people over here, and they identify as Christian, and these people over here, and they identify as Christian, you're like, well, this is interesting. And that keeps happening. So, I don't, I don't see your, you know, I don't see your statement as problematic, and I think it also recognizes within the history of Christianity that there have been many, many ways to be a Christian in this world, even amongst the great saints that many traditions point to and say, he's our guy. Yeah, yeah. And I suppose even towards Jesus himself, I take it that's the case. I mean, I've read a, I've read a book, I think it was by Pelican, Jesus Through the Centuries, and it's about, it's, wow, it's like, Jesus keeps being changed, if you'll, well, at least the understanding of Jesus. I don't want to make any metaphysical claims here. How about that? But, so I take your point very well, and thank you for resituating what I said within it. That's good. I suppose, I guess the issue then for me is, like I said at the beginning, I want to understand this even more broad picture. I want to understand, like, why is this the case not only for Christianity, but clearly, I think, give examples for Buddhism. Why is it the case, you know, I think, you know, I'm in discourse, not as deeply, but with, you know, people, even in the Muslim world, you know, and this is happening. And so I'm trying to, I'm trying to figure out, well, what are the common factors, right? So, you know, you can see all, there's sort of part of what I think, and this is something that's up for discussion and debate. You know, I think there's a shared axial grammar that I think that become problematized, because you need to find what's shared between them, if the problem extends between them. And there's also a shared phenomena, the encounter with science, because science is also another thing that hops and skips cultures. Yes. Right? Yeah. So science and technology. And so I've been trying to craft this argument that I think there's something about the shared axial grammar, and there's something about the shared confrontation with science and technology that we need to be looking at more deeply. And that a lot of the ways in which we're framing it is not generating, in my opinion, as like, as somebody who's sort of swims in theory, is not generating an adequate theory to explain all of the data. And so thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to try and articulate this, because this is something I'm wrestling with right now. And I'm trying to get people to I'm right now in many ways, although I often, I get maybe I'm a little bit too didactic. But I'm trying to formulate a question here. And I'm trying to suggest it's plausible to me that the shared axial age grammar, and the shared confrontation with cultural skipping science can give has to be something there has to be shared, there has to be a shared environmental problem. And in the ship and a shared structural defect, if you'll allow me that word that are accounting for why this is happening the way it's happening. And that's the argument I'm trying to make. Well, I think that's, I think that's, I agree. I think it's, it's vital. One of the things that I've been thinking about, I've got, you know, way more than we have time for one of the things that I've been thinking about is the, and, and this I look to someone who is a scientist, because I am not the ways in which the, the ways in which this this to track, you know, as Brett Weinstein calls it to track. And I think you so the opponent processing, I mean, it takes me a while to really get your language into my head to the point that I can use it. But it's coming. The way that this, the way that this ontology of a human being, as we understand a human being to be today, doesn't continually lend itself to certain kinds of dualisms, such as a two worlds mythology, again, and I've, I've used this, I've used this in my sermons and with my my poor congregation are these, you know, I don't have lab rats, I have a church. I don't come back to hobby. None of them watch YouTube, they're all too old. But, but you know, again, for an older congregation that and we've talked about this before the, you know, sort of the narrative identity that they have, which doesn't age because it's a narrative just like the idea of love doesn't age, whereas every instance of love, you know, as CS Lewis says, either dies with death or betrayal. And I wonder the ways in which these these dualisms like you have heaven and earth, and you know, these things that keep obviously they were developed at some at some point in the axial age. I wonder if if these things, how, how persistent these things will be simply given the kinds of creatures we are? That's a good question. Wow, that's a really good question. First of all, I want to I want to try to give a clear indication of where I speak, because I think you guys, all the people that were sort of addressing here, I don't know what the correct designation of the audience, the viewers, the followers, they tend to see me as sort of, you know, bringing the time the scientists coming to the religion, right? Right. And that's fair. And I don't want to shirk from that. I'm not trying to I'm not trying to dodge. But what many people don't see is the other. They don't see me within the world of science very much. And what I'm doing there, which is I'm trying to get the science people to talk and think about things that they traditionally have not wanted to talk and think about. And I mean, and this has been this has been personally costly for me. It has taken a long time. It's taken, you know, 25 years, because for a long time, you know, and not just me, I mean, you know, other people like Ebony was doing similar stuff and Varela and many people. It's like, you know, but it was it was it still is. It's like, what are you what what you're studying shaman like what what you're studying a shaman like what what you're talking about what mystical experience you're doing experiments on people having mystical experiences. You know, I was when I was the first person to professionally both both, you know, teach the skill and start teaching the science of mindfulness at the university. And when I first started it, like in the 90s, was like, well, you know, Ellen Langer has written this book and, you know, and everybody sort of right. So there's also it's on there's on that side. And so that's pertinent to your question, because it's the question about because there's, you know, and Thomas Kuhn made this very, very clear, right, there's there's paradigmatic traditions within science. Yep. And then the question is, I'm trying to refine your question. And then maybe we can talk about it, because there's sort of two aspects that we don't want to conflate them together. There might be that human beings scientists, I should say scientists are constrained to talk in certain ways, because of their paradigmatic tradition. There might be that they're constrained to talk in certain ways, because human beings, this is a technical term, human beings are epistemically bounded that way. So epistemic boundedness means they're there that that, okay, we, it's easy to first of all, pointed and other animals. Dogs are very, very intelligent. But no dog is ever going to generate a theory of why it's intelligent. Okay. So being very intelligent, being social, doesn't guarantee that you have the epistemic machinery to do theory generation. And it might be it's high fact, highly plausible that we are also epistemically bounded, not just paradigmatically bounded. So your question is, you have to be very careful here, because it's like, okay, do our scientists talking this way, because the scientific revolution was largely a Cartesian revolution, and Descartes, and I tried to argue this in the series, Descartes generates dualism out of the guts of the scientific revolution. Out of the out of the out of the trick. And this is what I learned from Albert Shalom, right? Out of the transformation, don't talk about first about why we have this strange theory of mind. What happened first was a change in the theory of matter, right? Matter goes from being potential to being actual. And its primary characteristic is it resists. And that is valuable to you, because that legitimates experimentation, because if the world doesn't resist your bias and your subjectivity, your experiments won't work. And this is what I mean about you have to understand, you know, how, you know, ideas about matter, and science, and knowledge, and self deception are woven together, you can't just sort of say, well, I reject materialism. Do you? Okay, maybe I get that. But do you reject experimentation? Because that notion of matter resisting us, and its primary action is it resists our subjectivity, is woven into the Cartesian understanding of scientific experimentation. And so what is like, what is like, be careful, be more careful. So that strikes me that there's huge paradigmatic reasons why we have to talk this way. So I wonder, I mean, okay, let me first before we turn back to the epistemic boundedness, I see many people, the people that are involved with that transformation I've been talking about, trying to get scientists to view, and this has now been going on for quite a while, especially in cognitive science for e cognitive science. I think the project of fallout academic philosophy, and more specifically, for e cognitive science has been the project of trying to deeply construct that Cartesian grammar, the dualisms between mind and body, mind and world, mind and mind, all of those great disconnections. And I think that that has been because both of deep internal incoherence, ultimately in these dualisms. And also, I mean, I think that's a safety to say, but why, why, why it's happening. And also because of ways in which the human phenomena, if I can put it that way, and all of its design is not captured and is being misrepresented profoundly by these dualisms. So I would first say that I hope as a cognitive scientist that we that well, I think it's very plausible that we've had significant progress in this, and that I hope it continues. Now to your deeper question, is it are we ultimately have do we ultimately have to talk this way? And the evidence here is, is much scarcer, of course, there has been some cross cultural work on whether or not people are sort of naturally given to a dualistic way of thinking about human beings. I have I am deliberately flagging that I'm speaking much more cautiously here. Okay. But what seems to be the case, again, very cautiously, notice my language, please, is actually what you get is a very incoherent thing. Right. So that people will sometimes, let's use this language we've been crafting together here, see people will sometimes perform as if dualism is true. And they will sometimes perform as if monism is true, they will sometimes is true. They will sometimes perform as if everything is a continuous cosmos. Right. There's a reason why the continuous cosmos could take such deep root, because there is a way of being human, in which that makes sense in which dualism doesn't. I mean, they had they had other dualisms, they had an order chaos dualism, but they don't have our dualisms. Right. So that's, you know, and you can you you can get a sense of this. And oh, I almost made a bad mistake there. I'm in no way equating other cultures to small children. Okay, I'm not doing that. No ethnocentric stuff here. But you can you can see you can see this kind of incoherence in small children, they will talk, they will sometimes talk, they have to get past sort of four, because before they're four, they're not dualists. They don't because they have no sense of having a mind they can't you I can't introspect myself until I've developed a very significant skill of being able to pick up on your mental states. We think this sense of our inner headspace is natural to us. And no, it's not. If you ask a three year old, you know, what's going on inside your mind right now, they'll look at you like, right, or a four year old. And I, in fact, I kept track of this with my son, my poor son's having to grow up with a car. But Spencer was like, four and a half. And he said to me, it's snowing outside, but only in my head. And this was a moment of revelation for him. He was able to introspect his inner world. Right. And notice, right. And then he and then there was another moment where he came to me and he said, I have a backwards thing in my in my head. What what? And what he meant was, he can auto he had he had done enough narrative that he could do autobiographical near memory. He had to learn that by way. It's not natural to us. Yes. And he had to point and he said that he could do mental time travel. Mm hmm. And then it was really cool. Just one more part about this anecdote. And then I asked him, does anybody else is anybody else capable of that? And he very confidently said no. A little bit of a little bit of fun as Piaget here. Well, and I think you're I mean, one of the things that I've thought about is how part of what's so fraught about all of these conversations is that again, the and I thought your your series, I mean, your series did it so well in terms of recognizing, OK, what's a problem? What is what is relevance? How how are these things, you know, how are you things deeply embedded yet unseen in in all of these processes that we are for fronting and able to share? Figuring, I mean, we we don't even really it's difficult for us to know what a human being is. Oh, yes, yes, yes. And and so, you know, we look at these things in children. You know, one of the things I so I, you know, hopefully will be I'm going to have a conversation with Tom Holland coming up in February. We're working on that. Excellent. Excellent. Excellent. And and so I've been, you know, trying to get through as many of his books as I can in anticipation of that. And I began the forge of of of Christian of Christianity or Christendom. I began that last night and he begins he begins with the, you know, the great story of Henry and Gregory at the Casanova or Casanova. I forget the fort, but he says, you know, right here, in a sense, the idea of progress, you know, the idea of progress takes the field and, you know, wins the West. And and you just stop and you think how for how many of us that is it's it's just simply so built into us. We can't see it. One of the most, you know, people some, you know, we talk about wisdom. One of the things I'll often recommend to people when they get out of university or in their 20s, I'll say, you know, go, don't just go and be a tourist in another culture. Go and live in another culture for five or 10 or 15 years and learn another language deeply and and pay attention to the people in the ways that they think differently from you. And their assumptions are different from you. And so this will this will hopefully breathe within you a deep humility. Yes, yes, yes. And at all sorts of levels. So I think it's excellent advice. That's very excellent. So so, you know, I hate to always have to give qualifications, but, you know, these qualifications are around everything that we're processing because, you know, what is a human being and these capacities that we have and and the we naturally line up these capacities into hierarchies because that's what actions demand and just on and on and on and on and on and on. So I know you've got a I know you've got a deadline. So I want to respect that. But there's one more thing I wanted to kind of throw at you. I can go for about another 15 minutes. Okay, good. One of the questions that you took in the question and answer, which I which I thought was was very interesting when they asked about which as a pastor, I really laughed hard when the question was asked because it's it is my life. You mean, how can you how can you basically how can you make someone else be wise? It's like, that's kind of my job here. And I don't know, I've been doing it for 30 years. But, you know, and and but then in your answer, you know, you mentioned, you know, all here at the university, you have the authority of, you know, of a professor, you have the authority of that office. As a parent, you know, you have the authority of that office. And, you know, it really, it really made me ask the question, you know, what is authority? So all the postmodernists of right are getting out their knives right now. That's right. Why stop now? Oh, John, we have knives all over the place. They can only kill us once. I mean, I mean, a part of it is, you know, and I mean, I do want to, I do want to qualify what I just said, because I think different postmodernists have different things to say. I mean, I think what Derrida has to say is very different from what Foucault has to say. Those are two that that I know well. And Foucault is particularly important in a way, I think, whereas Derrida says something that ultimately, I think needs to be put into deep conversation with relevance realization, because I think there's deep connections between his notion of difference and my notion of relevance realization. I think we should also pay attention to the fact that Foucault becomes very interested in this very same topic, the topic of wisdom, and even uses technologies of the self, right? All of this. And, you know, because I think Foucault realized that that's where things are going to turn, right? And so the way in which he questions power and authority should not be separated in my mind from this question of what like the, you know, the tech, the transformative technologies of self, of the self, and the cultivation of wisdom. And this, so I want to put those two together. You can see why I'm doing this. This is so much part of what I'm thinking about with After Socrates, because what kind of authority does Socrates have, right? So, you know, and you know, you might, it's easy to fall into sort of the barbarian categories. Well, there's institutional authority, and there's charismatic authority, but you know, but what is charisma? Well, I sort of think, well, maybe, you know, the kind of authority Socrates has is, right, he's obviously creating a new psychotechnology, but what he's doing is he seems to be able, again, not universally, far from it, right? But he seems to, at least for pertinent individuals and groups, he seems to be able to trigger aspiration, and he seems to be able to afford aspiration, and he uses the metaphor of being a midwife for this. And I was thinking, is, you know, there's part of what's going on there. I mean, part of, I think, what's going on is charisma is people can generate collective flow for others. You definitely see that. But I'm thinking, yeah, but it's a particular kind of flow in the Socratic dialogue, because the flow gets, the flow also gets these terrific moments of interruption, the aporia, and there's something going on between the flow and the aporia in which Socrates, and, you know, I talk about this towards the end of the series, and for Ben and others, it's like, there's this, how do we do this process of aspiration? And it's so crucial to, like, how do we become rational and how do we become wise? And so I can't answer the comprehensive question you gave me, but I'm trying to get, I'm trying to get a more specific answer to the narrow question of what's the kind of authority that is connected up with what actually, you know, provoked your question, which is what's the kind of authority that can lead people to wisdom? And it seems to be something about being able to engage in serious play, there's this aspect of being able to take up a role that gets people into the anagogue that actually affords aspiration. Because, you know, that's sort of my, my, my, my answer to the paradox of aspiration is, well, you get people engaged in reciprocal opening, anagogue, and you give them enacted symbolism, because the Janus face nature of the symbol, right? And with the enacted symbolism, the serious play and the anagogue, that's how people aspire. And so I think individuals who are particularly adept at triggering, is that even the right word, triggering and platforming and affording anagogue and serious play, though they get the authority around the issue of wisdom. That's my answer to that question. Well, and I think, you know, to kind of pick up where you and Andrew left off, because Andrew, you know, Andrew ended with, well, you started talking a little bit about, you know, well, in the 70s, we saw a bunch of this stuff go through and it all kind of, kind of withered away to pick up on this, you know, on this, on this aphorism, you know, without, without, without individuals, nothing changes, without institutions, nothing lasts. Yeah, for sure. And, you know, the thing, again, as a pastor, who, I mean, I'm a pastor, I occupy an office, and by office, I don't mean, you know, the room I'm sitting in. You're an official. I'm an official. And so, you know, whenever I, whenever I, I listen to your project, you know, again, with all respect, and I loved how Mary in one of her videos, you know, talked about you, and, and hey, this is, you know, he's trying to help people, so she's talking to the Christian, so, you know, get off his back a little bit here. I'm so deeply appreciative of Mary, so deeply appreciative, and I hope she knows that. I think she does. I think she does. And she, and again, this, this, I hate to get redirected, because I'm so ADHD, you know, she was one of the people early on that contacted me in one of my first conversations, and, and talking, you know, and it's just the, it's just the delight of finding, so, so here's this woman, you know, grandma, lives in Georgia, you know, was a Jehovah's Witness, becomes a Roman Catholic, is into organic farming, you know, all of this stuff, and then she's, you know, you know, listened to Jordan Peterson and grabbed onto that, and grabbed onto my videos, and grabbed on your, and, and, you know, is now interpreting, you know, Joseph Ratzinger to the world, and I just think, you know, it's just beauty, it's glory, and I just, I praise God for Mary, so, so anyway, back to where I was going. You know, the, you know, institutions of wisdom, and, and, you know, clearly part, something as broad as the meeting crisis, and we sort of try to broaden it when we say the meta crisis, you know, something as broad as this crisis, obviously, has deep connections, not only to the loss of some traditional institutions, such as the church, but also the, the, the skepticism towards institutions and authority, which has pervaded our, our culture since, you know, and, and so now, you know, one of the things that I see in, in various other ideologies, I mean, people to, to borrow a Jordan Peterson, because boy, he's another guy who could just say certain things, it's like, wow, to, you know, part of the reason people become susceptible to ideological possession, so you take these two words together, ideological possession is, is clearly, you know, past tyranny, practice within wisdom institutions, such as the church, I'll be, I'll be most upfront with that one, because that's the one in which I inhabit, but the, you know, now suddenly, when there are no authorities, people are subject to ideological possession, because they have very little wisdom with which to- Depend themselves, yep. That's right, to vet, but also to figure, to, to modulate the relationship. Yeah, I think that's excellent, I mean, Socrates was lucky that he had Plato, because Plato sets up the academy, right? So I think your point is well taken, and that's why, you know, I take time to talk about also the, the, in the series about the history of institutions, like the separation of the monastery from the university, and how significant that is, for the meaning crisis, right? How significant that is, and then, and then, and then the slow, well, fairly slow, but now deep, you know, interpenetration of the university with the state, and now the increasing, right, the increasing coupling of the university to the market. So I want to say, I want to say one thing about this institutional point, because I, this is coming up in one of the discussions I had a couple days ago, how, you know, the West used to have these three sort of locusts of authority, right, and, and, and much like we talked about with Weinstein, how you, you can play your biology and your culture off against each other, individuals, and groups of individuals could play the church, the state, and the market off against each other, right? But what's been happening, and this is what something that I, I think I was talking to Jordan Hall about, is we've got the homogenization of power. The church-state thing fractured, right, and the market-state thing has, like, the difference between them has progressively disappeared, and we, like, more and more the job of the state is to manage the market, and to be managed by the market also, because there's a complicity there, right? And so what's happening with the homogenization of power is that, and I'm talking, I'm trying to talk about this systemically, and I don't, I'm not, right, I'm not trying to demonize, but with the homogenization of power, there's kind of been, also been a stupefaction of power. Power has lost the ability to self-correct, and that's part again of, you know, the elites, right, if we, to use a real elite, oh my gosh, you talk about a fudgy word, to use your language, okay, but, but the elites, right, are seen as less and less responsive, and I think that's part of it is because we have, we have gone down a pathway of the homogenization of power that has made the elites stupid in the sense of they, because there aren't competing opponent processes anymore within the power elites, they have become stupid in their collective capacity to solve problems, and I think this is a contributory reason why there has been such a turning on the elites, a suspicion of them, because I don't think that is completely illegitimate, I think, I don't, I doubt that people are articulating it like this, but I think there's a pervasive sense that they're just not good problem solvers anymore, and so, you know, and yet they get wealthier and wealthier and powerful and powerfuller, if that's even a word, and yet they're not good problem solvers, and so what's going on, and you can see the rage and the anger and the frustration that people are sort of, you know, like what's happening, why are they getting so much reward when they're doing an increasingly bad job, and what they keep, and then, what do we hear from them, what they say to us is, no, no, we have to have even more homogenization, the issue is we're not homogenized enough, and it's like, no, no, I'm pretty sure that's not the answer that we need right now, well, we lost something very, very deeply when we lost the triadic opponent processing amongst the powerful. Yeah, yeah, I think that's excellent, I think that's really helpful, and so what then we tend to see is, well, we will, and how many times don't we see this in history, we try to take on the elites with the mob, and it's like, oh, and the mob is the, you know, the base, you know, the lack of wisdom grown large. Yeah, I mean, I think it was with Jordan, I am not, I think it was also when I was talking with Oshaan, I'm not proposing revolution, that's not, I mean, in fact, I think the way you get out of the addictive reciprocal narrowing is you need the anagogic reciprocal opening, and that's a very different proposal from let's smash it all, and so I was just, I was trying to answer your question, I was trying to repose an account at the institutional level, because that's how you had framed it, of why there is such dissatisfaction, and I think, I don't claim this as a complete explanation, but I think one factor we should be paying attention to is the homogenization stupefaction of the power elites. Well, and this isn't simply true in government, you know, if I go back and ask the question of the church, you know, why had the church, the church certainly had the West, why did it lose it, I think you can easily look at the period of the Reformation and say, well, you know, the use of tyrannical power within the church was certainly possible, are part of that, and whereas today in, you know, it's, again, it's so difficult to talk in generalities, because there are always individual circumstances where that's not the case, but you know, currently now churches are so, churches are so weak, they, you know, they only dream of tyranny in tiny little small places, because, you know, pastors are, you know, as one person put, quivering masses of availability. That's really good, that's really good. But you've, you know, so we've seen this systemically, we've seen it in government, we see it in markets to a degree, but we've definitely seen it in terms of the, in terms of the wisdom institutions in the West, that would be the church, you know, and again, looking at this, this video of just person on the street interview of these, Japanese millennials, you know, that the person's asking them about Buddhism and Shintoism, and it's clear they don't know anything, and they start talking like a moralistic, theopute, moralistic, moralistic, therapeutic, deist, Westerner, when it becomes clear that they're getting down to their religions at heart. And it's like, okay, so then where does the world go now? Because again, we're living in the midst of this significantly interconnected world. And I would imagine that these crises in large and small ways, because of the deep connections of the, you know, the disruptions of technology, and the ways that secularism has impacted societies across the board, the collapse of wisdom, authoritative wisdom institutions that function is likely systemic and pervasive. And these are scary things. I agree with that. Well, my friend, my time is up. I gotta go. Thank you so much, John. Paul, you know, I'm always, I mean, I hope we talk again. I hope we talk again. I always find it valuable. And, you know, and thank you for announcing to people that you and I and Jonathan are going to be meeting in person next year. I'm looking forward to that. But no, it's September of this year. September. I am. That is a, that's going to be a highlight of the year, I'm sure. I am so looking forward to that. For me too. All right. Thank you very much. Take care. Bye bye. Bye bye.