https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=INWU16d2ZMU

 I thought I'd do a little bit more thinking on this whole membership thing that I started. A number of you have signed up and joined. And I got into this because YouTube sent me an email and said, we'll give you $500 to turn it out or $500 to turn it on and $500 if you get 30 people. Oh, we got 30 people. So I have $1,000. That'll buy a camera. But having played with it, now playing around with it, I'm trying to get a feel for what exactly I want to do with this. And so one of the things, let me share the screen here. One of the things, I'll just let you into the back room here. One of the things that I did was I had started this video. Let's see if it comes up. Yep. I started this video and I just put that in the member section and that's a real rambly video. And I had made it and I had sat here for a little while and wondered, oh, should I do this? Should I do this? And so then I did it. And so then those who sign up for the in the door level, that's the lowest level, they get to see that video. And I'll put some more videos in there that are just for members. That'll be fine. One of the things that I was thinking of, and I really want feedback for this, is if the randos conversation should go into the in the door member section. And I'm really looking for feedback on this because here's the rationale. One of the things that I usually do with the randos conversations is I keep them in terms of the thumbnail and title a little obscure unless, let's say the person has their own channel and they want a little bit more publicity. So then, you know, I'll put that on there for them. But if they don't, I don't necessarily want to have them easily found by someone just doing a Google search for them. And so part of what I'm thinking is that perhaps the in the door level will sort of be kind of a basic community level. And I think it's $3 a month for that, which is I think pretty small money for most people. That then would give, I think, maybe a sense of exclusivity and community to the people. And I kind of like that idea. And so then for the randos conversations, I could be a little bit more open in terms of their names. Now, some randos are sensitive about that and some randos are not. So that's a thought that I'm thinking about. I'm thinking about whether or not I would use the in the door. I might even rename that membership level randos. And that then would sort of focus kind of the community aspect. The randos conversations generally don't get a lot of views, which is fine. But I know that they're really cherished by a lot of the people. So that reason, I'm a little hesitant to put them behind the membership paywall. But I think the membership paywall might afford a little bit more transparency and honesty and openness. Now, obviously, if someone really wanted to see what you said on the Internet, they would pay $3. But what it sort of avoids is most people who are just wandering, trolls who are wandering around looking for things, are probably not going to pay the membership to get in and see a video. And so it would have a little bit of an impact on the community. So it would have a little bit of an estuary effect. So I'm thinking about that. So I'm curious about that. So leave a comment below and let me know what you think about that. Wendy says, Hi, Paul, I'm happy to pay $2.99 a month small exchange for the breath of fresh air you bring to my life. Oh, that's thank you, Wendy. That's very sweet. I'm one of the founding members of the New England Estuary. Woohoo! And Robin Cher. Well, welcome, Wendy. Thank you for joining. That's kind of what I'm thinking about using that sort of lowest tier for because it's not a lot of money. And then we're not necessarily talking on the absolutely open Internet. We're sort of behind the scenes a little. And then we can feel free to do some things that we might not do just where the YouTube algorithm or the YouTube search engine is going to find everything. Yeah, we're talking coffee money here. So that's pretty low. So that and these are going to continue to evolve because basically when I signed up for this, YouTube says, Here's three tiers. You can make your own. I thought, Well, let's start with what you did because YouTube probably knows about the price point that people are sensitive with. For those who are already patrons, would you prefer we move our support here? Doesn't YouTube take a bigger chunk? Yes. So if your patrons and the reason you're a patron is you want to just continue to incentivize me and say thank you and support. Patreon. I get 90% of what you give to Patreon. YouTube takes 30%. So it's a bigger chunk. You can adjust patron. I don't have levels in Patreon. So you can make that any amount of money you want to. So if you want to, if you're supporting at $10 a month and you'd like to be at one level, you can cut the patron. I mean, you can do whatever you want with it. That's fine. But I'm part of the reason I did this instead of say levels on Patreon is administratively, this is just a lot cleaner and easier to use. So that's part of the reason I did this. But I've had a lot of questions about Patreon. So again, the money stuff is always difficult. I preached a sermon about this Sunday, actually, and it made me, doing some of the study about the collection, Paul's collection in 1 Corinthians 16 made me think more about these issues. But I do want to see to what degree this membership thing can be used to facilitate better community and better conversation. That's my yeah, the blue shirt again. Yeah. So I have I currently have two of these shirts and one that looks a lot like it. So I have three blue shirts. So I am bathing. I don't smell. And these shirts are clean. I bought started buying these shirts because Rick said that the plaid stuff kind of strobes on the camera. So I went to solid colors just for you, just for you. You can clip that and the broken clock tower, Reapers can, you know, just for you, maybe make a whole branding thing of that. Do you bathe with the shirt on? I saw a movie where someone was doing that. No, I take I take off my clothing to bathe. Yes, I do. I know that that might be a little scandalous, but that's true. So in the door is going to be sort of like a basic community level. And again, I'm toying about putting the Randall's conversations. I might start putting some of the I've got a lot of back. What do they call it? It's not backlog because it's not backlogged. It's basically I've got a lot of old Randall's conversations on there. I don't think they get much action on YouTube, but I want to keep them available. Yeah, live streams. I think also might I might do some live streams behind the paywall too, because then we can talk a little bit more openly. So and the the the membership levels, everything in a higher membership level always gets what the lower ones get. So it's kind of tiered that way. New twenty five dollar paywall, Randall paywall. So I'm kind of thinking about that now. I want to show you. So I just made another Mrs. Davis video. And this is something I've always kind of wanted to use the membership for before, too. And I hadn't thought about it. So I just made that video this morning. I was just on Aaron Renz. I just did a live stream with Aaron Renz. He wanted to talk about the CRC. Hopefully going to do a Randall's conversation with Aaron Renz at some point. They're not really it's part of a celebrity celebrity rando conversation. I've got one coming up. I've got a really important celebrity rando coming up this week. So that'll be fun. Like altercalls. It's still Turkey. Oh, yeah. OK. I got distracted by the chatters over there. So those of you who are no wait, no ads level members, I made a video this morning and I threw it up into the membership section. There isn't a thumbnail on it. I haven't done the thumbnail and I am not the title isn't set. There's just sort of a basic title that I used. And so I thought one of the things I could do with that is that so if you decide you want to watch one of those videos early and you have some ideas for the title, go ahead and leave it in the comments section. And that way it gives a little bit more member participation into the formation of the videos, too. And again, now I'm next week. I'm going on vacation and we'll see what happens then. The membership section might be flooded with videos that are just way more personal because my wife is recording me in the car. That was her idea because my so I don't think she wants to be on. So she might show up if my wife shows up. She'll probably just be in the membership sections because she doesn't want to be in there. It's the join under video. That's right. Not happy about the memberships. Why not, Charlie? I'm still out here. How many people actually sign up for memberships? I'm curious. I find it tedious and I'm hearing about them from everyone these days. Oh, that's a good. You know what, Gabby? Everyone is. I just got emails from Google, from YouTube about both the Vander Clips channel and the church channel. So it's quite clear that that YouTube is really pushing hard on members right membership right now. And for a lot of YouTubers that basically are doing YouTube to make money, I can totally understand that. I want to see to what degree we can form community using this strata. So, yeah, can she get in front of the camera? My wife get in front of the camera. She might. It's funny because I think I could get myself into trouble here. Men and women feel differently about being on camera on the Internet for very good reasons. So I think my wife feels more of a desire to look a certain way, even though she's gorgeous. I don't care that much and anyone who sees my grooming habits, but the shirt is clean. I am into cleanliness, but just not managing my facial hair very often. So selling out. Yep. Selling out. I want a wrench. The almighty dollar. That's right. So, so, yeah. So if you're a if you're a no wait, no ads, the videos that I haven't quite made a thumbnail and got it all set up, you can get sort of sneak peek at them. I haven't turned on the as you can. I haven't turned on the monetization on it. What I learned was that YouTube when you put anything up there, YouTube sort of runs its algorithm on it. So when you turn monetization on, it's ready to go. So I can leave those demonetized. And that way, if you don't do an ad blocker or don't do YouTube premium or anything like that, you'll get fewer ads. Four people have already watched or I've already clicked on the video to like. So the the higher level is causing me more anxiety. I'm not quite sure what I'm going to do with that, because that's a significant amount of money. And I want to show my appreciation for that. So there might be a different Calendly link for those people. Might have more chats or more estuary type meetings for those people. So, yeah. So if you know, if so, that's what I'm thinking about. And so I'm looking I'm looking for feedback. So let me let me make a link here and let's throw it in. I don't want you to turn into a dancey monkey. Pay to play for PVK. There it is. See, I get myself in trouble. All right. I want to find this video and I want to shoot. Crap. Hey, Andrew, how's it going, Bob? Good. What are your thoughts on this subject on membership and whatnot? Yeah, I know. What's on the whatever exclusive content stream? Well, I haven't figured that out yet. So, yeah, I know. I'm back into this thing. So right now there's I'm going to have some videos that are just in the member section and they're probably ironically messier than even my regular videos. They're videos that it's like, do I really want this out on the open Internet? Because I'm sort of really unfiltered. So that'll be in behind the first level of membership. The second level is sort of no wait, no ads. I'm going to throw videos up there. And like I did one this morning about Mrs. Davis and the godlessness of Mrs. Davis. So and I haven't done a thumbnail for that yet. And normally I'd probably release that one tomorrow morning. So anybody who wants to see it early can watch it now. And, you know, I felt bad this weekend. Friday, I made a you know, I put something up on Twitter about the video that I would that I made that I was going to release my video. And I made a video on Friday that I was going to release Monday. And then Grim Grizz is like, oh, you know, he's, you know, using his content and I put it behind a paywall. I felt really bad. But I, you know, Monday I knew because normally what's happened is Friday I make a video and I just put it in. I make the video Friday afternoon and it sits in behind, you know, basically in the YouTube studio all weekend long. And I don't release videos on Sunday except the Freddie and Paul show and then maybe some church stuff. So, yeah, so that's and then the big level I have to really figure out how to do something. That'll probably be more conversations and access and those kind of things. So, I don't know. What do you think? I mean, one idea I had was there's stuff that's more TL focused and then there's stuff that's more your hobbies and whatnot. And then the stuff that's more centered around you and whatever your interests you could use the membership for. Oh, OK. Yeah. That way you don't lose the whole community thing. Oh, that's a good idea. All right. No, that's a good idea. You guys, you guys are smarter than I am. That's why I do this. What do you think, Chad? I want the link. I don't know where it's at. I can't access it with my phone. You can't you can't access the join link with your phone. Yeah. What is the join link? Where's the button? Somebody saying it's a button on. Yeah. So if you go, let me see. Let me get here. Oh, it goes this way. OK. So if you open up, let's go to YouTube and then you go to something like this. And down here on the bottom, there's my name and then there's join. And that's I'm inside. So you have the analytics in the edit video. So it should be right by my name. It's just a join button. It says join. Well, I tried looking at it with my phone. So let me see. Let me go to YouTube on my phone. Benjamin Boyce has this on his channel, too. Let's see where if I can see it on his Benjamin Boyce. Then I go to his channel. So if you go, I'll put this up here. So there's Benjamin Boyce's channel. Focus your darn thing. And then right under his channel, there's a join button. So you'd have to go to my channel page on the phone. And then there's a join button. All right. Well, anyways, I think it's great. And whatever you got to do, man, I have no quarrels with it. I like the idea of, you know, if you're willing to share more of your some of your hobby stuff, that's kind of cool. But just a little just on topic, but a little off topic. I really, really loved your video today. And like, I love when you get in those moments where like you hit you hit a nerve today that was very powerful that that I think we needed reminding them. So the trying or the training versus trying. Yeah, that's so good. Yeah. And I needed to hear it because I I'm a trier. You know what I'm saying? I'm like, damn it, dude. But so I appreciate that. But yeah, man, doing great work. I'm going to hop off now. But I appreciate you, Paul. Good to see you. Good to see you. Andrew. So that's interesting. I hadn't thought of, you know, I I don't always know what personal stuff to put on here because there's already a lot of me on the channel. So that's interesting that more hobby stuff and things like that you'd be interested in. So, OK, OK, that's cool. And maybe, you know, when I first started this, my wife was like, real, you know, don't make any videos in the house. And if you do make sure there's a blank wall behind you. Of course, John Verbeke was on the covid couch with the Native Americans behind him. Yeah, you know, those those schools of fish were just a bunch of them congregate. So if a predator attacks, you know, it just gets a couple of them. That's pretty much my whole world view for this YouTube stuff. Nobody's ever going to look at me. There's so much content on the Internet. Safety, safety and numbers. Yeah, let me see. I've already got this muted. So let me see if I can pin the pin the link up at the top. Content. I also changed the title on today's video. And I don't usually like to do that too much, but sometimes it makes sense because after I after I sleep on a video for a while, I usually get better ideas in terms of, oh, what was it really I wanted to say? Maybe if I got paid for what I do, I wouldn't be. I don't know. Yeah. The most horrible thing I'll sit on the covid couch. Yeah, beard, beard grooming. Yeah. When you get to grow a beard, Mark, I mean, come on, Mark, let's see. Let's see a beard. Let's see a beard back catalog. That's what I was thinking of back catalog. Yeah. So I was thinking of maybe starting to move the randos conversations to the back catalog just because it gives a little bit more protection for people. You know, someone's out there looking for a job and, you know, they might not want they might not want to be associated with me. I have in the past had to take. You should do a conversation for each twenty five dollars sub. I think I will something like that. But the question is how often because oh, here's twenty five dollars. Get a conversation. I can't I can't do ten or fifteen. So the deal the twenty five dollar level will probably be something like that where we'll do a conversation. So and about the back catalog stuff, what's that? I can't hear you speak up a little bit. Sorry. For the back catalog stuff, I think you should probably like ask the randos instead of just like, I don't know, private in the mall because a lot of the randos conversation is good. That's true. Yeah. And that is that is sort of the the weight, the the what I'd really love to do if I had more time and sort of Justin is sort of doing this would be to actually go through all the randos conversations and do some editing of them. Maybe I'll put that in the in the other channel. So something like that. What's that like a montage or something like that? Yeah. Even just an edited because a lot of the randos conversation, it's it's just like a conversation. You're sort of getting up to speed but just take some of those salient chunks, put them behind it. I don't know. That might be. Yeah. Yeah. I would never become a regular watcher without the randos. Yeah. Release your members only content after for you. I don't have any members only. I have one members only content video. Father Eric, that's it. Oh, okay. Yeah, that could be. It should be on the phone. Top ten randos conversations. I've got them all in a drive actually. Oh, donors. Yeah. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know. This is hard. It's hard to figure out. So, yeah. So, keep keep the ideas coming. Let me know other ideas that you have. I'm I'm I might make some merch. And part of the reason I never wanted to make merch was I find a lot of the merch out there boring. T-shirt. Sorry. Sorry, Grizz. Your your merch is wonderful. Somebody said socks. Socks sounded fun. My wife said I should have sets of three pairs of socks with with each beard evolution. So, Sam likes boring merch. All right. Maybe I'll make some boring merch. Let's see. Randos probably shouldn't be digested too much. Socks. Yeah, I'm in the merch. All right. All right. What about it? What about my sister? It's her birthday today actually. You can go to my sister's channel and wish her a happy birthday. Bring the stickers back. Oh, Raj. I got a lot of these t-shirts that say go to church. You can afford the Randall sports bra. I don't sell beard grooming stuff. I don't groom my beard. That's the thing. A PVK hoodie. I guess I got to work on merch. Oh, fighting with her. No. Well, I like to fight my sister. My sister had a good time. My it was that was fine that you engaged my sister in that. Absolutely fine. There was no hard feelings. All right. I just basically want to do a little video to bring up these points. If anybody else wants to jump on. Now's your chance. I pinned the link up there. If any of you has any other ideas. You definitely sell merch that you would buy. Why? Yes, that's exactly it. Because if you don't like it, you won't have fun selling it. I think that's exactly right. I feel like the guy that can't see the monster on the beach. You leaving, Andrew? I've got class in three minutes. Oh, you don't want to take me in and introduce me to your professor? It's only allowed. Oh, it's only allowed. You don't want to you don't want to introduce me to the rest of your class. You don't want to say here's a rando on the Internet live streaming. You want to say hi to PVK School of Fish, PVK School of Fish. Well, it's kind of fun following Andrew into class. This is what I like. This is why I like the the the the the discourse. You get to see get to see some Andrew in his normal life. See the institutional ceiling tiles. He used to sell that stuff when I worked in a lumber yard in college. We can experiment with PVK. That's right. You experiment. Can we help Chad? You got to help Chad sign up. Chad doesn't want to miss out. The school Wi-Fi is getting a little sketchy. Did we lose Andrew? Oh, oh, oh, oh. You didn't you didn't you didn't dress for this appearance. You just here in your knee-neck t-shirt. For you? You don't groom your beard. Why the hell should I dress up? That's a good point. That's a good point. You know, I do think Chad's already a member. I thought I saw Chad on that list. So I'll have to check. It is hot in my office. That's why I'm like, I'm like, why is it? I don't know why. It just got hot. It's been it's been remarkably cool in California this summer. We're here too. Beastly hot. I don't think we've had one 100 degree day yet. I'm like, I don't know. That's weird. It's great. I like it. But you need you need PVK t-shirts with those pithy sayings. You know, like you could do eyes up, eyes down. You could do you could do we sanity is outsource. I mean, you know, you could you could. Yeah, there's some there's some good material there. I hate to say it just because your head's big enough. But well, look at it on the screen. It's like. I'm sorry. What do you what do you have to say for yourself, Mark? What's your what's your take on this membership stuff? I think it's good. I think I I find it funny that that that you're a sucker for like YouTube. Why don't you do something? You're like, oh, OK, I can check it out. Wow. That was it seems like the easiest thousand bucks I'd ever make. Well, that's that's true. Like, man, I wish I had that. I don't know about you. A thousand dollars is still real money to me. Oh, that'd be you if I had an extra grand right now, I'd be real happy. Yeah, a thousand dollars is yeah, that would be a big deal at the moment. So, yeah, no, I I wish I had that deal. I would totally I don't know about the PVK sippy cup. That seems a little bit of a setting, but I think there's so many little little things you did. But I was talking to Justin this morning, Justin Wells. Well, this morning, your time. And I mentioned him. No, no, we need PVK top 10 landless list for sure for him, because I told him you got to listen to Lynn LeVoy stuff and you listen to W weeks for sure. Just those two are great. And I don't watch them all myself. But the ones that are good are really good. So, yeah, I was like, yeah, we get it. We got to encourage him to do that. So if you have the top tens randos on your membership channel, I think that'd be good. I think that'd be really good. Yeah. Yeah. Well, CW's conversation. Well, and it changes about an hour and 30 minutes in and then it's like a completely different. Also, wonderful conversation. I was like, I learned so much. I was like, wow, this was just fascinating to me. Fascinating. Oh, oh, no, it was it was that was amazing. That was amazing. But look, look, I think that you could sell a beard grooming kit that is well, well, wait, wait, wait, no, it gets better. It gets better. It's just an empty pouch. I was going to buy some cheap Chinese groomers and just loosen the wire on them so they just intermittently go out. Well, I can't cut it today. No, no, see, that's that's too intentional. But just just selling somebody an empty kit and then like notice it would be their own fault. I agree more job. Yeah, you definitely have to get job on again. Job is job is busy man. You know, job is a busy man. Yeah. At some at some point, I have to get back to New England to do another thing at my sister's place. Oh, yeah. Let me know when you do that. If I can get a job. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. I'll do it. Oh, yeah. Let me know when you do that. If I can get up to New England, I would. That would be great. Yeah, I think I think that just the posset like some of your little sayings on a t-shirt. I think that would be great. And I think it I think it's you know, I think it also goes along with with your pastoral mission as well. Like some of these points that you make are so good to get the what I call the crisis of faith people will try not to get into an argument about meaning crisis here. You know, no, no, I like my reminder. I think your crisis of faith point is right because religious people are not having a meaning crisis. They're having a faith crisis. It's usually after their faith crisis where they throw away the faith. Then they have the meaning crisis. Yeah, they can fall further. But they have a leg up in some sense, having been exposed once and they don't have the allergy to the language in the same way. They might have a different problem. Man, Justin played a piece for me from I think it was from Chino or whatever in his little documentary thing. I was just like I couldn't have imagined hearing a story like that. I was like, well, that's something new that I didn't expect. Oh, no. Justin has gold from the Chino conference. He's played some clips for me and some of the stuff that he's put together from my randos conversation. He's played it for me. It's like now he told me I have to lower expectations on this for people. But some of the stuff I've watched and what he's done with it. Yeah, I thought, oh, gosh, this I could see that out. If that got bigger distribution than what we've currently got, we could have a whoosh. There's something for that. We need a whoosh. We need whoosh on merch. Yeah. Well, but I think the possibility for merch to be in that pastoral mission for you for crisis of faith people is definitely there. And I think you could even do a little bit of linking with the with the meaning crisis or the people that fell down further into the meaning crisis pretty easily. I did want to mention to Wendy that no, I did not grow up in Fishing Ham. Framingham. I go through Logan Express Framingham all the time. That's how I get to Whitesville. I take Logan to Framingham and then my mom and my sister pick me up in Framingham. I used to drive through Framingham on my way to and from work right down right down Route 9. It used to be a better path and or sometimes down the pike. But yeah, no, I'm familiar with Fishing Ham. A friend in Natick right on the border to the Natick Mall. Yeah, great area. I do miss it. Yeah, my daughter, when she went to Wellesley, would always go to the Natick Mall. That's all. Yeah, it's a small world. Oh, here's interesting. Why don't you partner with that fellow who does the Jesus signs for your merch? Oh, Philip Fast would be oh, he would be so excited if if I did some Jesus signs for my for my merch. Yeah, I'd have a t-shirt with Philip with a picture of Philip and his. Well, wait a minute. I should scan it. So I'll get it again. Say something. Say something entertaining, Mark. I will. If you like this idea of merch, you should put your merch ideas in the chat for Paul so that he can get that rolling idea. And also, I have no idea why Paul did not pick up on my funny comment earlier, which I left twice. Right. I think that they need a name for Vanderkla's memberships. And I think it should be Vander member. I think the Vander members, the Vander member army. I think that would be good. Join the Vander members. Become a Vander member. You know, there's so many possibilities. So so here's Phillips book from 2008 to 2020. You got always got to cover. And here's his book, too. And my my my favorite pictures in here are the ones when he goes to Hooters with the Hooters girls with the Jesus. Because he's so he's so innocent about it. It just makes me laugh. That's the end. And you know, and if anybody missed if anybody missed the Freddie and Paul show this week, this week's was one to watch because Rick wasn't there. So Rick Rick usually gets tired of the shenanigans about five to eight minutes in. And so so that's when we got the hourglass for 10 minutes because Rick's had it with the shenanigans and he'll turn off the camera. So now I'm trying to get trained. That's right. And but but we had if you watch the church, the Sunday, the Sunday scream, you'll see Pete. We had Pete holding the camera. First, he had his fingers in front of the lens and then he figured that out. And it was a it was a hilarious show. It was a hilarious show. Did you call the Freddie and Paul show for this week? Because I think I saw the title was wrong. It wasn't Freddie and Paul Unchained, which it sounds like it should have been. Well, it was it was it was Freddie and Nancy Unchained because they because Rick was away. And so Freddie and Nancy could do what they wanted. So Rick went out to see the motorcycle races this weekend. Gotcha. But yeah, there's so much. Yeah. Oh, do it. Do it. Do it. Do a T-shirt with Philip and his Jesus sign. One of those pictures he would fill up would love it. Well, you should do that. What? Wendy wants to be a vendor member because she's a man. I like that. Yeah. The best part about Massachusetts is that they will make fun of themselves mercilessly and love every minute of it. So one of the things I miss about New England is they were just basically their own their own selves and a member. They had a member. The funniest thing about my sister's channel, too, is that she often has my cousin Mel on. Every time Mel is on that channel, she just gets clicks like crazy. Everybody loves to loves to loves to follow Mel. Mel's just got this thick accent and Mel is totally New England. She's totally New England. So anyway, all right. So, I don't know, Clay Fab, Clay Fabe, Clay Fabe. I don't know. I'm not Vander Mugs. Vander Mugs, the whole series of Vander Mugs. I could see Vander Mugs because you can have your coffee with some with some Vander Clay. Here's a little thing. There's some. Yeah. I got to make a list. All right. Look, I'm doing all the work. I'm like, guys, put it in the in the comments. I don't I'm not seeing anything. You know. All right. Let's see. Oh, you want. Oh, Peter wants you to sell your wine from communion. Yeah, you could bless. You could bless stuff and send it out. Oh, people buy that. You look crazy. You can people are going to turn me into some cheesy televangelist. I would buy anything that you bless. No offense. Mostly because I could just fly out there and get it blessed for free. But, you know, it's crazy people. Well, and you get plenty of them. It's there. OK, socks, Vander Mugs. What were some of the other ideas that were good? Oh, Philip Vast. You Sir Bible. Jesus, man. I think I think you could you could come through some of PVK's greatest hits and get some T-shirts with some preachy sayings on it that aren't too pastoral sayings. How's that? They weren't too preachy. I think that's you know, I think it would work. I think it would work. OK. All right. You should you know what you should do. I know it's still on your on the BOM server somewhere is is the Vander Klaan meme I think Jess made it. I forget who made it for me. He reversed your beard and so you just reversed your beard. It's hysterical. And he put a red nose on you. I think that T-shirt. Oh, my goodness. I'd buy one. Well, I wouldn't buy one. I'd buy three. I always buy three. I buy like three of those right away. Yeah, whatever. I can't afford to buy Vander Klaan T-shirts. They're too funny. Yeah. Yeah. That would work. Yeah, you could you could do you could do different the different seasons of the beard. Your wife really suggested that. That's genius. Yeah. Yeah. Well, she's got a lot of good ideas. My daughter did the pictures. So I'm going to start pushing. Me. That's right. I went prosperity gospel. We're going full water bottles. Yeah, I just I don't you know, part of the reason I also didn't I just don't want to clutter up the world. You know, but the world wants to be cluttered with your glory, sir. That's the problem for people. The people are the people are restless for PVK merch. That's what I'm seeing. See, actually, my I got that I started because my sister does a lot of so my sister does art and then sells it for wall hangings and shower curtains, which was an interesting one. Yeah, shower curtains. Yeah. And there it's I mean, because the shower curtain is usually kind of a boring thing. And but when you walk into a bathroom with a really clever with really nice art on the shower curtain, it just it elevates the experience. I can I can see that the minute you said that I'm like, oh, one of my pictures from Hawaii. Yeah, my heart and Sally Joe, they do great stuff. You can't have Sally Joe. She's mine. Oh, and San Giro. I got to get you. I haven't forgotten about you, man. I get it. You got a rando slot waiting for you at some point. We just have to just have to find the time. Pick the Vanderklaan. Oh, that's good. Lucky he was at that. He was at the. Vanderklaan Unkempt Beard calendar. I don't know. Hey, look at this. Guess what? Chad's got in. Oh, Bart Ehrman introduced member tears after I volunteered to help with his blog podcast. I should grin. Oh, CW Weeks pushing Bart Ehrman. It's not going to help your relationship with all the evangelicals. CW. I mean, oh, CW. Yeah, the role playing stuff. That's that's fun. Coasters. Oh, coasters. They do what do the faces on coasters. Oh, yeah. Oh, I put my glass on your face. That would be good. Slam that down. Here comes Chad. You found it, huh? Oh, it's such a pain in the ass. I had to go to your community page. But I'm in. All right. So you got to you got to make since you're not going to write a book, you have to make the blank book. That's actually a notebook. But it looks like a book and it has a picture of your face on it. It says this is the book that only my mom will read or something like that. And I'm going to have to write. I'm going to have to do some writing at some point. There's no question about that. But could you imagine you could be the first dude to publish a book that actually has no writing in it? Ben Shapiro is always always pissed off at Michael Knowles because he wrote a book like I forget what it is. Oh, reasons to be a Democrat or something. And it's all empty pages. He has a way better book. It'd be cool. Anyways. Yeah. Now I'm happy. So I'm going to get off here and get going. I'm going to get going. I'm going to get going. I'm going to get going. I'm going to get going. I'm going to get going. I'm going to get going. I'm going to get going. So I'm going to get off here and drive. Have a good one, guys. All right. We'll see. Yeah. I like when you could sell you could sell bags of pebbles from Living Stones. Sure. Yeah. And some driveway. There's all kinds of. Yeah. Yeah. The point. I mean, again, to me, the point isn't just making money. That's. You're going to get the people. What's that? You got to give the people what they want. They want Merck. Always. They want Bender Merck. Damn it. Well, I think it's I think it's more I'd like to do things that actually are. The things that have some cleverness to them, things that not just I don't. There's so much trash in the world. I don't want to make trash. I want to make something. I want to make something that's sort of clever and has something to it. So you have so much clever work that shouldn't be a problem if you if you use words and a neat font. Yeah, I'll keep working on the merch idea. Something will come through. Plus, my my sister, she was like everyone uses Teespring because like YouTube has this cozy relationship. But my sister was having real trouble with Teespring. They were not making people happy. And oh, look, Jess is a member. I'll have to do a special job video. Yeah, now you are obligated. What a Bible study book. Yeah, yeah. So early release of sermon notes. Well, I already have rough draft for Sunday. Yeah, you should move that crazy people who like that stuff will pay for it. Put that in the members here. That and the synod stuff. I think you should put all this in. Man, I don't watch any of that. And I'm just like, why are you going to watch that? That that synod that synod stuff. Yeah, you and you and my well are in totally different places on this merch thing. Lamentations. I that that would be totally fun. Oh, dude, the action figures. If you could make that happen. That would be total. Oh, Freddie would love it. Oh, I speak to the grill. That's right. That's the yeah, that's one we could do. I speak for the crowd. You could really should speak for the crowd. I think it's about time. But yeah, action figures, Bible heads instead of bottle heads. You call them Bible heads and they. If you were a BBQ, barbecue rub. That's right. Great to have examples of God number one and God number two. I like that. Actually, I like that. I kind of like that idea. OK, I already got Sam had Sam had that idea. So all right. So what was that? Yep. OK, so I think I got my message across and merch ideas. I'll keep working on that and navigating patterns. That's you should just exchange Mark LeFavor for navigating patterns right underneath there. I'm not that self-promoting. You guys are like I'm like, have you seen Grim? Do you like Grim? Oh, Grim. More self-promoting than I am. I'm not. But for Grim, it's the whole shtick of his channel. Oh, I agree. I agree. It's the whole shtick. Yeah, a great country. You guys could totally have merch. Oh, I know. I know why they don't do that. They could cash in for sure. They could do well. I'm not there yet. I'm watch hours away from all this. Let's do Sam Harris pictures with a patch on it. People would have no idea. Why is Sam Harris wearing a patch? Maybe the Sam Harris patch will do the eye patch. We'll do Sam Harris on an eye patch. He can slip it back and forth. You do one of those things where if you look at it one way, one eye is closed. If you look at the other way, the other eye is closed. Because you do that eye thing. Yeah. Yeah. That's there. Or you could do that on a mug too. I've seen that on a mug. You turn the mug and the different eye is shut. Oh, yeah. That would be great. PBK bomb. Bomb maybe, but not bomb. This is too controversial. I should say no. Sunscreen. Oh, look at you. Oh, hey, there's Ginger Bell. Ginger. Hey, Bill. All right. So this has gone on long enough. I have to make so. Yep. Those of you who want to know what's coming out tomorrow, the title isn't set and there's no thumbnail on it, but it's in the no wait, no ads. Oh, yeah. This is what happens. You opened up for this, man. You just totally were asking for this. Voice mail greetings. I want to know why CW is not a millionaire. The dude's just freaking clever. Grim Grizz too. I mean, I know why Grim's channel is small. He's just a step ahead and everyone's like, what am I looking at? What am I looking at? PBK ringtone. Oh, you're not the verveky ringtone was because verveky used to talk. We used to call me out all the time in praise on the meditation series. So they all know phone ringtone. Mark Verveky saying something nice about you again. That's right. Poor Ginger Bill comes to the live stream and he kills it. Sorry, Ginger Bill job. Bill. That's why. Pleasure, Paul. I wish you luck with the membership thing. Let me know how it goes because someday I'll be able to enable that myself. So watch out. You got that. You got that big bump by Matthew Peugeot on your channel. It's huge. Doubled my doubled my subscribers in three weeks. Yeah. But I didn't need watch hours. I got all the I got the numbers. I'm at one K. I need the watch hours. Then membership turns on. And then if I get another thousand watch hours beyond what what I'll have for membership, then they turn on the partnership thing. And then you get the free ad money, you know, the billions of dollars a week. They sign over to you. Oh, that's right. What is it? Six dollars. You that's right. I keep forgetting to remind you. You owe me half of the money from my videos. You told me I'll buy you a coffee. That's fine by me. You owe me something. A scone, something. I you know, you said you'd do it. Let's you know, next time I see you, Mark, I'll buy you a coffee. I might be out there. I might be out there in in the beginning of August. There's a slim possibility out to California. I will. Yeah. Yeah. What? I won't be here. Oh, you're going to be where you're going to be traveling. Yeah, I'll be traveling. Oh, shoot. So shoot. Oh, maybe I won't go out there. We'll see. Anyway. All right, Mark. Thanks for coming on. Take care, everybody. Thanks for your ideas. And those of you leave an idea in the comments section for merch and channel membership perks.