https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=EN-PQ3uUm4Y

 We're on, Mary. All right, great. How are you doing? I'm doing great. I'm very excited to get to talk to you again because I have had, I have so many things stacking up in my head that I'd like to talk to you about. I mean, I could talk to you for hours. So could everybody else, obviously. So you've got, you had so much great content. Wonderful things are going on. I got to, I got to do two books first. Okay. So I'm going to flash two books up here. All right. This is for Julian. One of them just fell on the floor. This is for Julian. Julian, this is the Stanley Harawas book I've been talking to you about in the comments section a couple of times. And also Luke is, you know, like seeing this because Luke pointed me to Father Stephen Freeman, I think his name is. And Father Stephen Freeman studied under Stanley Harawas. Oh, really? Yeah. So on I, and Luke would like to know that I watched or listened to all the Father Freeman stuff that I saw. Just a second. Let me get this other book that fell on the floor. Okay. So this one, you're going to like this one, Paul. This is, can you see it? Practical Theology. Bye. Bye. I can't read it down below. Okay. Peter Kreeft. Is it Peter Kreeft? It is Peter Kreeft. Okay. So this is, this is great. A lot of the people that watch your channel will love this book. This goes into Thomas Aquinas's Practical Theology. As you can see, I've really been poured over that book. Also, remember Kreeft means lobster. Yes. Remember that? We learned that on your channel. That means you can give your lobster a last name. Where is he? I don't see him. Oh, he keeps falling. He must be, uh oh, where is he? You could call him Bucko Kreeft. Oh, here he is. He could have a last name, Bucko Kreeft, instead of just one name. He's a little inflating. He's a little, we've got to. Oh yeah, you don't want him to be deflated. You don't want him to be defeated. No, no, no. He's falling on the floor. He needs some, needs some serotonin. Yes, he does. I got things to say about serotonin in this conversation too. Okay, so, mouth to mouth resuscitation for the lobster. I don't like to think about what I have to do. There you go. We'll see if he stays. Okay, so I have a couple, I think I'm only going to get to like two topics, and I want to kind of circumambulate them a little bit. You know, you're Jungian. Now, is this going to be a conversation or are you going to, you know, women seem to want to colonize my channel, and it's like, Paul is not just a passive thing to get your hobby horses out. Okay, you know what, you're right. So I have to stop and I have to, I have to get feedback. Okay. We'll do that. Okay. Did you talk to your, did you talk? Usually I have one conversation where folks kind of share their story, and I pretty much just let them go. And the next conversation is where we process some things. So that's kind of the way that the pattern has gone. All right. Well, so, did you talk to Jungian people? Because you were going to talk to somebody Jungian, and you didn't ever put that up, I don't think. Well, Skip, so I had a conversation with Skip, and he has a channel, he has a pretty good sized channel where he reads audio books from Jung, and he puts out a ton of content. We had a conversation and his internet went out, and he posted the little beginning of that conversation, but he and I haven't had a second conversation. So Skip's got some pretty clear ideas about what he wants to see happen, and it's, you know, the, oh, this stuff gets so complicated, because Jung has a following that is extremely devoted to Jung and his work. And there are times when if you're, you know, it's, again, it's sort of just like another religious community, and if other people aren't sufficiently down with that project, you know, it's just like you can be not reformed enough or not Catholic enough. I mean, it's just a natural part of, just a natural part of tribes. Oh, okay. And Jung's, you know, Verbeke on one of his recent videos made a comment about Jung basically saying, if you don't know Kant, you don't know Jung. And he said that, and I thought, oh, I'm going to have to think a lot more about this, because Kant is another important figure that, you know, Kant, Hegel, these are, these philosophers' works have been so foundational to the West, but they're not easy to get your mind around. So I've just got a lot more homework to do. Yeah, well, they can stack you up with the things that you have to read and everything. I think I'm kind of past the point of doing all of that reading. I did it years and years ago, and I'm like, now it's like, I still feel like I have time to dive into all those books, but getting the lectures from somebody like John Verbeke or Dr. Gregory Sadler or something like that, or you, is real helpful, because it brings things back to my mind, makes connections. It's really great. So, okay, so I said that I was going to think about the men without chests and the women. Yes. Women that had an issue similar to that, right? So the reason I brought up the word circumambulate was because that's a word the Jungians like to use about how to approach a subject. It's like you walk around it and you get closer and closer to it. And, you know, it really just means walk around, right? Circumambulate means to walk around. But somehow or another when people say things in Latin, it's supposed to be more special, you know? It's like you go to the doctor and you say, ah, you know, I have this red irritated patch on my arm. And the doctor looks and goes, oh, that's dermatitis. And all he did is say to you in Latin what you just told them in English. But now you've got a diagnosis all of a sudden. That's right. That's transgallantly right. So anyway, so I was thinking about that when I was thinking about all the ways that I was approaching this, I thought, well, I'm kind of circumambulating it. It's like I have these different little stories that I think feed into trying to get a handle on what's going on with a particular thing that I observed. So I want to tell you several little stories. All right. And I won't go back to back. I'll wait for you to respond to each one. That sounds good. Deal? Okay. All right. The first one is something that happened in my family. Okay. So we had this new baby was born into the family. You know, one of my all my son's family and new baby. And, you know, my mom brings the new baby over and all the women of the family are gathered together and they're making over the new baby. Well, this new baby has a brother who's just about four years old. And he's kind of bouncing off the walls a little bit. You know, he's being told to settle down and quiet down and whatever. And at some point in this whole scenario, he bursts into tears and he goes, everybody likes the new baby and nobody likes me anymore. And he's he starts crying inconsolably. And all of us females around him, you know, we're we're pet and we're trying to comfort him. And we've got all these things we're saying to him and how he's so important. He's the big brother and all this stuff. He won't he's not having any of it. The tears are just flowing. And my husband's in the kitchen. We're in the living room. And suddenly my husband walks out of the kitchen. He grabs that boy up, throws him over his shoulder like a sack of potatoes, runs up the stairs with him, throws him on a bed and starts tickling him. And in moments that kid is laughing his head off and he's totally happy, you know. And I just I I just admire. I just said it was filled with like this sense of admiration over him doing that. It's like he knew exactly what to do. All of us women with all of our words, we were being completely ineffective. And he took that, you know, that masculine strong action and he just dealt with it. And it was it was all good. And so that's the you know, that's the thing. The sense that I'm what I'm seeing is missing is in women is that appreciation of being able to observe something like that and have it. And have you recognize it in a way and appreciate it? Do you see that? You see that? That's a great story. I love that story because that so nicely illustrates, you know, men and women are different. We just are. And I love that story. I'm going to use I'm going to use that story at some sermon at some point. I am. It is a great story and it so perfectly illustrates exactly what it illustrates that sometimes. And you know, you know, when men are married to women and women are married to men, you can sometimes you sit there and just talk, talk, talk, talk, talk. And it's like, you know, two different worlds. So right. Right. But now I have a couple of stories that I think illustrate the opposite. OK. All right. So one of them is remember I was talking before about being interested in like home studying and animals and you know, gardening and all that stuff. OK. So I was watching this video about this man who had gotten to that. I said before I was interested in goats and also interested in ducks. So I was watching this video of this man who got these baby ducklings and he's got them all set up. He's all set up to start raising some ducks and he brings them home. They come from home from tractor supply in a little box and they're, you know, peeping and everything. And he goes he's got several little children. So the whole video showing him bringing the ducklings home from the store and he goes downstairs to his basement. He's got a brooder set up with a heat lamp form and and he's got several little children. So he's talking to his little children. He's telling them to be careful, you know, to you know, they have the older ones have to wash their hands if they touch the ducks and mustn't put their fingers in their mouth. And the little ones not to touch the ducks at all because he will put his fingers in his mouth and you know, and all this stuff he's doing, he's taking care of the little ducklings and making sure they're warm and cared for and everything. And then the next scene in the video is there several days later and they're taking the little ducklings out for the first time for a walk in the backyard. It's their first outing and they have a black female lab. And she's she's just following along with these ducklings and you see her and all the kids are there and she's like nosing the ducklings and sort of herding them along. And there's a little boy. I don't think this little boy was even three years old. And we'll say that though I don't remember the name of the dog, but we'll say her name was Lucy. And and they hear the little boy says, what's Lucy doing? And the mother who must have been the one holding the camera because she didn't appear in the in the film. She says she says she's trying to be the duck's mommy. And the little boy, the little boy says, I want to be the duck's mommy. And the dad says, you're a boy. You can be the duck's daddy. And I thought, I got to read this comment section because, you know, you know, sometimes people are writing YouTube, they're like, I'm just here for the comments. I know there's going to be something stupid in this comment section, so I'm going to go down and look for it. So I scroll down the comment section and sure enough, some call her a wicked witch had written, why did you tell him he can't be a mommy? Don't you want him to be nurturing? And the dad, the owner of the channel, had come back and just said, don't you think a father can be nurturing? Which is a much, much less fewer words and kinder than I would have probably said to her. But the thing that's that killed me about this is the whole video was of a nurturing father. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He was nurturing his own children. He was even nurturing duck children. Yeah, yeah. And she couldn't see it. Yeah, yeah. So, you know, I don't know what she ideologically possessed or what. I was thinking about this. What is wrong with her? Yeah. She couldn't see it. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. We've got kind of a stupid culture. We trip up on things that probably should trip up on. I mean, if you just pause and think and be patient and be quick to listen and slow to speak, which I'm certainly not someone who should, you know, toot that horn too loud because I do a lot of talking. Well, the second story that I have about a woman doing the same thing involves Jordan Peterson. OK, so this is like, do you remember the GQ interview? Now, everybody remembers the new movie. You remember the GQ? Oh, yeah, I certainly do. OK. And this is a point about it. I've watched a lot of analysis about it, but this is a point about it. I haven't seen anybody point out. So there's a situation in that interview where she says to Jordan Peterson, how have you encouraged your daughter? Do you remember this? It's ringing a bell. And he comes back and he says, I encourage my daughter and her desire to be a mother. Yes, yes. Of course, not what that woman wanted to hear. Right. Yes. So then she comes quickly back and she says, well, did you encourage your son to be a father? And he said, well, yes, of course. But he's looking at her like, you're so clueless. And I'm thinking, I'm seeing that and I'm thinking, oh, Sesame Street time, boys and girls, because one of these things is not like the other. Yes. You know, when you're a medically fragile daughter who's been on umpteen medications her whole life, had I don't know how many surgeries since she was a young child. So she wants to be a mother. It's not the same thing as your healthy son indicating that at some point in the future, he might like to impregnate his wife. That's right. Right. That's right. She couldn't see it. Well, she, she, well, she couldn't see it. I think that's exactly right. She couldn't see it. And, you know, who knows how, you know, I was thinking about Peterson this morning because he posted a video on his channel with which had a think club, which was funny, had a think club opening. And then, and he just made a comment in the notes saying that, you know, he's been very busy and preoccupied with the illness of his wife. Right. And I just thought about, I just thought about Jordan and, you know, you can't read 12 Rules for Life without a real appreciation for the pain that he and his wife, parents suffer with a child in a different way than the child suffers. And this has actually been, we've got a member, an important member of our Meetup community who has a disabled sister. And, you know, when there's a, when there's a medical, a significant medical issue with one of the children in the family, that shapes the whole family. It very much shapes the parents. And, you know, I thought of, I was thinking I should probably do a video about Peterson and call him a man of sorrows because in many ways the trauma and the sorrow and the struggles that he had because of his daughter's medical condition, he wouldn't be the same Jordan without that, that deeply shaped him and shaped his thought. And now to have his wife, you know, facing a very serious medical challenge, you know, I do, I do, I do keep him in my prayers because this is, this is, this is very, very difficult. But these, these kinds of, I mean, any pastor who's paying attention knows that these sufferings are deeply formative. And, you know, the New Testament talks about suffering in a peculiar way. How, you know, the, how, you know, the apostle Paul, for example, how, you know, to fill up the sufferings of Christ. This extremely, you know, interesting phrase that Paul uses and you have the sense that, that part of the, part of what suffering does is, is bring a depth to glory that perhaps could not be had any way than through suffering. And you see this as a pastor, you see this in people's lives that, that suffering, suffering can make people deep and profound and, and, and give them this, this godly quality of strength and tenderness at the same time, which is, you know, I did a video on the Democrats all want to be about kindness and the Republicans all want to be about strength. But, but it's, it's godly to be strong and kind because strong and kind actually makes love. And love without strength is mere kindness and love without kindness is, can be just, can be, can lack gentleness. And so, no, yes, to encourage his daughter to be a mother despite everything that she had undergone. And, you know, I think about that movie that was out a number of years ago, Steel Magnolias, where the- Oh, that's one of my favorite movies. Where the mother is, you know, the daughter has had medical difficulties and the daughter has decided to go through and have, you know, to go through and get pregnant and, and understanding fully the risk that the daughter will face because of this. I mean, these are, these dramas are, are what make us, are what make human beings godly. And it's, it's just true, but our, our culture, you know, I've said before that the sign of a good culture is it bequeaths upon young people a wisdom that their years could not earn for them. And our culture is failing the younger generations because we are not reliably giving them this kind of wisdom that you actually need in your 20s to make the hard decisions that will bear fruit in the 50s and 60s. Right. Well, that's what, that's what I thought when I contrast these women who could not see, like the woman who couldn't see the fatherhood, the nurturing fatherhood of the father with the ducklings or the nurturing or the sacrificial kind of fatherhood that Peterson was expressing when he said, I encourage my daughter to be a mother, knowing that's a risk for him, for his heart. Right. Yes. And, and I, and that she couldn't see this. And I was thinking, what is it with these women? And then I was thinking about, because you had talked about the men without chests, that, that whole thing that CS Lewis wrote. And so, so my, my question was, or, you know, about their perception. And then I was thinking about, we keep talking about perception, like in this whole conversation, right? We talk about like, for Vickie talks about a salience landscape and Peterson talks about a priori structure that without that, we can't see things. I was thinking, what are these women missing in their a priori structure and their salience landscape? What is it that's happened to them? And then CS Lewis, when he writes about the men without chests, it's, it has to do with perception because it's like, that's what they were missing. They were missing a perception. Like they had been educated out of the normal perception or the normal emotional reactions or sentiment that the perception of things that were beautiful or noble were supposed to evoke in them. That's right. And that's what he meant when he said that they were men without chests. Right. That whatever it was that was connecting the head to the perception had had to flow through this middle space and they were missing it. So they were disconnected. Right. Yes. So they couldn't see the real qualities and virtues in things. They couldn't see through things to that they're lacking the, they're lacking the, you know, we have these five senses, but we have these additional senses basically. And one of these is the numinous. And with that comes courage, which is obviously, you know, someone with a chest, they have courage. Lewis brings that out. And no, that's right. So for the women, I thought this is kind of what I came up to. Women would naturally find motherhood attractive and they would naturally respond appreciatively to fatherhood. But what's gone wrong is that they have been educated to think that those emotions don't tell them anything about the virtues of motherhood or fatherhood, but that those feelings are artifacts of social construction designed to fit them into a subservient role in the patriarchy. Yep. And so they have to internally reject any sentiment connected with them. Yep. And once they do that, then having rejected that sentiment toward motherhood in themselves, then they reject the fatherhood. The evidence of fatherhood is good. It's right, it's just sitting right in front of their face. Yep. They reject. Yep. They can't connect the fatherhood to the motherhood inside of themselves. Yep. Does that make sense what I'm saying? It makes perfect sense. It makes perfect sense and well said. Well, I had an experience, a personal experience of this was so strange. This is very, very personal, but I'm going to say it anyway. So this is probably about 10 years ago or so, and well past the time when I'm nursing my babies or having babies, well past the change of life. And I'm in a store, pushing a shopping cart, and then the next aisle over, I hear a newborn baby suddenly cry. And you know they have a very distinctive cry. It almost sounds like a little lamb. Yeah. And immediately I felt a tingle in my breast. That same feeling that women have when they're nursing babies and they're, and they suddenly, they smell their baby or they see their baby and that milk lets down. Although I don't have any milk, but I had that sensation so strongly and I was so surprised at it that it would happen as like this reflex. You know, so many years after I've nursed any babies. Yep. So that made me start to think and what you said about how we have other perceptions and I thought, well, could I say that the breast is an organ of perception? Absolutely. You think so? I thought so. Yes, we are embodied creatures. I mean, one of the things that makes us so, we are absolutely covered with nerves. You know, all of these, you know, part of the, I heard one thing, I'm not a scientist or anything, but we're covered with all of this hair. And all of these hairs are attached to nerve endings. And so one of the reasons we have this giant brain is we are so, we're just, we're covered with this capacity to sense things. And no, I think that's exactly right. I think we have far more senses than just the five that let's say John Locke imagined brings input onto this blank slate inside. The sense of the numinous, it just seems silly not to imagine that we have these senses. Now, having said that, it doesn't mean we always get things right with these other senses. That's a whole different story because it's wrong with our eyes and our touch and we get things wrong. But to deny these other senses completely seems to me just just not reasonable. Well, when I was thinking about whether the breasts were organs of perception, I had the funniest thought because I thought about, I thought about Hooters. And I thought about how they make the eyes of the owl like they relate the woman's breasts to the eyes of an owl. And I thought, that's like an iconography of saying something. Isn't that funny? It's a good thing that you're not monetizing this video, Paul, because you'd have Hooters ads and you'd be leading people astray because I said that. But isn't that funny? That is, that is. And then I thought, and it's an owl. And I thought, oh, you know, the owl, talk about a mythological irony. The owl is a sacred bird for the goddess Athena, who's the goddess of feminine purity and domestic arts. Other things, but I just thought that's so ironic. And so that's what I came up with. I finally came up with that the correlation of the men without chest was women without breasts. I think that's really good. And so the bottom line is like in our, in our time, the problem with women is too many boobs, not enough breasts. Oh, that's excellent. That's excellent. I thought you would like that. Yes. Yes. Yes. That's good. That's good. I don't mind. Such good stuff. Well, I just, it just all sort of started to come together, together with me for me. But without the things that you said, you know, pointing out about CS Lewis and that's so such a rich source of material, everything that he says, I don't think I would have ever put it together. But, you know, this whole conversation, John Verbecky and Sevilla, I've listened to all of her stuff now. I got caught up with her, you know, on her channel. A lot of stuff too. Yeah, she does. She does. And it's great because I'm probably not going to sit down and read the motorcycle, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance. Although I actually think I did read it years ago, but it just went right past me at that time. But it's so good to listen to her go through the chapters and explain it, you know, explain each one and what she's where she's coming from on it and everything. I just think it's great. So the second thing that I want to talk to you about was John Verbecky. Okay. All right. You've been watching all of his stuff, right? I just got up this weekend. Okay, good. I think it's like the most humane. That's the word that comes to my mind when I think about this project that he's doing is how humane it is, which I think is like when I say that it's humane, I'm thinking, you know, there's lots of people who could say, well, there's this problem with humanity or society. And then I care about society or humanity, but they don't care about the individual person. But you can see in John Verbecky that he sees a big problem, but that he has his, his heart open. He's a man with a chest. See to the to the individual person who's being affected and wants to find something to do with the problem. To the individual person who's being affected and wants to find some way to help them to get through it. But I was cracking up when I listened to his, his lecture on the romantic romanticism. That was a good one. It was so good. But you know, there was one point in the lecture where he goes, we can't believe in God anymore. We can't religion. We can't do religion anymore. Did you remember him saying that? I caught my attention. And you know what I thought? I thought of you immediately because I thought who's the we I'm talking to my phone. I'm saying, oh, who's the we Paul Vander Klang taught me to say who's the we because the we is not you and me, obviously. Right. It's got to be another we. Yeah. Well, and I, you know, I've got a deep respect for that because, you know, Sevilla, for example, she and I talked about this a bit. Job and I have talked about it quite a bit. There are many people I am now because of this channel in contact with many people who quite honestly say, well, Jim, another I'm actually going to talk to Jim right after I talk to you this afternoon. We had a conversation before. You know, there are a lot of people who that they're they're honestly telling me and I completely believe them. They want to believe, but can't. And and I think I think people like you and I, for whom belief I've never stopped believing. And in fact, in probably some of the darker periods of my life, I found that the suffering made me believe more and it drove me in, you know, and that was such a whereas it meant for many people, they get driven out of belief. And so I think the church had had really better not guilt people about their frustrated attempts and desires to believe, but their difficulties and and for the church to for the church to, you know, try to guilt and shame people for not believing. I think this is a I think this is a terrible thing. But at the same time, when he says, you know, we can't believe I thought I see people coming to belief all the time. Yeah, yeah. I felt the same way. I thought, you know, and I don't think it's a majority that can't believe it looks to me like the majority like the majority of people do believe in something transcendent. Right. Yeah. So, and then when he and then he talked about, I think more within his conversation with Jordan Greenhall talked about trying to build And I thought, well, that whoever that we is they don't want religion but they have. They have a need for church they feel like they need church right. Yeah, maybe they, they need to have the church first. Before believe in other words, maybe they just need to be in the church without believing, like you've said to some people just go ahead and go to church whether you believe or not I thought that was. Did you look at the conversation with Jordan Greenhall. Yes. Um, I don't know what you thought about. I had some thoughts about it. I want to hear your thoughts. Well, okay. First of all, I have a great deal of respect for the conversation, because I thought it was a very hard conversation and I thought they were trying to do very hard things in the conversation and that they were Although it's the kind of conversation they would recommend to other people I think very few people could do that kind of conversation. Yes. Where you're trying to operate on many levels at once and pay attention to many things at once. You know, to the, you're trying to pay attention to what you're saying and what the other person is saying in the context of the larger project that you're doing together in the context of the larger problem in society you're trying to address. Plus you're trying to also pay attention to the your own react responses, way down even into the physical and the other person's responses in that way also and stop and address those when they come up and that's a hard that was all that was hard and it was interesting to watch them to watch them do that I thought. But at the same time, at some point, it like, it felt to me like they were getting to meta, like they're having a conversation about how to have a conversation about how to have a conversation about how to have a conversation, you know, and I felt like, okay, they have, you know, you think about Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs right it's like they've gotten up to the top of it, and they've jumped off and they're floating off into the stratosphere somewhere. And it's like, I want to take the rope and I'm pulling back down and go, I don't want to say, guys, guys, what are you eating? What are you feeding people? Which is like, that's at the bottom of Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs right is is what you eat. And I remember you saying in one of your videos where you were talking about people think we think we've made so much progress, but we don't know what to eat right. That's right. That's right. And I thought that's it's like, we think we can do the self transcendence thing because we think we've got the base of the hierarchy covered, but we really don't. And this is, you know, you can see it in like how all the guidelines have changed like, you know, yes, we're supposed to eat butter and eggs and fat and animal fat is good and fatty meat is good and low fat milk and low fat cheese is bad and vegetable oils are bad and animal fat is good now and everything's flipping all the guidelines are flipping as the new nutritional information come. But it's even worse. It's not just that we don't know what to eat. It's like, we don't even know how what we eat nourishes us. Yeah. Right. And that's spiritually too. I mean, that can apply even spiritually as well as physically, because what we found out in the past, like 20 years or so is that we don't digest their own food. Right. I mean, we digest part of it like in our stomach, we digest meat, but much of our food is digested by other things that live in us. That's right. And digest our food and feed us. And they even it turns out that it's the bacteria in the gut that make most of our serotonin. Have you heard about that? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Most the gut bacteria make most of our serotonin. Well, that's so that's that's not the end of the thing about the food, because there's another thing that's like a parallel thing is we used to think we knew how plants got their nutrition. They they send their roots out into the soil and through capillary action they suck nutrients up, you know, through their roots. That's not how they get their food at all. Turns out that plants through their roots sense things into the soil. They're called exudates that they send into the soil, sugars and carbohydrates and various compounds they send into the soil that are chemical signals. And these chemical signals call to the plant, the various microbes that live in the soil, the the back soil bacteria, the micro riser fungi, the nematodes call these things to the plant and those things feed the plant. Really? Yes, some plants put as much as 50% of the of the of the carbohydrates that they make back into the soil to communicate with this with this soil life. Not only that, the communication with the soil life even communicates things from one plant to another. If you are if you are not caring for the soil so that has an abundance of this other organic stuff, your plant is not going to have what what the plant should have. Exactly, exactly. Well, think about this. Now scientists are starting to think that there's actually some sort of communication that goes on between our gut microbiome and the soil microbiology. We're thinking that that occurs through the food that we eat, which means that food is information. Karen's going to like that point. Wow. Okay, so food is information. Now imagine that you're eating food. Let's say you're eating food and the average American plate, the food is traveled 2000 miles. So if you're eating food that comes from far away, what are you telling your gut microbiome? I am not at home. I don't belong here in this place. Or if you're feeding food that's been grown in soil that's depleted or that the microbiology has in the soil has been killed by chemicals. Right. It's been eradicated. You're telling your what message is the food giving your gut microbiome. Everything out there is dead and dying. And so what do you have? You'll have a sense of scarcity. That's something that Jordan Greenhall and John Baveghi talked about is that people seem to have a pervasive feeling of scarcity. But I'll tell you something interesting. If you plant food in your own yard, you tend to the microbiology in the soil of your own yard and then you eat that food, an amazing thing happens. Joel Salatin, who's a wonderful farmer, said he had to have a kitchen garden because he wanted to feel like he was nestled in abundance. And if you're eating food local to you that with the soil microbiology is being cared for, you feel like you're nestled in abundance. That feeling of scarcity goes away. And that's why when I'm thinking about the things that, you know, John Baveghi and Jordan Greenhall are talking about and the problems they're seeing with people and I'm coming back and I'm thinking, well, what are you feeding people? What are you eating? You know, because we're not at the point where we've climbed successfully up Maslow's hierarchy so we can jump off the top of self actualization into self transcendence. We have to bring the bottom with us. And that's what, you know, like Jonathan Pagio talks about Jesus connecting the top and bottom of the hierarchy. So the bottom, the food gets connected to the top and to the transcendent, which is exactly what the Eucharist does, right? Because in the Eucharistic prayer, what do we say? You know, when we give the Father thanks for this bread we offer, fruit of the earth and work of human hands, it will become our spiritual food. And we thank the Father for this wine we offer, fruit of the vine and work of human hands, it will become our spiritual drink. So you're taking the bottom, right, and you're connecting it to the top. But you don't just climb up the top and ignore the bottom and jump off the top of the hierarchy. They have to be connected through Christ. Like that's what Jonathan Pagio said, the top and bottom of the hierarchy are connected through Christ. And I like, what's her name? Sevilla with a quality existence. A quality existence. She talked about food, the importance of food for our psychology. I remember her talking about that one of her lectures. And also another person who's very into the food thing is the anadromist. Anadromist, yeah. Anadromist. He likes to feed people. Yeah, he likes to feed people. You know, he talks a lot on his channel about having meals and the importance of feeding people and gathering people around food. So that was my thought about that conversation that I felt like Vervecky and Greenhall had kind of come untethered from the earth in some way. You know, a little bit in their conversation. And that this is a connection that has to be made in order for this, you know, project of conversation or whatever to work. Does that make sense? Yes, it does. That's really good. That's really helpful. You know, I've been watching. So a lot of the people who have reached out to me, a lot of the people who have been greatly helped by Jordan Peterson, for example, were suffering from depression. And a number of those people have also, like Peterson, worked to adjust their diets in a variety of different ways. And someone recently I was talking to and they were they pointed me to I've already forgotten the channel, but, you know, treating depression with diet. Because I'll have people come and talk to me about this stuff. And I'll often recommend, you know, a lot of basics, a lot of basics. You're going to have to, you know, when do you wake up? When do you go to sleep? What are you eating? Are you exercising? I mean, all of these basic, basic things. And just, you know, I'm so John and I are going to have a conversation next week. And I'm really looking forward to that conversation because I agree with you completely. Very much a sense that he's a man. He's a man with a chest. He's got a big heart. He wants to help people. He cares for people. You know, both he and Peterson are very much that way, even though, you know, they've got some differences in terms of of their projects. Now, it's it's one of one of the things that I know one of the things when I think about, you know, Verveckis project, the you know, I as a pastor, I'm I'm not an academic. I'm not a scholar. And, you know, I'm kind of pastors. I'm kind of a go between a priest in a way in some ways. You know, I'm a pastor. I'm a go between kind of this highfalutin talk and people's ordinary everyday lives. And and that's one of the the key things where we're John also, you know, it's interesting how the thing that moves Jordan Peterson is that when Peterson when someone comes to Peterson and says, you really helped me. I mean that as we've seen many times that when Peterson hears that he knows, OK, I'm fulfilling my calling. This is this is what I want to do. I want to help ordinary people sort out their lives, repair the relationships with their parents, you know, be able to to have children and have a home that's in order. All of those things. Well, I think John Verveckis wants a very similar thing. Difficulty at some point. And I love I love his project. I've really been blessed following through it. I've learned so much. But at some point you have to figure out, OK, how how does it get down to people who will never that they'll never they'll never study Kant or Hegel or Pascal. And this is why I love the church, because the church majors in this area for for every one person that might be interested in this highfalutin psychology. There are five or six or ten who are, you know, going to the liturgy, whether that's a high liturgy or a low liturgy. And it's amazing, even a low liturgical tradition like mine, how people cling on to that liturgy and say, first we do this and then we do this and then we do this. And these are the words we say. And these are the stories that we know. And these are the the ways that we trust. This is basic, basic, basic stuff, as you said, all the way down into into what we eat. So I know you're right. And and so then I did a Melanie Bruce is a Brewster. I think it is she I've used the video before. She went to a skeptic conference and did a talk about church people and why basically why atheists can't do church. And she's just exhorting them to meet together and talk together and form communities. And I listened to that. And I think, yeah. But what people form communities around is, well, so often a table. I did my I did my conversation with with Rod Hugen, who I have to any excuse to have Rod Hugen on the channel is a good one because Rod, in my opinion, is is just the epitome of what a pastor should be when he planted that church. A big part of how he planted that church is he had people over to his house and he gave them a meal. And that's how the church, in a sense, started. And that gets this gets back into some of the Peterson lectures about women are women are women share food and just the food is such a basic thing. And so the the food that Rod would share would be food he would make with his hands. And that, of course, condors up the best feast. And, you know, it's it's if you want to change the world, you know, prepare a table before them. Right. Well, you know, and another thing about about the food is that or you are the plants. When you talk about, you know, how how him preparing it with his hands is that people people who do herbalism really understand that when you make an herbal preparation, your intentions matter. You know, and that there is communication between you and the plants so that so that if so that plants will call to you in a way or make themselves known to you when you have a particular problem or a particular illness or something. And I had an experience at my house. I have Achillea, which is an herb growing in in my yard. And I had a little a woman and her little granddaughter over and was talking to them. And the little girl kept going over to the Achillea and just touching it and looking at it. And and and I told the grandmother, I said, she that plant might be calling to her. She might need some of that of that herb. And it actually is an herb that is particularly good for children. So, you know, you see the the plant, there's all this communication going on within the food. And it seems to me that one of the things that Jesus is teaching us through the Eucharist is that food is supposed to be the center of our life. And it's I don't mean in an unhealthy way like, you know, like gluttony. Right. Right. Like gluttony. But I think we feel like it's tremendous progress we've made in society because we have fewer and fewer people working with food, working on the land. We feel like somehow that's and that's progress. Or because we can devote fewer and fewer acres of land to the production of food. And we can we think we're going to put the plants in high rise buildings and feed them hydroponically and totally disconnected from the earth. And that that's just going to be OK. And I don't think it's going to be OK like that. I think that we need to be have that direct connection as much as much as possible. Yeah. Well, it's the interesting dichotomy between the Greeks who, you know, the Greeks are always floating up with this Gnostic tendency. And here you have this image of God the Father in the beginning of Genesis making a man out of the earth. Yeah. Right there. He makes a man out of the earth. And I'll always often remind people I say we are the stuff of earth and the breath of God. That is in the Bible. That is what human beings are. God breathes life into him and he becomes a he becomes a nephesh. And that is that is what we are. Well, and the same thing. Think about the way the Holy Spirit is over the earth at the beginning and then over the womb of the Virgin Mary in the second creation. That's another thing that connects our bodies to the earth. Yeah. So anyway, well, those were the things I wanted to talk to you about. You know, you and I, Mary, I know you and I could talk for hours. I have no question about that. And this this, of course, was again a delight. And you were I shouldn't I, you know, I teased I teased poor Esther and she she still won't let it go about her colonizing my channel. And but you can you go ahead and colonize my channel, Mary. You're you're just fine. It's just fine. I always enjoy talking to you. And I'm so I'm so grateful that you that you stumbled across my channel and and you, you know, you and live in the comments section. And it's it's just been it's all just been a real blessing. So I deeply appreciate it. Well, thank you, Paul. And continue blessings on your wonderful work. And maybe we'll talk again in a few months. OK, that sounds good, Mary. You take care. You take care, too. Bye bye.