https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Vbq4vrRrM5k

 Well, how are you? Oh, now I don't hear you. Oh, how about now? Yep, I hear you now. Is it okay? Yep. Okay. Let me just make sure the audio is okay. All right. So, how was your day? My day's been good. My day's been good. I... What day is today? Today is... Monday. Monday. Boy. It's been a crazy week for me. I had two funerals last week. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. And so I had Sunday. Monday, I had a funeral. And then Saturday, I had a funeral. Then Sunday. So today's Monday. Okay. So, it's been... Two weekends. Yeah. Yeah. It's been a little busy. But I don't... Funerals, not that I want people to die, but funerals are times when people can be serious about things. So, there's... So, yeah. Funerals are often meaningful times, I'll say. Gotcha. Tell me a little bit about yourself. So I am 27. I'm a software engineer. I currently live in Chicago. I work for a healthcare startup. So mostly like I'm in development. I'm kind of starting to change careers a little bit. Maybe a latter move, but doing something different. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, I actually saw your video yesterday. Or today, actually. You released it today. It was quite good. It was an hour long prep. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Sometimes I feel like you have too much stuff to talk about because each little thing, right, you can expand on it forever. Yeah. And, I mean, that's actually why I like your videos too. They're just very thought provoking. It allows you to kind of like dig deeper into these other concepts and ideas that I'm kind of in a way maybe obsessive, you know? Like, you know, just like, oh, there's this book, you got to read it. So then you go look for that book and you read it. And then it's like now my bookcase is filled with books now that I haven't read. I just need to get on that. But it's just too many. Well, I've exploded a lot of people's bookshelves. And maybe bit by bit folks will catch up. So I don't know. Yeah. That's just what I do. So you found me through Jordan Peterson videos? I did. And I found Jordan Peterson through Joe Rogan, actually. I actually watched a lot of Joe Rogan's podcast. And then I saw Jordan Peterson. And that was very, very interesting because, you know, it's like he, I had a lot of questions growing up, right? And they were never answered in a sense, like, properly or even in a way that made sense to me, really. Like, I've always been kind of contrarian, right? So I don't really like mainstream thinking. I like eccentric people who think differently, who do things extraordinarily, right? But it's like, you never really are given the answer, right? And that's what I really like about Jordan Peterson. He kind of doesn't give you the answer, but he kind of gives you a direction. And I read like that. So what area of his work did you find most helpful? Psychology, actually. Like human psychology, human behavior. I really, like I was watching his personality lectures and they were really good because I took psychology in college, but it was like surface level, like, okay, read this book and yeah, here are some primary sources, but you know, you don't have to read them. You know, just do whatever you need to do. So I actually studied physics in college. So I wasn't like a computer science major or anything, but I ended up going to software engineering. But I mean, I liked physics because it kind of gave you a lot of good answers. Also, well, I mean, like I was pretty good at math and, you know, like I was like dead set on becoming a physicist or whatever, but that didn't turn out so well in college because you realize that what you think you like, right, in the future is not exactly what you're good at or what you enjoy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So. Well, I was going to say it's true about college psychology. I had college psychology courses and they turned wine to water and you get on and you listen to Jordan Peterson, you think, boy, if I had a psych prof like that. Exactly. Yeah. Totally different. Not to say that. I don't know if any of my old psych profs, I think most of them are dead, but no offense. But yeah, watching Jordan Peterson, I think I never had a psych class like that. Yeah. I've had a lot of great teachers like growing up like in high school and college. But yeah, Jordan Peterson is kind of like a different animal. Like he really, there is so much content, honestly. It's like you don't have to go to his office hours to listen to him, tell you something profound, right? Yeah. I think that's what I like. Yeah. It's true. Yeah. I actually wrote a lot of notes that I kind of wanted to talk about, but seeing your previous videos with the other guys where I think it was like, I wrote them down, like Brendan and Luke, they kind of just went with it. I've kind of already had like this conversation in my head like 10 times with you actually. Really? Cool. I haven't had it once. No, what I mean is that, you know, like, I'm pretty introverted, so I think about things like a lot. And yeah, it's as if I've had conversations with you in my head, but of course, they're never like... Uh oh. You're froze. How it is. Now you're on froze. Good. So I'm just going to try not to like too much. Oh, sorry. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, you just froze momentarily. What do you got on your list? What are some general areas you're interested in? I'm interested in a lot of things. I mean, you know, like just watching Jordan Pearson, that introduced me to a lot of different ideas, like a lot of philosophers I've never really like looked at or like even like the general idea of like philosophy that people can disagree on these very fundamental things that are essentially like the tools we use to interpret the world and that they do change how you look at the world. Like I'm totally different after all this exploration, right? But I mean, like one of the first things on my list, I think I wrote down some stuff on that calendar, but you can forget about that. Oh, yeah. Like, that's all right. I mean, I mean, there might be some stuff I touch on, but it's like it was too short anyway to really talk about things. But one of the things I was kind of that I was interested in, but also kind of bothered me because of like, like most people are not ready to have a kind of conversations that are that are put out, you know, like on YouTube or just just like political or philosophical because they don't have the vocabulary or they don't have the breadth knowledge, right? To kind of like even touch on it. And it's really strange because like, you know, they take a lot of shortcuts when they think about things like I've been I've been like, you know, looking at some some controversial figures in history and there's some modern ones today, of course, right? Like Trump and Henry Kissinger and like Steve Bannon, right? They're all like even Dick Cheney, right? And they're all, you know, people view them as evil or like criminals or like these political enemies of the United States or something, right? But when you listen to them, they just have a different view of the world, right? And like you can learn a lot from them. But but people will say I mean, this is one thing about Jordan Peterson as well, right? Is that people will say, you know, listen to them is like listening to Hitler or something or like they're not ready to have a conversation about taking someone ideas like not seriously but just even like considering them. I mean, what do you think about that? I think when people use a line like listening to them is listening to Hitler, they usually that that's kind of a rhetorical device to dismiss a person's perspective. That doesn't mean that the person's perspective that they want to dismiss is right or wrong. But it's it's not helpful, especially if you know, I appreciated Jordan Peterson's appearance on the Bill Maher show when you know, everyone was just kind of, you know, beating on Trump, beating on Trump, beating on Trump. And Peterson said, yeah, but you know, half of the people in the country voted for him. And you think what you want about Trump. But there and a good number of those people, some of them voted for him. A good number of those people voted against your tribe. And these are the people you share a country with. These are the people that are voting and paying taxes and serving in the army and serving in the government. And and so at some point, you're going to have to sit down and actually live with these people. And as a pastor, you know, people like to imagine these big tribes out there. But, for example, in C.S. Lewis, C.S. Lewis has had this book, The Great Divorce. And in the book opens in a city where you can have anything you want just by thinking of it. And you think, boy, that sounds like heaven. And the city is this massive city that just keeps growing out and out because people keep building bigger and bigger houses. But what they're doing is getting away from each other because they can only get along with people who think just like them. But I don't care. Two people decide to marry each other and they stand up at an altar and say, I love you for for the rest of my life. And a few years later, that's the person in the world. They can't stand the most, even if they have so much in common. So there's something about us like that. And so if you know, it's really important to. All right. So you want to dismiss someone and call them, you know, call them a Hitler. All right. But that's that's actually a pretty lazy approach to differences. Right. I think what's interesting as well, like in addition, in addition to people calling someone else that, is that it's also a tactic to dissuade people from listening to them. Right. Oh, yes. Dissuade other people. And, you know, that's that's very counterproductive. Right. But it is. And, you know, and I think, you know, obviously a lot of that was done to Peterson a number of months ago when he first kind of peaked. And then all these news outlets, well, let's label him in a certain way. And out there in the normal world, when I might mention Jordan Peterson, oh, he's right. Transphobic or he's, you know, misogynist. And I'm thinking, have you listened to the guy? No. But OK. No. But OK. That's yeah, I'm not even that vocal about it. Like I know none of my friends even know that I listen to them. And he put this up. Maybe it'll be on the Internet for the world to see. No. Yeah. I was afraid that it would go viral or something. I would have to listen to my voice. Right. And that would really suck. Yeah. Well, well, the way my videos go viral, you're probably pretty safe. Maybe a couple thousand people see it. But in the great scheme of things, it ain't much. You know, I've actually like been not necessarily a part of, but I've seen a lot of YouTubers rise. Right. Like they go from one thousand subscribers to like ten thousand, fifty thousand, hundred thousand. And it's very interesting because like it's like what they have in common is that they just kind of do it out of love and not out of like fame or and sometimes out of obsession. Right. It's like, oh, I got to do this because it's, you know, I like doing this and no one's stopping me. So, yeah. And that's always really cool because like it shows you that, you know, the that they're really having fun doing it. And I think I think that's how YouTube should be. Right. It's like if someone wants to speak up or, you know, give it a piece, they should be able to like just say what they want to say. Yeah, I agree. I wouldn't do this if I wasn't having fun. Yeah. I'm just surprised anybody watches. I mean, that to me was the big shock. You kind of take my mind about pastors, actually. So that was a good thing. Yeah. Oh, good. I'm glad because pastors are people. It's just people like my dad is actually a pastor. Oh, really? Yes. Yes. He is. Well, I mean, we were first like I don't know, but probably Methodist or something in the beginning. And then he now pastors at a Baptist church. But like you say, he's like a what's it called? It like, you know, have two jobs or buy a vocational. Buy a vocational. Yeah. So, you know, it's whatever. Like I stopped going to church when I was a bit younger, but he's always been in church. And I mean, like something interesting about that, that was like, you know, like my parents are not from the United States. Like my parents immigrated from Laos, although I, you know, we're not violation or whatever, like minority group. But it was interesting because like when they first came to United States, of course, they didn't really have a community. Right. Like, you know, when you live in the old country or in Southeast Asia, your community is the village. And you have like, you know, your extended family and they're extended family and so on and in different villages. So then coming to the United States, it's kind of like it was all, you know, disjointed. Right. Like, where do you build a community? And so, of course, the people who actually sponsored like these immigrants are usually churches. Right. I see Lutheran churches in the 70s and 80s. But it was interesting to really like think about it, like especially for my grandmother, right. Like a person who grew up in Laos who didn't have very much money and like where did she find her place in the world? Right. Like, where does she find her her spot where she can be useful or especially if you can't speak English, if you're like already 50. So that was just kind of interesting to kind of like introspect. That's really interesting, especially with a transition as big, I would imagine, as Laos to the United States. That's a big cultural jump. Yeah. Especially if you lived, grew up in a village and then come to, you know, come to maybe Chicago or a major city in the United States. Yeah. Yeah. You know, even, you know, the Christian Reformed Church that I grew up in, you know, that was it's a church made up mostly of Dutch immigrants. And they were coming from a developed country, you know, to a developed country. But even so, you know, they clustered together in churches and they clung to those churches and they built their Christian schools and they they stuck to their own as much as they could just to somehow weather that immigrant shock. It's a big deal. Yeah, it definitely is. It definitely is. Like the whole cultural divide is pretty huge too. Yeah. Like people don't really understand it if they're not part of it. Yeah. A lot of the traveling I was doing in the last few weeks was to part of my denomination visiting Korean classes, which are groups of churches in Southern California. And, you know, on one hand, you've got the pain of the immigrant shock when you come in. But then you begin to realize your children are growing up American and they've still got some of you. They got some of the culture. But in those immigrant communities, and it's much more than it was, say, in the late 19th century when my family came over or even, you know, the early 20th century, because now you come into a major metropolitan area. The culture is so strong in the CRC. You know, you just had your church. You dealt with people maybe in the business world, but there was no TV, maybe a radio. Now, boom, it's all open. Yeah, it's, you know, like entirely like, like the culture surrounds you. Right. Yeah. I mean, that was one thing about like Christianity, too, that people don't really understand is that, you know, you're surrounded by all of all these Christian traditions, all these cultural touchstones, right? Yeah. That you're not even aware of, really. Yeah. Like, the idea that, I mean, this is common among like all cultures, but like the idea that fidelity is the very, or like breaking fidelity is a very taboo thing, right? And it's, I mean, it's interesting, too, because like, it's something that's culturally like, you know, taboo, but then everyone does it. It would seem as though the words and actions are very different from each other, right? Yeah. And I guess when Jordan Peterson says like, he acts as though he believes in God, he must like follow that. He acts in that way, right? Where he takes the commandment, like, thou shalt not commit adultery, right? He takes it to heart, or like in his actions. Which is interesting because, you know, like that's, I think you said it before, it's like the only times that it matters are when, you know, it comes up, right? Like, you can, there's no, there's no power in following that rule until that happens. That's right. Until there's the opportunity. No, that's right. Because thou shalt not commit adultery is an easy rule to follow if there's never an opportunity. I've never done it. Good for you. But, you know, when an opportunity arises, well, then you're tested. Yeah, of course. That's true. It's very true. Yeah, and that's what's really interesting. Like, you know, people would just think it's a bunch of rules or something, but it's like, it's when it matters that you become, you embody this theme, right? And when, and even if you've, you know, I've seen this experience too, if people have, say, left the church, and they're just kind of going along, going along, and then something happens. And then suddenly, all of that stuff that they were raised in gets energized. And then suddenly, oh, now I understand my parents. Now I understand the importance of that. And as a kid, you don't know because you're just a kid. But as life goes on, you begin to think, oh, wow, there's something there. Yeah, I was shocked, actually, when I heard from my friends when they, when they all said that they have either been cheated on or had cheated on someone else. And that was a big shock to me because like, you know, like, you know, you grow up thinking that, wow, people don't do that or that, you know, it's not Christian like or whatever. Yeah. But then it's so, I guess for them, it was just so easy to do, right? Yeah, yeah. Well, and people are complicated and they... Yeah. Well, the statistics are, you know, nearly 50 percent, which is a huge statistic. And they're not bad people or like unlikable people either. No, no, no. It's like they feel like they don't belong in this relationship, so they just date someone else. Yeah. Yeah. Because to get out of, because to get out of the present relationship would be, you know, horrendously costly and painful. So I'll maintain this over here and keep this on the side. And to be honest, you know, thinking back in terms of my professional world, I haven't had a lot of adulteries in my church. Yeah. Well, that's the thing, right? So my co-work actually challenged me on this, but it's like my Christian friends actually, so I've like kind of separated groups of friends. Yeah. I have not heard that so much on their side. Yeah. It's mostly my more agnostic, like, you know, anxious friends. Yeah. Well, I think there is something. And Peterson mentioned it, even though he doesn't go to church, but he mentioned that there is something. And it's not just you're hearing the rule or that it's a rule in the community. It's that these norms get embodied in the community. And generally speaking, if someone has an affair, they're out of the church because they might find another church, but it's just you've broken trust with not just your nuclear family, but your entire community. And so everybody understands that at a deep level. And so that is a that power of accountability. And I mean, and here's the here's the thing about sin and temptation. Yeah. Part of its opportunity, but part of it is consequence. And, you know, if if you violate that norm and the consequences severe doesn't mean it never happens, but it does mean it gives you a little bit more support to do what you say you want to do. Yeah, I don't know. Like, I don't want to sound as though I'm like, like, put it on Christianity as though that's like the thing that's going to save you from that. But I think I mean, there's this maybe it like has to do with like, like a temperament as well, you know, like more virtuous perhaps are more like drawn to Christianity or something. Yeah. But I mean, that might not be true either. Like, I don't know what exactly is like people's motives to do things. But I mean, it's, it's good to just have it like outline right. It's kind of like, I don't know, there's like this riddle like, you know, speak and I appear or something. And then it's kind of like that. It's like, once it exists as a, you know, like if you have like a mathematical like a like preposition or a proposition or something, right. Well, once you have a theorem, right, then that's proven for all time. And it's kind of like, yeah, it's kind of like, once it's there, right, then you can see it and you can say, okay, this is true and this is not true, something kind of like adultery is bad or something. It's people are so complicated. I've, you know, of course I know I've known people who committed adultery, married their, you know, that's unusual. Most of the people that I know that have committed adultery didn't wind up sticking with the lover nor the wife. And I had everything blow up and it was a mess. And then they pick up someone else down later and maybe they learned from their mistakes. Maybe they didn't. But the truth about sin too is that once you do it once, it's easier to do the second time. You know how to do it. You've created the neural pathways and we're complicated creatures. We really are. Yeah. It's almost 30 minutes and I feel like I haven't even touched on the thing I actually wanted to talk about. I got 15 more minutes. So I don't have someone after you so we can do another 15 minutes. Did you have someone before me? Yes. This is my third chat today. Okay, excellent. We'll see if the other ones get posted. What I usually do is I'll send you a copy and then you can tell me, unless you want to tell me at the end of it, yeah, go ahead and post it. Otherwise, I'll send you a copy and you can decide and I'll post it if you want to. Well, it depends. I mean, it depends how it goes, right? Yeah. I feel like if you feel like it's a good chat then... I think it's been good so far. And again, this is... I mean, I told one of the other guys today, I backed into this. I mean, I've always found people interesting. And so I love talking to people, but I didn't think anybody else would care to watch. So who knows? Who knows? Great videos. I didn't understand that pastors can know so much philosophy. Because usually when you go to a regular church or something, the guy is just reading off of the book or he has a sermon that's prepared, right? And he doesn't talk about St. Augustine or Clinas or even like John Stuart Mill or like John Locke, David Hume. People who have like profound insights about the human condition, right? So I mean, that's like... That's very helpful for me. Well, thank you. So what's the big thing on your list? I have a lot of stuff. Let me find one that's actually good. Let's see. Well, I mean, you know, I really like your analysis of Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson, actually. I think they're very good. Like, they're very long, too. Yeah, they're very long. And you know, there's just so much stuff. Like, there's... Sometimes I feel like... Like, sometimes I feel like you're strawmanning Sam Harris too much. Although you do have a lot of great points. And I'm sure like Sam is aware of like a lot of his biases or his like his understanding of human nature and things like that. So, of course, I mean, I think you're also right that he is generally flawed in his, I guess, assessment of what people believe and how they get to that point, right? I think Jordan Peterson is much more on the mark. I think he has the right idea that there are these like a priori structures, as you like to say, yeah, that are kind of like... That are there that actually, you know, get you to that point of religion, right? It's not as though... It's not as though like religion is something that kind of just appears like... Like what appears without a history, you know, like nothing does, right? Like our bodies or our social system, our neural system is, you know, something that is carried on throughout evolution, right? So it's very hard to say, like even even these names like religion, that they can just like disappear. Although, I mean, I guess something is fair, but it's hard to say that something just won't come in and take its place, you know? But I think you... Yesterday, or it might have been a few days ago when you had like a talk with Luke, you were talking about how Sam Harris kind of like... I think that the world can be free of conflict, right? Or that if everyone is just rational, then everything will be fine and good. And everyone will act rationally and virtuously. Of course, I don't think he believes that, but I also don't think you're wrong or Lucas wrong either. I think Sam thinks it's too easy of a project to get there. I'd be curious to sit down with him and his wife and say, how rational is this relationship? Yeah. I think it's very rational, yeah. Let me see how that reason works on your wife. And I'm not saying anything about women. I'm just saying, like I said earlier, two people get close and boy, that's when you see stuff. Yeah, it is irrational. It's like, you know, there's no reason why you should put yourself before someone else, right? That's a, I guess, you know, not economically rational. Not necessarily like... That's the best thing to do, right? In any, like, theoretical situation either. Well, there's so many... part of the difficulty with rationality is that not only are there so many potential goals or like the video I made today, potential ends that you might be seeking, but there are also so many nuances to circumstance. So to put yourself, to put someone else ahead of you, well, that might make a lot of sense if it's your child. Well, how about if it's someone else's child? And then, so what's the goal? Is it the preservation of the species? Is it the preservation of our tribe? Is it the, you know, there's... the world is just so complex and rich that then to say, well, this is the rational choice. Well, but like I said before, rationality is more like a chain than, you know, like a globe. Yeah, I thought about that. Right, I thought about that a lot actually, how you said rationality is about self-consistency, right? And like another way to say it, it's like rationality is just like a tautology where all you have to do is take one statement and then try to figure out, okay, how can this statement be equal or something? Yep, yep, yep. And there's like a lot of, you know, a lot of things in rationality that can't, you know, this is like a idea by Hayek where you just can't have all the information, you know, like of something. Like in the marketplace, you can't coordinate all the actions that happen. So you don't know exactly what's going to be the result of all these individual actions. So you kind of just like let it be, right, in a sense. Don't try to like manage it. But his, you know, his thesis comes directly from this idea of like, okay, there's not enough information to know, so you're not supposed to like fidget with like these variables because it's going to affect other variables. And, you know, maybe that's kind of like Jordan Peterson's idea as well because like, how I see it is that, you know, Sam kind of doesn't, like, in my opinion, he doesn't really get Jordan Peterson's ideas, like, or his argument. Because, you know, you can look at these two arguments and say, okay, they're just equivalent. They're trying to, they're saying the same thing or they're trying, they're saying things that are minutely different, but they're very, like, very different. Because Jordan Peterson is much more like, yeah, it's going to happen and just let it be, right, like this is human nature. It's going to, you know, it's going to develop religion. But Sam is like, no, you can like control, control humans in a sense or control human nature. And like religion is just one cancer we can, you know, scrape out or something, which is very different, right? Like, it's completely different. It's part, part of the difficulty with Harris is that his definition of religion, I think, is overly narrow. And I don't think that, so if you define religion, it's a very hard thing to define. But if you say, well, religion is only a response we have to supernatural beings, well, then, you know, in terms of our secular society, yeah, we've pushed a lot of it out of the public square, but it just keeps leaking in. Yeah, it keeps evolving. And then even the, you know, and I also have problems with the natural supernatural distinction. I understand the distinction, but I don't think, I don't think that's how people actually function. Because we and I think Harris and Peterson basically say that at a point in the videos where we don't know where fiction comes from. You know, you sit down and, oh, and I think about a hobbit and a hobbit hole. Yeah. And then there are dwarves and there's a wizard, you know, Tolkien's making up stories for his kids and it just starts to take on a life of its own. Well, where does this come from? That's where Jung and other psychologists say, there's patterns. Yeah, maybe something's going on. Yeah. Yeah, speak of Jung, I think Jordan Peterson and you also talked about a book called Answer to Job about, and I was starting to read it, but I'm still kind of reading it, kind of intermittent. And it's quite a good book. It has a lot of very difficult words, like I've had before. So that's really good, you know, to introduce these ideas and Latin words and stuff. But it's very cool because he talks about a unconscious God becoming conscious in a sense. And that was kind of interesting because like in Genesis or so, God is more like this force nature. And he only really has presence in like in the presence of a human, right? Although I'm not sure you're the theologist that knows this. I don't really know it, you know? Well, I haven't read Answers for Job, so I haven't read much Jung and I have to read more and more of it, but I'm learning it slowly. There's just so much on my learning list. I know. Yeah. Some people are really annoyed by me because you need to read more Jung. Okay, I probably will, but I'm interested, but it's just going to take time. And if I'm making an hour video every day, it is limited. Yeah, I understand. That's why I use like audiobooks. So like I can use my Discover Time. Yep. No, I do the same thing. I do the same thing. Yeah, but Answers for Job is actually kind of a short book. It's like probably less than 100 pages. Oh, okay. Yeah, but it's just kind of difficult to read though because he goes through a lot of content. Yeah, but it's quite good. It's like he talks about, I mean, like, I think he covers the things that people are, or the things that people have a question about, you know, the book of Job. Why did God do this? Why did he have a wager with Satan? And why did he not like essentially apologize to Job at the very end, right? Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Now you've piqued my interest. Now I'm going to go out and buy it. See, you've accomplished what a whole bunch of Young fans have failed to. So, maybe I'll send you Patreon. Yeah. I think you just have a really nice way of like analyzing this idea that it was like a shift in thinking, you know, a shift in the Jewish people and how they viewed like the natural force of a monotheistic God, right? That, you know, it can take a life of its own or something where it's not just, what's the word, not just like a counselor or like a person guide, but someone who can actually act on his own accord in a way where you don't like, you know, like your shirt cloud, right? Is going to be a shirt because he's going to get you to the mountain or something. Well, I mean, this is like a shift to like, okay, this guy's, you know, by himself and he just goes up the mountain or something. Hmm. Really piquing my interest. I have to get this book now. That's a hard book though. Yeah. But no, that's because Job is such a fascinating book. And the, I mean, part of why I was doing at my, so I have my YouTube channel, then my church channel, and I've been doing Old Testament prophets. Those prophets are hardly, Christians don't pay hardly any attention to them except around the holidays. But if you spend time working through the story of Israel and just the slow motion disaster that it was and track what they're doing in terms of God and the veils and then God and what does God say and what is God doing? It's really an incredible thing. And I think most Christians, I think Christians would benefit. I think Christians would benefit from reading the Bible. Reading it as literature in a way. Yes. Well, when I was in seminary, that was one of the real, so Robert Alter, who, these are two of his books, I got to put my books on your shelf. But he teaches, he's pretty old now, I think, but he taught at Berkeley. And when I was in seminary, I remember reading Robert Alter and it was like, boom. Oh, all of this stuff that I never understood about the Bible, Robert Alter just kind of lays it out and says, this is what's going on. It's like, oh, now suddenly the book is coming alive. And now it's getting fun. So, yeah, there's a lot of interesting things about the Bible for sure. Yeah. Oh, there is a fascinating book. Well, if one of the conversations I had today was a guy who's been horribly sick and he had some amazing experiences and then he decided he was going to read the Bible and he said, I'm going to read it through cover to cover. That is no small thing. But it is an amazing book. And that's one of the points that Peterson keeps making to Harris that Harris doesn't seem to get. Peterson is making the point that, you know, this book has captivated human history in a way that no other book is even a close second. There's something about that that is not so easily dismissed as, ah, this is Iron Age bullcrap. No, no, you're really there's more going on there. Now you might not believe it's inspired. You might not believe it's special, but there is something unique about that book and all of human history. And and if you want to definitely. Yeah, and I'm surprised and disappointed that, you know, you would think that anybody getting a BA in just about anything would have to take a course on the Bible just to learn what's in it because it's so foundational in all of Western civilization. But we don't do it. Yeah. Well, I mean, like, there's this, I guess, this sort of, what do you call it, like, the subtitle, like, the great conversation, right? Throughout history. Close all the classics, all the. What do they call it in like. In like the great books or something. Yeah, it's very interesting because you compare that with other literature, right? Like, yeah, or, you know, like Odyssey. And, or the onion. And it's like, yeah, they're written in kind of the same way where they were supposed to be spoken, right? Like, you know, and it's like, yeah, that's that's really changed over over history. Yeah, they're verses, right? And I think not only is is there a crime in universities not teaching it, I think the bigger crime is that you go to a lot of churches and you can go to a church all your life and you won't know much of anything about the Bible. Oh, yeah, for sure. Yeah. And I don't mean that you don't know Bible trivia. Most people won't get that, but that you won't have a sense of how is this book put together? What is what are how are these stories? I mean, there's so much to learn about this book, but churches seem. Well, we want to get busy with all kinds of other foolishness. I mean, you would you would hope that if you wanted to learn the Bible, you could go to a church and you would learn the Bible. But boy, I'll tell you, you would have a hard time picking a church that would really be helpful in terms of getting to know this. So that's one of the things that, you know, with what I do as a pastor is I and I know sometimes my people complain, it's like, well, but it's no, you you should know this book. And that should be one of the main things we do. So that's how I feel, at least. Well, I've got a I've got a ski daddle. I got to run home and I got to take a phone call. But it was it was great talking to you, Michael. Yes, singer. And and best wishes to you. And who knows? Who knows? So let me know if you if I'll send this I'll send you a copy of it and you can let me know if you'd like to post it. I'd be happy to post it. And yeah, I'll take a look. Okay, real good. Thank you, Michael. Have a good evening. You too. All right. Bye bye.