https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1DtL5AGi6hA

 Hi, this is Paul. And today I have sort of a special thing. There might be a couple more of these. John Vendonk has been working on his, I always get the, I'm dyslexic, I always get the name wrong. John, what's the name of your little outfit here? The Estuary Leadership Support Network. The Estuary Leadership Support Network. And part of what we've been doing is training leaders to lead estuaries around the world. Now, there's always little links down below most of my videos, and there's a new link down there now, which has to do with a directory for the Estuary Support Network. And sort of what we're doing is that these estuaries and the list are being led by people who have gone through this program. So, but part of what I asked John if we could do would be to host some, let's say, model estuary meetings, and that's what these will be. Now, these folks have been doing this for at least a year now online. And the idea is that in the future, we won't just do these things online, we've got COVID and people are separated and all that. The idea is that a lot of these things will happen in person and not be recorded. But given the fact that they've been doing these online with Zoom, I thought it might be helpful to just have some of these conversations. And I don't know if the conversation will interest the viewer or not, but that has never stopped me posting things before, so why not start now? So I'm basically going to turn this over to John because John's been leading these meetings. And so we'll just get a chance to see how John does it and see what kinds of conversation it produces. So thank you all for letting me into your estuary meeting today. Thank you, Paul. And that is the key word that you just said there. We don't really know what's going to happen because we never have any pre-planned topics. We never know quite what subjects rise to the top. And we don't know what we're going to end up discussing in the end. But we can certainly walk through our initial protocol of how to get things on the table. And generally, when there are new people such as you are today, Paul, we generally like to start off by introducing ourselves to one another. And so David, why don't you introduce yourself, say where you're from, and then also say something about how you actually got here. What was the trajectory by which you ended up in this space with us today? So my name is Dave. I live in Germany. I live in Mannheim. It's a fairly large city here in the southwest of Germany, right on the Rhine. I work in church planning, church resourcing here for the small denomination called the Mennonite Church. And we work also in social work, have done after school programs. And now we're launching a new program or a new German called Familiencafé. So it's like a family cafe. It's kind of going to be in a poor part of town. And it's going to be a way for people to build community for people in the community, to have a community center, a space where they can, especially for families and young children, we have a playground and all that. We got to take over an old kindergarten. So we're involved in lots of different things here as a family and in ministry and in church work. How did I get into the estuary? What is it called? Is it a support host? We need to come up with some kind of acronym. It just rolls off the tongue, right? I think like many, my journey of it or specific work in the road is when I started listening to Jordan Peterson. And the reason I started listening to Jordan Peterson and why I stayed with that and why it was so engaging has a longer history. But I come out of the Mennonite Church in the North American context, where I studied peace work and peace and justice work as my background did peace work for many years. And at some point decided then to start working more clearly in the church and have seen many trends in the church over the years. But I think one of those that I'm concerned about is that sense of identity and where we are as a relationship of the church related to its own culture. And so I ended up actually studying anthropology and missiology. And that's really my passion is culture and people and how the church fits all into that because that's always part of bigger conversations about meaning and how we relate to people anywhere around the world. And so somebody that's grown up as a third cultural kid, it's something that I'm always part of. And Peterson opened that door where I could start having conversations on a very different level and realizing how there's so much more to explore, particularly the secular and post-Christian world, which is what I relate to here in the German context. And that was one part and the other part was my good friend, Matthias, who's part of this group as well. We just happen to run into each other and in Mannheim because he also lives here and he had also been listening to Jordan Peterson and we were not really that close at all before. We knew each other in passing and because of that we started meeting regularly. We just somehow got on the subject of this and kind of had our own little mini estuary for a long time until then this opportunity came by to take part in larger conversations on this level. So that's a little bit about my background. Thank you. And then next is Nate, the Lord himself. John's calling me the Lord because my musician name is Lord Sycamore, so a little inside joke there. Great to be with you guys. I'm from PA or I live in PA and I got to Jordan Peterson, I guess because I grew up in a pretty fundamentalist background and went to a Christian college that sort of had a creation science division for the science department. And I also had gone to public school in high school, so the origin story of evolution and the origin story of biblical creationism didn't really fit with each other. And then when I encountered Peterson's biblical lectures in particular, he just seemed to assume that they could and that was very intriguing. And so I've just been following that train ever since. I guess very curious about those places where the stories are colliding with each other and grateful for the work that Paul's doing on his channel of just sort of holding that space open for people to talk to each other. And it's been great to be in that estuary and learn how to practice that too. Great. Thank you. I see that Mathias has joined us in the meantime. So Mathias, we are just introducing ourselves to the group and pretending that we don't already all know each other. So tell us who you are, where you're at, what time it is, and how on earth did you end up in that and how on earth did you end up here? Yeah, hi, I'm Mathias from Germany near Mannheim. And yeah, I figured out that you should read your emails because I did know that Paul was here and I could change things that I'm here now as well. And yeah, how did I get here? Well, basically in 2017, I saw the biblical series of John Peterson and then soon after that Paul's first videos and then I got to the Discord server and yeah, afterwards at some point the estuary concept developed and then yeah, during that time I got part of this group and we practiced our meetings every other week and yeah, and eventually I started to open a German language chat in the Discord server and there we also have a regular German speaking estuary and yeah, it's going pretty good so far. Wonderful, thank you. So Quentin, you want to be next? Yeah, sure. Quentin, I'm in central Ohio, very similar to everyone else on how I got here. I grew up in a rural small tiny Baptist church, went off to a Christian college, went through a whole you know, bit of a deconstruction kind of phase of my life and I found my way to Paul Van der Klay's channel and I just noticed myself really struggling to formulate thoughts and actually express them in a conversational way with other people and actually have dialogue about things you know, at work, home, family, church and yeah, like when the estuary idea cropped up, I was really interested so got involved here and it's been good. Yeah, that's how I got here. Thank you, Quentin. Tanya, good morning. Good morning, I'm Tanya and I'm from Auckland and I'm really hoping that you're all doing well. I'm from Auckland and I'm really hoping to get a group up and running in New Zealand. I also had more of a fundamentalist Christian background but was deconstructing. I was widow 10 years ago and then remarried and then divorced and Jordan Peterson was really helpful for me but also for my older sons so that's connected there and also I've been interested in exploring contemplative spiritual practices so I got onto John Vivekis channel and then found Paul's channel and appreciated the openness to evaluate different perspectives. That's been so helpful for me kind of returning to a church with a little gap where I was wandering in the wilderness, it felt like, but still haven't worked everything out of course but happy to stay in that uncertain place and really interested in journeying with other people in their spirituality. Thank you, Tanya and then we have a new guy here, Paul. You want to say something about yourself? Yeah, my name is Paul. I live in Sacramento. I have a little YouTube channel. I've had conversations with some of these folks before and they're really good. You can find them on my channel and maybe we'll have conversations with more. I usually every week try to do conversations with at least some randos and some of them get published, some of them don't so I know it's a big competition to grab a randos lot but I'm just super happy to be here and I probably won't. I'll try not to talk too much because I get lots of chance to talk on my channel but I'm very interested to hear what all of you have to say and what interests all of you. For me, one of the really cool things about this is as a pastor, it's very difficult to really know what's going on in the minds of a lot of people in your church and I like this process because it helps me know what you all are thinking about and what you truly think and if you don't really know what people think, it's really hard to engage with them productively so thanks for letting me be a part of this. Thanks Paul. So as is our custom, this is where we go around and put some stuff on the table for us to have a conversation about and the way we do it is I have each one of you share briefly what you have been thinking about, what has occupied your mind, what you've been obsessing about, what you've been pondering in your heart in one of the following four areas and actually you can mention one or several or if you're really OCD, you can mention all of them but we are focusing our attention on these four areas so what has gotten your attention intellectually? What lectures have you heard? What books have you read? What articles? What speeches? What did you catch on Paul's channel or somewhere else that captured your imagination and made you think deep thoughts? That's one. Secondly, we live in the world so what has been happening to you contextually that got your attention? Were there fires, earthquakes, floods, elections, major drama in your town, some headline in the newspaper that got your attention so intellectually and contextually. Thirdly, we're ordinary people and so what has occupied your mind personally? Did you have a new baby? Was there a divorce? Did you move to a different town? Did you get a new job? Did you get fired? What's going on in your personal life that you feel comfortable sharing in this forum? And then finally, because of how we came together in this group, which is an estuary type group, what have you been thinking about estuarially and perhaps especially in your intentions and your efforts and your desires to start an estuary group on the ground? What's happening with that? Is it going anywhere? Are you happy with how it's going? Are you struggling? Are you frustrated? Do you have tips for one another? What have you been thinking about estuarially? I made up that word. It is not really a word in any dictionary but we use it to our advantage here. So David, why don't you start off again? In any one of those four areas, what have you been thinking about that you would like to put on the table today? I had a sneaking suspicion you'd start with me. I feel like that happens to me every time and for every reason I always feel caught off guard every time. Well, today I took a walk even about an hour ago because I wanted to collect my thoughts. I hadn't been here for about a good three or four times and there has been a lot of life that's happened. We were in vacation in Turkey and we spent time with my parents. We were on a sailboat with three kids and so there's a lot of adventures to share and actually lots of deep thoughts that came out of that but I think where my thoughts, especially in the walk centered is and again I had no idea Paul was going to be here today but I listened to his three hour plus video on marriage equality and it's been circling in my mind and I had an experience just two days ago. I work with different groups here and that issue was not even on the table but there was something similar in that conversation where I was back to what I think Paul was trying to outline in that video which you take the complicated and very maybe sometimes contentious but it's a very prevalent issue in our society when it comes to how we're defining sexuality today and marriage and what that has to play in it and the point that I took from that was really this idea of what is an archetype, what is an ideal, what is this idea of what is an archetype, what is an ideal, what is something that another way to say it perhaps is even what is something that we've put on the top of the value hierarchy when it comes to how we see relationships playing out or at least what we strive towards and it just struck me that that approach or that way of talking about it also applies to God. That in a sense there is an ideal of goodness or of what we've, at least in the Christian culture, Christendom, when it was able to define the hierarchy of values, put that at the top and we're in that space now where that's just not automatically at the top anymore and that was just something that really struck me after listening to Paul's thing and how so many of these conversations like when I relate to other Christians that are dealing with how to talk about that in culture and also how culture talks about to religious people about that, that I come from a Anabaptist tradition which you could say one characteristic is the kind of egalitarian way we want to deal with hierarchy with at least in the structures of the church but I think up until a couple of maybe a generation ago the hierarchy of where you would put God or it would have been fairly clear. But now that's a very different discussion within the church even, like how you even put that ideal because it has all these other things attached to it and so it becomes a very complicated discussion even in the church not just outside of the church and I think what that whole three-hour process of that video just showed me again, it was just like yeah there's a deconstruction of an ideal going on and we're finding it hard now to know how to find conversation mutuality about what we can even agree upon what's on the top of that value of hierarchy which just would have been a given a hundred years ago if you were for it or against it, it would have been at the top. So anyway I've been thinking about that a lot because it just comes up more and more in the conversations I have internally even in the church because you know for example in the Mennonite church we want everything egalitarian but like yeah anyway so that's something I've been dealing with. Thank you David. Nate what do you want to put on the table today? What have you been thinking about since the last time we worked together? Contextually we had an enormous windstorm here which knocked down a whole bunch of trees almost creamed our house but like went past it and took out our power and internet for a couple days which was a very humbling experience just realizing how dependent I am on power sources outside of myself and how small humans really are. All of that was a gift though not only spiritually but for like the intellectual side of things you guys all know I've been working on this musical called Hard Heart Phone for the past year year and a half and it's been like wrestling an octopus working on it there's so many different themes and ideas but this experience actually helped me to pin down that it's a story about power with the dramatic question being something like how do we use power or how do we respond to other people misusing power and so it's just got me thinking a lot about the theme of power like where do we get it from how do we use it Jesus lays down his power in serving other people freeing them what does that look like for us to do it and then of course what does it look like in in the story that I'm writing so I'd be interested in talking about power in whatever form that connects with what you guys are saying. Thanks Nate. Thank you. Quentin what have you been thinking about since the last time we were together? Yeah I guess a couple things trying to get our little estuary going we've got two guys and here in central Ohio and we got like a place and I think we're going to make it more regularly on a month by month basis so that's some good news to share. I've been thinking so I attend a non-denominational Bible church and we're doing a I'm not participating in it but I have some friends that are going through it counseling biblical counseling training course right now and I've had some real interesting conversations with you know some elders my pastor and then friends that are going to the course on like where's the line between psychology and then biblical counseling like what's the difference and it's funny because like you know there's it's really easy just to fall strongly on one side or the other and completely ignore what the other side is saying and that's a very fine difficult hard line to pin down and I don't even know if I'm comparing and contrasting it correctly so I've just been thinking a lot about that. I also one of the guys in our estuary both of them actually are orthodox Christians so or they've been going to an orthodox church so I went with one of them to a liturgy my first one the other day that was very very interesting so I've been mauling over like all of that it was just so it was enjoyable and I had a good time and yeah so I guess if anyone's interested in what that's like we could talk about that. Perfect. Yeah that's about it. Well didn't mean to interrupt you but thank you thank you. Yeah. So Matthias what have you been thinking about since the last time we were together? Yeah well yeah contextually or here in my personal life yesterday I attended a parent's evening at the elementary school of my younger daughter and yeah you know when you when 95% of the time the teacher talks about COVID rules and how they can keep the COVID rules in school that's quite exhausting yeah but so I mean of course everybody knows this and every family knows this COVID is still pretty hard topic at the same time our daughters are after school are connecting to their friends and so that's good they have their friends they have their social relationships but at school it's still still a hard topic and I think I mean of course there are these rules from the officials but I think the school is is already allowed to do stuff like singing or sports and so the rules got softer there but they are they are hesitant to to do what they are allowed still because they are afraid of quarantine classes and so on and I think they should just do everything they can with the kids because I mean it's just too long for them in the long run and yeah but yeah but I mean it they were worse times so it's kind of okay but also I think yeah sometimes it's just still a lot yeah and what else can I tell well some of you know that we had an in-person meetup of our German estuary and that was quite a thing that was almost two weeks ago and so we normally we meet online every other week but yeah two weeks ago the first time we met in person and we we met for a whole day and we in Neustadt in Germany which is in south Germany we met in the morning 10 people 10 bridges of meaning discord members and yeah a lot of people from Germany Joop was there from the Netherlands and Ras Poutine from Switzerland and that was really a great experience to meet all these people in person and that's something that's I mean yeah I'm still thinking about it it was a really good experience we in the morning we had a guided tour through an old church in the city and we we climbed a mountain near the city and had lunch on top of it and yeah it was just a great day to connect with all these people and that's something I'm thinking about these days yeah Thank you Matthias good stuff Tanya. Hello we're in our highest level lockdown in Auckland with New Zealand's pursuing an elimination strategy so all small businesses that aren't deemed essential services are shut and schools are shut and my teenagers are struggling we've been stuck in it for about four or five weeks or something so we're really hoping just to go down our levels so we I can buy takeaway pizza for them that's what I really and my 16 year old had his birthday in lockdown it was a bit I tried to make pizza wasn't as good eh so I've been really thinking about the marriage equality your video Paul but I've been thinking about um connecting it with um counselling and therapy like there's a um dialectical behavioral therapy which holds you know change but also unconditional acceptance so I'm wondering um you know there's a lot of people being really hurt and harmed by the Christian church and I don't know if we've done um acceptance that well but I still so I think you know the care piece is really important but I still have a idea of that archetype I think that's very helpful which is sacred to me of one woman one man for life even though I've fallen short of myself as a divorced person so just thinking about you know how Jordan Peterson for example or a therapist engages with someone um in a way that's unconditional acceptance for them but also holds a standard um and how you know I want my cake and eat it too I want the archetypes as aspirational something to aim for maybe you know holding that tension between already but not yet um but at the same time feeling accepted in community where even when you fall very short of standards and I know people will want to say um we need to get rid of the standards because it's so judgmental but there must be a way just the same as your relationship with a therapist where you feel unconditionally accepted and then the person themselves says well actually I would like to change this thing in my life so I've been thinking about that. Super thank you Tanya well believe it or not I have thought about stuff since the last time we met as well and um one of the biggest things that that is turning around in my head is is related to estuary so estuarially I have been thinking about the fact that my church here in Chino um formally adopted or sponsored the Inland Empire estuary as a ministry of the local church with staff endorsement and elder approval and you might think that I should be just delighted and super elated and feel very affirmed and all of the above and yet I still struggle with it in the sense that um it is it is a challenge I think for any Christian person to to make room for and to uh be open to people with completely different value systems and world and life views and perspectives on anything and so the the the role of the facilitator of the local estuary will have to be somewhat more open and accepting and and the the relatively conservative church that I'm a part of still is feels very compelled and rightly so I mean in their in their own mission statement and their own vision for their own reason for existence is to to draw some lines and say we we need to have some lines here and we need to have some lines here and this is what we stand for and this is what we don't stand for and so um yeah that that that is a tension that I that I um experienced personally and and and so I I mean if anybody has any feedback about that I would be interested in engaging about that topic so Paul what are you what have you have you thought about anything since we last were together? Nah I I don't think about much um I think about all the things I put out on my videos and there are always four or five different other things in my head you know they've got way more ideas in my head than can come out my mouth or my fingertips I've been doing more writing lately on CRC Voices as John Van Dock knows it's a little ancient listserv that we both participate in um I've been thinking a lot about wrestling and Mark Driscoll so American wrestling is an interesting story and it's extremely religious and I'm just trying to think about how the palette the palette for the palette upon which Americans maybe not the palette maybe the stage upon which Americans play religion has so broadened since before the internet but that that broadening has been happening you know from all these different steps of technology to characters to writing to paper to you know all the not so just and that makes it harder to ask questions okay what is this what is it for what are we doing what is good what is bad so I just always think about this stuff so that's what I'm thinking about super and we're glad you are so um so this is the point where I always remind people that it's kind of important that when people share what they want to put on the table it's important that we listen very carefully because now you get the opportunity to say hey what so-and-so said that's what I would like to explore more or what so-and-so said that's what I would like to or maybe these two things or three things go together so why don't we so so this is where we say hey you know I would like to pursue a conversation about that or that now that you know what's on the table David what's on the table that that grabs your attention um um covid I think what matthias is talking about we're yeah that's that's um I didn't mention it but my my son has covid right now so we're we're in quarantine and uh it's very interesting to interact with people and and have conversations this this kind of space right now so yeah I'm especially schools and the regulations and all that kind of stuff but um yeah but it's that's personal level yeah definitely okay thank you Dave Nate what's on the table that uh that grabs your attention like I mentioned I was thinking about power a lot so I was noticing the power dynamics and the different things you were talking about uh Quentin your question about psychology versus church biblical counseling um I've been reading a number of books by Chuck DeGroote because he sort of goes talks about this heart stuff that I'm trying to tackle and I've been wrestling a lot with his use of language he'll use phrases like the god that is in you or like your inner light or talk about sin in ways that are less like a rebellion against the holy god and more like a departure from your inherent wholeness or goodness and I don't know how much of that is in psychology as a whole but I I've just been trying to pin down like what is he what is he doing with language here and in terms of power dynamics there it's like whoever gets to define what something means sort of gets to determine the trajectory of the rest of the story and where where the outcomes are and in the end what's good or bad um and even when it comes to this this marriage equality uh video which I also watched that's what struck me is it's it's coming down in a lot of ways it feels like a a trying to pin down like what is what is good and bad in this situation and if people have competing stories then it sort of just becomes a power play with different methods of employing that power whether like paul you were talking about people playing the long game and trying to just exhaust the institutional church um or whether to like give way to a different definition a little bit out of compassion or just to buckle down or to try to take over the political process to ram a different definition through like there's all different ways of trying to solve the problem so to speak but a lot of them have to do with like trying to enforce something on somebody else and it's hard to see a way out of that I'm pretty perplexed so I'd be interested in talking about any of those things more but especially in relation to how how power intersects with them excellent thank you nate uh quentin yeah um I think I was going on the same path as you nate I was listening to like Dave mentioned like where does the ideal go so I'm thinking you know power authority um and then also with the psychology question even what you said tanya um you know that yeah that that like where where does the self fit in to all this discussion and then how much of uh it's like there's a yeah like the tension between finding the like you hear like people talk about your authentic self and being authentic and then you hear that word authentic and I think of I've started every time I hear it I think of the word authority now and I go okay how do you relate to authority that's like the next question and what you're looking at when you're talking about what the authentic self is and then you know biblical counseling psychology like how how does the bible how does what we experience out in the world and all of the other resources that are out there come together to find that authority in that power um and even relates to the COVID topic I mean we see a lot of power being exercised right now in lots of different ways and a lot of power being abdicated too so yeah power dynamics that'd be fun to talk about cool very nice Matthias yeah John I think um I would be interested in what what you uh told us uh what's happening at your uh local place I mean the S3RE and the institution I think is an interesting interesting topic so so uh how much institutionalization is is healthy for the S3RE and how much openness do you need mm-hmm yeah okay well Tanya what what are you thinking um well I have two topics that are definitely of interest to me the um your topic John about history in the church but also how in the church but also how much diversity is within the church um but still having boundaries so if we think about I don't know the church is kind of a playground if you're not into slides you can go on the swings and that and that's all right or everyone has to line up and do one thing you know if there's a bit of diversity but still there are some rules in the playground about what's appropriate and what's not so that's interesting about that whole uh diversity of community in the church um and um I'm also interested in the psychology spiritual I'm actually just about to finish a graduate diploma in psychology but I'm just at the moment taking a spiritual um narrative therapy for spiritual practice as part of a theology degree so um yeah so I'm also interested in the talos the goodness of God working through in someone's life and respecting their agency and not using power to force someone to move in a different direction but being gentle and trusting the spirit and that approach Thank you. Thank you. So I feel really old right now because when I was in seminary I ended up writing a paper on the difference between Jay Adams' directive counseling and um that's how old I am I'm blanking on his name non-directive uh La Jolla California help me out people Carl Rogers Carl Rogers non-directive active listening kind of therapy and so the one clearly being you know we know what the word of God says we know how you deviate from it so if you correct that then your life will be in line with what God wants of you and you'll be healthy kind of there's a good deal of church authority behind that there is a particular interpretation of the scriptures that is behind that and then on the other hand is Carl Rogers saying this is a little bit of a caricature but what he's really doing he's saying there is a certain kind of truth inside of you that has been suppressed long enough so I want to create a safe space for you to get that out and access that for yourself and what lies in the deeper recesses of your of your of your your your selfhood and so it was known as non-directive counseling and um it's old and a lot of what we hear today are just variations of those two things either you're going to do it according to a standard or the standard is within you somehow and and and all we need to do is make room for that to emerge to the surface at this very moment I do not want to express any preference for one or the other but it seems like it might be an interesting foil for us to to structure our our our conversation around and Paul do you have a preference between all the stuff that's on the table I want to talk about Paul myself that's surely going to get me kicked out of this all right my preference is that we not talk about Paul all right well um I I think that some some some direction has emerged and I think that um speaking as as one of a group of people that have a little bit of experience with this thing I mean you've all been part of this thing so so I have been known at this stage of the game to just say let's go so I'm going to say that let's go you guys know what to do next well I I would love to just explain a tiny bit about narrative therapy it does have a little bit of direction and and your job as the person listening you you listen for stories of hope so someone may share a problem but sometimes within that there there may be either a way they've dealt with that problem previously that they've managed it that they've forgotten they haven't succeeded all the time but you can examine the times they've tackled it in a way that's been helpful or you know as we filter information from what we have happened in our lives sometimes one story kind of dominates but there's another story of hope that can be strengthened so it's not that it's whatever it's like you're looking for uh what's what's good what's hopeful strengthening that in the person's life but it's what's in their life already and uh the person has agency so you're asked them oh I'm curious about this thing you mentioned here that that's you know that's tell me more about that so it's not completely whatever it is aimed towards something good and purposeful but it's giving the person agency to journey with them so it's kind of like a directive non-directive therapy exactly me thank you clarifying that in our in our men's group um I've let in a few people from the internet world and one of those people is Warren Mills who's who's the guy who brought me to Australia and um Warren Warren grew up dispensational so he loves to attack me on Calvinism and things like this and this whole topic of agency is so incredibly layered in you know part of what you know Brett Sockel came in talking about you'll hear Roman Catholics talk about first and second level or degree late agency and you know there's part of what even the silence of Carl Rogers saying and having people pull things out of themselves you have still as Nate noted you have still created the space I mean there's just just even even what seems like a um a posture of repose is actually expressing agency even relinquishment or surrender is expressing agency so this is very very subtle things it occurred to me I don't know if this is this is a helpful way of framing it but sometimes when Jordan Peterson talks about the archetypes of masculine and feminine he he talks about the masculine archetype being more of like a aggressive dominating forceful kind of power and the feminine is more like a receiving nurturing shaping so maybe that's that's also a dynamic that's at play and does that map on to these two different types of therapy the directive non-directive I don't think I don't think so I think I do think that a person has to want to change and they have to choose the thing in therapy you want to choose the thing that the person wants to change otherwise you know you can't be motivated by someone forcing you to change in an area but maybe even with the directive counseling a good counselor would be sensitive to you know often these frameworks a very good counselor will work with a framework but still get the same result I just I do think a person has to own that wanting to change and so it has to come from them but you can strengthen that motivation I don't know if it's a masculine feminine thing I mean the founders of narrative therapy are both male I know I know there's that characterization that often counselors are female but yeah founding is a very masculine thing to do even if it's a feminine thing they found yeah I was Tanya you saying people have to want to change I overheard a conversation on the street last weekend someone was saying that they're that they were describing something that happened in the news and then they said these are the facts of what happened and then the then they were talking about the feelings that came from it or the feelings that you know generated all the responses that the story is writing about and then they were feeling all these very oh I don't know it wasn't it wasn't joy it wasn't peace it wasn't patience it was kind of an impatient anxiety anxious worry some kind of thing right and I think that's what the facts of the story were but it just you could hear like the hopelessness and their reaction to that news and yeah it's so important to monitor your stories and monitor the stories you're telling yourself and the stories you're living out and that's been really sitting with me because it it changes the emotions that come right um yeah the structure of the story so your narrative therapy stuff whenever you talk about it it's very intriguing I like it just wanted to add one more thing sometimes we have parts of ourselves we don't feel like going to change the side of you know we want to maybe work with the things that the spirit is working with and some things we just have to say okay I'm just going to keep struggling with that one it's in terms of how much can we change about ourselves until our brokenness until like the resurrection god kind of reputs us together yeah I guess I got a question to prompt the group then earlier Nate when you're talking about power you said you were wondering about where does power come from so I guess my question now is that desire to change where does that come from in a person um because I've looked back on my life and I can see when I've been telling myself the wrong story right and I can never pin down exactly where that change occurred you know where the power came from to see a story differently um it just seems like happenstance you know and just people that come into your life and things that happen to you and it's like a perceptiveness and awareness of I don't know I was like looking for it and hope you started off with hope too it's like hope has to be there first so yeah any thoughts on that well the Calvinist and our mini debate is a little bit like is is god if you think of the spirit working in your life is it the spirit works and you respond or you're seeking and then I don't think it matters but um yeah which way you kind of see it sometimes we sometimes the problem has to be a big enough problem that we want to make a change right and then we the problem story we think oh just sick of this something's got to change and other times we just like I'm just going to ignore that problem let's go watch some more youtube yeah and and sometimes change is simply a change in perspective because I went through life for 57 years thinking that I grew up fatherless and was angry and bitter about that went to a Richard Rohr seminar that focused primarily on helping boys become men and it was kind of an initiation ritual and as he sent us out into the wilderness to do some heavy duty reflecting he said to me to my face you will experience the change that changes everything and my gut reaction was yeah right but I nevertheless walked into the woods and I'll give you the short version at some point sitting there for a number of hours got quite irritated at the futility of it all and my irritation made me kind of irritatingly ask the question why couldn't so-and-so have been my father or for that matter why couldn't so-and-so have been my father and maybe why couldn't so-and-so have been my father and I got the four or five down the list and all of a sudden the light went on and I said whoa there are a lot of people in my life who have had some fatherly influence on me and maybe when everything is said and done I got better fathering in my life than I ever realized and that eye-opening experience made me look at all those men in a totally different light they now were instruments of God to help me grow up and even my own father who abandoned me many years prior was redeemed in the process because with my new insight I was able to even see some redeeming factors in his relationship with me things that I learned from him that I would have never admitted before I had to change of perspective so sometimes change does not constitute even a change in behavior or a change in circumstances but sometimes it just involves a change in perspective and insight I don't know if that's helpful. Yeah that's helpful it's like you told yourself a new story instead of keep telling yourself I didn't have a father I've missed out this was bad you began to see the threads of people that were father-like figures providing those things that you needed and then that probably there was kind of a rewriting of your own history as you thought through oh yeah God or that person came into my life and they did xyz and so that can have a ripple on effect and I never again after that moment whined and complained that I grew up without a father that that has never again happened since so it's been a nice little run here for now for a few years. This is making me think of in the Sermon on the Mount Jesus sort of inverts the the power pyramid and he's saying things like blessed are the poor of spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven and it seems like that's just essentially a change of perspective more than it is a change of behavior he does have behaviors that he addresses in the second half but it seems like those all flow out of the change of perspective people who are poor in spirit and all of the other negative things in the world's eyes mourning and being gentle and hunger and hungering and thirsting like if we think we're essentially powerless then and that's our perspective on ourselves then either we don't have hope or we try to use what little power we have to get what we need from other people. So yeah that change in perspective that's really interesting. Yeah there's like a you know that the poor in spirit the mourning you know the meek hungry and thirsting it's a there's like a desirous aspect there right and it's that's almost like you know like I give that story where the the facts came before the emotions well this is like one of the emotions come before the facts change right you know you got to get to that when you're at that point of lacking all understanding right needing some understanding something beneath you to hold you up that's when like perspectives can change right I've been thinking about that a lot like that I think it's what we do in estuary right I mean I think when we talk we're trying to understand each other instead of looking to just be understood and that's a big difference I've been watching myself when I talk right now am I doing it to understand or be understood and yeah I'll leave that there. I'm curious John if that story affected how you related maybe to other young men in your life who didn't have fathers or whether that flowed on from. Well there are elements of that story which you can find on Paul's channel so we'll just leave it at that but I would like to at least draw out the fact that I have a quite an interest in estuary and in estuary gatherings and an estuary on the ground and so as I sometimes do in our conversation here we can somehow shift towards very religious language in which there's a lot of insider language and a lot of spiritual language and a lot of bible talk and all of that but now if there were two or three atheists in our midst right now how would we have to change have to change our language or our tone or the way we approach the topics that are under consideration such as marriage equality or power I mean how you talk about that in a more generic language rather than using the highly specialized christianese means because it all goes well you will face that situation when you have your estuary on the ground and Joe Schmo from down the road walks in and says what are you guys doing here and why are you having this conversation that I don't understand and even before that you have to think about where to where to yeah at what place would you organize your estuary right I mean in the institution or at a restaurant I mean that's to begin with that's that could be a barrier before you even talk to people he says to the guy who just started an estuary in his church moved it to his church moved to his church yeah yeah that's true and he can keep a straight face under a belt do you but it you know john john and I have talked about these questions a lot and these are very much the kinds of questions I get from churches that are thinking about groups like these because churches understandably have an agenda that involves their own propagation and I am a minister in a protestant denomination and yet one of the you know one of the things that I've thought a lot about and continue to think about is you know lately I touched on it a little bit in the three hour video about marriage equality but the the way in which after the protestant reformation even the state becomes sort of the second speed of protestantism Charles Taylor and look comparing roman catholicism to protestantism several roman catholicism is two speed and protestantism is one speed and I used to talk about that I'd get a lot of some roman catholics would get a little upset with me Mary would really push back on that and and the more I think about it it almost seems that the the space outside of the church the secular space downstream from the protestant reformation has sort of become the the the second speed so so the church is supposed to be the sort of like the monastery to the community in the medieval catholic community within Christendom and so all of these issues are is there is there a Christian analogy or is there a secular analogy to what Jesus says in the Sermon on the Mount because I find in secular spaces people in sort of a poetic manner will look at the Sermon on the Mount and say oh isn't that lovely and in other words some of the vision has so saturated into the public imagination that we have this we embrace whether we identify as Christian or not we embrace this ideal of care for the weak and concern and making space for the lowest and the least of these and the least of these we don't no longer associate that with Christianity partly because of the dynamics of church and state because you know people don't people don't bang on the doors of the monastery and say you bigots you don't let in married people well there are some you know married orders too in roman catholicism but that everybody sort of understands that well if you go to the monastery the schtick is well there's you know there's lots of prayer and maybe some chanting and solitude and working and married to Jesus yeah you're married to Jesus you wear this you wear the clothing so there's lots going on here you know I loved how Nate sort of set it up in terms of well it's so funny because we're so quick to sort of say power is a dirty word an agency is the good word but it's like isn't power an agency they're pretty deeply tied I'm pretty sure we have more stuff on the table than your silence would indicate so this could be part of the reason why I have up until this point always said we don't record and publish estuary meetings it's there's something there's an inhibition to the the knowledge of being viewed I was well I've been thinking about your challenge John if there were three atheists and then thinking about what Quentin said about listening and so I mean I would want to be listening to those people and sharing their thoughts listening to them and then interacting with their thoughts and that would naturally change the kind of language I would be using because there's no point using language that they don't understand I want to interact I mean I may bring in an idea that's a different discourse and explain it but I'll be wanting to interact with them using the framework that they are their terms yeah and I think that their terms on their terms yeah yeah that's a good insight because of course we are in to some significant degree all on the same page here and that's why Paul occasionally says that you know his his conversations are greatly improved if a few atheists show up in the estuary or on in the in the meetup so that I mean he's on record as having said that so yeah yeah it challenges our assumptions to think now why do I automatically have think from that perspective and so then I can examine it and yeah very true and actually in the previous group that met in the period prior to this there were three new people and all three of them were quite eloquent in describing the depth and extent of their deconstruction so that that was very much related to the use of language and one of the guys did say that once upon Jordan Peterson's prompting he decided to go back to church he was initially offended by and downright resisted the pervasiveness of Christian language it is a certain language that tends to serve as a mechanism to protect the insiders from the outsiders and the outsiders from the insiders there is a borderline there that's why Tanya Lerman has this book out you know when when God talks back which is all about the way we learn our Christian language in community and that's where it has a function and it even it even has a role in shaping our world and life experience and our and our spiritual experience within the church community and but it also serves as a mechanism to to separate the men from the boys and in that if you if you if you can't or won't learn or speak the language or use the language then you can't be part of the thing so there's a there's a there's a distinct danger that even estuary can become a very secluded space in a way speak to that that yeah I guess I'll throw something out there it's funny how you know we say we say often because in our group I think we're all Christians here it's we always say we tend to get off in christianese and then we say what if an atheist you know came in here how did that change the dynamic and we're always checking ourselves for that but you could equally have like an atheist group and then a christian walks in and then the dynamic changes right and I guess something that's helped me figure out how to navigate estuarial conversations and Pazio just did a video with this with the ancient faith podcast guy he's talking about like the universal history and that has helped me a lot because I've um some days I wonder if you know I'm in I'm in this non-denominational bible church and I'm always just having conversations with friends I wonder if they're someday gonna find out that I'm I'm getting these ideas from uh you know Pazio and orthodox thought and I'm bringing them in and having conversations with people I wonder if they're ever gonna be like you know if it's ever gonna come to the surface um but the uh the universal history has been very what's the right word freeing for me because I'm realizing that the common language can be like in the podcast that Pazio just did a couple days ago you know the uh the guy speaking to says um you know christ came and announced victory over death to to all like you know to all like it's like a it's not like something a choice that we make it's something that he came and announced and then the people he tells it to come say okay how do I respond to that and come into conformity with this proclamation right um I hope I'm not losing anybody here but I'm just realizing that the the Christian language can be I don't know like translated out of the christianese that we tend to to reduce ourselves to in a church community and like I guess it has been done carefully but you can you can play it out in other languages so that a common language can be found to then talk about a universal truth um so I hope I didn't muddle all that but Can I ask a question of Paul here? So Paul you've you've done this in a lot of different contexts but particularly when you have been talking with John Vervecky on your channel I mean he obviously has some Christian background so he knows how to speak that language but most of your conversation is not an explicit Christian Christianese terms so in your experience how did you how do you connect? I think experience has a lot to do with it I think a self-consciousness about the Christianese I've worked for a long time a lot of even before I started my YouTube channel a lot of what I thought about was trying to find different language trying to express things that I knew in different ways and then I mean Nate when you talked about Chuck DeGroat so I've got a little bit of a history with Chuck DeGroat and I might talk about this on an upcoming video where I talked about a I might do a commentary on a video from Sean McDonald McDowell because this the language that Chuck is using is now sort of the default language of the therapeutic community and that and that language has been intentionally developed to avoid Christian content and I think there I've got a fair amount to say about it that goes beyond what I can say right now if you look if you look I had an experience once where I was at a birthday party of a good friend and he he grew up Roman Catholic Puerto Rican he's no longer a Christian his ex-wife had this birthday party and she had a musician there and this musician was playing songs from Buddhist songs and Hindu songs and American protest songs and this musician was about to play a song that had some Christian reference to it and that musician must have given five minutes of disclaimer before playing that song and they felt absolutely no embarrassment about playing songs from the other traditions and so this again speaks to the the power of context and and so part of what I do with someone like John Vervecki is I try to listen carefully to his language and so then when I talk to him use his language when I'm speaking with him and and that takes some doing but it's key and you know part of what I when I first started my channel most of the negative commentary I would get from people were from Christians that were pretty monolingual in terms of why aren't you talking about Jesus more why aren't you quoting from the Bible why aren't you using these theological terms it's not that I can't use those terms I have just found even in church work that if you stick to too narrow a vocabulary nobody learns anything and people enjoy it because especially if they're feeling this a place like California if they feel sort of always surrounded by people who are antithetical to that language it sort of becomes code talk to reinforce the group and to reduce their anxiety and there's there's good function to that but you're probably not going to help those people actually be less bunker oriented and more engaging and perhaps have better relationships with their neighbors so that's part of the reason that I've developed the skills that I have with respect to language and talking to people and why I do what I do this well I man I have lots of thoughts now but what one of the things that prompted my whole walk and what I was trying to process was a conversation I had I think I mentioned earlier with this group that I'm helping to organize and we're going to do a project for our denomination here for our church and we had a it's kind of one of those things where when you go public okay you start public in the sense we start relating to the broader church community that we we serve well what kind of pushback what kind of critique might come we had those kind of discussions and so this is I don't know if anybody can relate to this but I think I but okay I would say Matias and I we live in a world where hardly any pay the tox christianese ever you just aren't going to meet that unless you are in a very specific location where you know it's it's a maybe a christian gathering or a church service or so I mean you just don't ever encounter that and so I feel like that's my that's my everyday life right like is trying to understand the world around me and and um learning to navigate that listening carefully to the language you know meeting people where they're at um in fact I want to I want to be conversant in that because that's that's my world it's my life and so then in a meeting like this I find myself getting frustrated because then we're sitting here talking about the the whole impulse is our church is in a crisis we're we're dying you know there's old people what's the future you know we should pray you know that's important to us that's something that that has that has a lot of meaning for us in in the in group right let's let's organize a a different approach with that but we're going to try to do something uh just kind of a initiative a month of prayer we're going to have some inputs you know and hopefully even bring in some of these things that we talk about in estuary but we're going to do we're going to be partnering with different people and everything and then the first comment is well should we talk about prayer too much should we use that word I'm like whoa and and so this is me most of my life is connecting to the to the world around me and then the particularity of a Christian practice right which is the whole point of what we're trying to do and I just I'm just getting kind of mad because it's like well what what do you mean like what's the point then if we're going to be invited like if we're not clear then we're not clear right and the discussion went a little further like oh we got it was all the discussion about what language should we use in in as we relate to the broader church should we talk about both you know should we say lord should we say king should we you know and all the the critique that we knew that was going to be coming right and so I just remember like that was a frustrating thing for me because on the one hand I feel like my whole life is trying to figure out to be conservative to the concert conversational to the broader culture and then when you try to do something where we're trying to maybe do a renewal a little bit within the church then that conversation it just anyway it frustrated me so I don't know if anybody relates to that um but I often find myself at that intersection John can I put the ball back in your court so your estuary is meeting in a church building would you find it appropriate to use all of this for any of this christianese with the atheists in your group given the context of being in a church building um well we picked a music room which is not the sanctuary I have this interesting spatial thing going um once upon a time we conceived of estuary as the outer court of the temple and the language is a little different you know they speak greek and aramaic over there and they don't speak the sacred language of the holy of holies and the inner court so yeah it's a little bit more of a rough-and-tumble world so so I am I think that I'm kind of on the same path that Paul describes is learning the language of the world around the church and find the places where where the where what describes itself where what describes itself as a secular space nevertheless has embodied or is embodying a lot of religious concepts and themes and so I would prefer to talk about it in the non-christianese version even when when I'm surrounded by by christians you find the lowest common denominator if the christians happen to know certain things by a different name then good for them and they can talk about that during the worship service on sunday and the rest of the time maybe it would be better if they learn the language of their neighbors and learn to talk about redemption in a different language and learn to talk about community in a different language and learn to talk about forgiveness in a different language and learn to talk about the kinds of things that that matter to Jesus when he himself actually didn't use the language of the pharisees he used the language of everyday life and food and and farming and and and the life the language of the of the of the people around them he knew how to get down to brass tacks and and talk about those damn tax collectors that you know charge too much money huh like you give some of that back and so that that would be a model that that I think it's more as soon as you say more effective the next question is effective onto what so that is another part of the equation I mean what are we trying to do here what are we trying to change the world are we trying to save the world are we trying to save the world from itself are we trying in the end to get everybody on our side or what's really going on here and so I have I have lower goals and and I'm I'm perfectly happy creating a community where people can talk to each other in the language that they all understand so let's just start with that so yeah ball back to you John you sorry go ahead Nate okay um you tip something off for me John I would when you said Jesus was using the language of you know not the scribes and Pharisees and all that I I realized Jesus did he did quote scripture though you know and he was going back and he was wrong when he did that well what I'm what I'm driving at here is uh he uh that's funny I lost my thought oh I got I got it yeah I feel it what was he going back and revisiting almost like re-plumbing it you know like to see it new like you talked about a perspective shift earlier I mean was it a is that maybe that's what we're trying to do in estuaries you know like a re- I don't know plum re-plumbing is the right word but like a re reassessment of our language and just going back to change change the go go back to plumb the depths again to find something brilliant that sparkles and works and you know that that's applicable now because it's there in in in the story it's just that as the stories are told after you know 50 60 a couple generations they start to fade and they need to be returned to um I mean I I found that I I found that to be something I gleaned from all these conversations just new ways of thinking about old topics you've heard it said but I say yeah yeah right there coming up in the summer the attitude the this stuff gets into you know something that continues to really keep my attention that I I released two videos today a first one which is about 45 minutes more on same sex marriage and then the second one a conversation I had yesterday from a guy in the United States and he said I'm going to be a good friend of yours and I'm going to be a good friend of yours and a conversation I had yesterday from a guy in LA which I thought was just a terrific conversation because he so exemplified this place that I've heard so many people so they found Jordan Peterson and I mean he had kind of been wandering in the wilderness of church and he's he's looking for the Jordan Peterson church or at least the church that speaks Jordan Peterson and now this is where a whole bunch of things get triggered because of course the Roman Catholic church is you know we we we are the true church I mean the Roman Catholics will say that without much you know yeah without much blushing you know a lot of Protestants, Roman Catholics, and of course the Orthodox are like y'all changed it it was right in the first place and if you can just get back to before y'all messed it up here we have it and you know basically in the conversation is that I'm just going to expose my protestant nature and say I think we and and I think estuary is a part of this I don't see estuary as a church which is why I called it an estuary if I was going to call it a church I would have called it something else I have the language to do that but I think what we need is a process and a journey that will be in anticipation of church renewal to be able to address so much of what we have in the culture and so I look at the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox and say I think you're doing that too I and I'm not going to put you in a corner and make you swear that Jonathan Peugeot using the internet and doing movie reviews is somehow violating orthodoxy I'm not gonna I'm not gonna press that point because I that's I don't think I should and I don't know that he is but there's the Orthodox Church in America in 2021 is going to be different than the Orthodox Church in Tbilisi, Georgia in the 10th century and and we were all working those things out and so I think there's a certain as a Protestant that's a little easier to say we're still on a journey with our Lord and he is still perfecting his bridegroom and and getting her ready for that day and we really you have a little gender change going on here we're always the feminine he's the masculine we are I know but you said the bridegroom oh I'm sorry the bride yeah sorry about that gosh so anyway I know I I think this is I think this is a deeply important conversation because it's in the conflicts and all of this stuff that we're doing I think we are to use this you know use this phrase that we love so much now we're doing the work when you were saying that Paul I was thinking about in the past century or so there's been different revival preachers who are able to go and bring lots of people to Christianity but it seems like without taking anything away from the Holy Spirit at least part of what made that possible is sort of like the latent Christian assumptions in a lot of the American population and it sounds like you're saying estuary would be sort of a way of without saying that this is what everyone would be coming to estuary for it'd be a way of rebuilding the language bridge so that if there was going to be a revival or renewal from the Christian perspective like it could actually happen we could actually speak the same language I think you know if you look at I mean what you described is certainly true of the American situation but if you look at something like the Korean revival at the beginning of the 20th century I mean that blazed through a country that of Christianity and Asia that's a very interesting history but anyway so yeah I I don't know that I was thinking in those terms I think when I think about estuary I think much more relationally and and less because I think the language will the language follows relationships if you know when Van Donk wound up following cows to America his English improved so you know his love of cows gave him the the the beautiful articulations we enjoy today so you're just sucking them back into your videos that's what you're doing that's right it's all about the clicks clickbait if anybody I mean if you guys haven't watched my first conversation with John Van Donk that is a special special conversation on my channel it really is Richard Roaring cows I find this whole conversation fascinating that we're we're talking about language and and because that has so much to do with what happens in estuary and and that's my personal draw to it is that recognizing that on a personal level in the American history and the American history is that recognizing that on a personal level in interpersonal relationships on a daily basis I have these types of conversations often with people but there really isn't a place where I can invite people to conversation right and that's that's my draw to estuary I it's so valuable and that's just that there's something sacred about having space and time and that openness to develop relationships and talk about things that I would say, broadly speaking, we don't know how to talk about religion very well right now. You know you go to other parts of the world that's that's not the issue you know but in the West. We're going through deep transition in this area, and we're not have a lot of places to talk, we have conversations within the church, and you know, again I was frustrated with certain aspects of that because, you know, my experiences as we do speak a particular language, right. So then you can see how the, the, that is encountering the culture around it and that culture is way of talking is coming into the church and how do we interact with that. But that particularity, the particularity of the way we understand our own language is something that, you know, I, I'm in that category to many Christians are still learning that that's a particular thing. And we're not always used to that. When we have talked more broadly about religion and so I in our own context and so this is where I find estuary so valuable because I learned more about that particular in us because I get to have conversations with atheists, for example, and and that opens up all kinds of both ways I think understanding of oneself, and so that that's what I'm drawn to is being somehow being part of that and helping to host those kinds of conversations because I see exactly that is something that doesn't exist very much. happens on the internet, more and more maybe. But, but to actually do that live. Wow. Yeah. And that's why I think churches need estuaries. That's why I named the concept the way I did the imaginative framing of it is the way it is, because churches need this and as a pastor I've been deeply frustrated that there was no one in the church to do it, and the people of the church were not equipped to do it well. And so, and I stumbled into this because just because I started making Jordan Peterson videos people wanted to talk to me, and I had to talk back and I had to learn their language and, you know, so here we are. And another thing that's kind of pertinent in this conversation is that, you know, if we're going to, you know, if this is a demo of estuary protocol or estuary the estuary experience. The estuary protocol also includes the, the, the demographic. No, the democratic selection of topics so it is not just the language we use. It is also the topics we address because if you do start your meetings on the ground in a circle in the way we started our meeting today. Hi, who are you. What have you been thinking about you open it up to having the resident atheist or to say, Well, I'll tell you what I've been thinking about. And that could be something out totally outside of your particular church experience because they're, they may be complaining about the price of beer, or the fact that the subway system isn't running on time, or, you know, any number of, you know, Why, why, why can I not find a quality wife or husband. Those are, those are our topics that, you know, we don't, we don't, we don't. We don't naturally gravitate towards those topics because in our religious sphere, we kind of have all these things figured out and so we talk about kind of esoteric things are a little bit further removed from reality. Except that they're not, and I would be the first to admit that, but it is done in a frame that is two steps removed from you see those tattoos on that checker girl in the in the in the in the grocery store. I mean that is just crazy. That's what I mean. What do those tattoos represent, you know, so. This is my way of trying to be relevant here to the world, trying to represent atheism to the best of my ability. I have a question for for all of you. Do you think I mean this question of languages, I think it's really central and do you think as an estuary host, you should intervene if if people use too much in group language and how can you do that. I mean, I'm sorry, sorry. Yep, Paul, Joey does it all the time on the discord and, you know, if we if we have a, I have to, we haven't had I haven't hosted a local meeting here for a while but I host a local meeting and we start talking about stuff on the discord. Joey always say no discord talk in the room here. Do the discord talk on the discord so yeah yeah a leader does have to do some enforcement usually Yeah, I mean because in the discord environment. I mean, okay, you talked about the Christian is but in the discord environment there's a new in group language developing right I mean the very vacay terms and stuff like that, if, if you even start to use those terms, a lot of people won't even know what you're talking about so I mean, once you have a group, you will develop a language. It always happens. Friends do it, husbands and wives do it families do it. It's a functional language. So in the estuary are we trying to enter the other person's group, are we trying to get them to enter our group, or are we trying to make a totally new group. I think it's a fresh space because like the imagery of the history. It's saltwater in the freshwater. And I appreciate being a safe place to explore maybe how my previous Christian narrative hasn't really doesn't fit any. And so maybe these other people who've been part of church previously and it hasn't fitted for a while. But there's something precious that they had previously that they don't want to lose. And so history is a great place. Maybe to explore those, those things that you know when it's going to call you a heretic because I don't know, you're interested in John for vacay or, you know, you're interested in exploring a whole lot of ideas which is outside the Christian space, but still see that as part of your spirituality And I think that God is at work in all kinds of places, including the church. And it's like enable screen sharing and it's like, I don't, I can't trust them down to do anything. I trust I trust that but don't will do something. What did you do, but I don't know. Well somebody made that picture I don't know somebody decided that when, when on the discord server you may not talk about the discord. And in the estuary you may not talk about estuary that's the first rule of estuary. Yeah, and you never record estuary meetups. That's right. I know I said that. Yeah, I don't know where this is going to go maybe we should just down vote this whole publishing thing. No way, no way. So still good not to share. Okay. Well, we are, we are running towards the end of our time together and are there any kinds of closing remarks that anyone wants to, you know, some last licks in or some, some words of encouragement or edification or there's a Christian word for you, edification. So, but, but any any closing remarks before we stop the recording. I just wanted to thank you, Paul for like it's really exciting to hear, like as a person and high and openness. I really appreciated your YouTube channel and what you're doing, and that openness to ask questions and explore stuff. That's, that's been a help to me. Thank you. Thank you. That's that's what people send me notes and stuff and say that it's it's really helpful because there, there are many days when I put stuff on my channel and I think, why am I doing this this is insane. I go to bed at night thinking, what did I say, I'm sure. And then other people are hurt by what I say and a lot of people are annoyed by what I do, especially I think in the Christian reform church. I don't know. I had one final lick john, it just can't Tanya you said the word there. And sometimes an extra we get like these pithy mottoes or slogans. And this one just popped in the head. It was a, an extra are we were exploring language instead of exploiting it. I feel like that. And then like, but, but then you could say you know once we explore it and we figure out something then we all go and we exploit it elsewhere, and then we come back and talk about how it works. I think it's a little bit different about the estuary leadership support network because in a way we do a little bit of reflection on what happens in the estuary and why we do what we do. I think that your average estuary group may focus less and less attention on the estuary process, you kind of, you know, adopt it and run with it. But, but for us here, it's kind of helpful to to be somewhat cognizant of what are we doing and why are we doing what we are doing and to what end, and what are the obstacles and what can we do to improve the process so that's kind of what this conversation is about. And, and I think we did it very well. So, yeah, thank you for. And thank you all for your willingness to be recorded and have this posted. Although I think that we want to say something. I'm sorry. So, I just wanted to ask Dave and Matthias if anything that we were talking about was connecting with your questions about COVID. Maybe that's a whole nother can of worms but just wanted to close the loop on that if possible. Yeah, not directly I don't know, Dave. No, I mean COVID is a whole nother, whole nother bag of worms, or can of worms, not a bag of worms. Maybe a bag of worms. But it's also an illustration and an affirmation I think of what part of what estuary can be is not just an exchange of ideas and conversation about concepts, but it is also the building of relationships and caring for one another and it becomes an expression of love for one another. And if those are not secular terms then so be it, I think that almost anybody in the world looks for a place to belong and connect and feel wanted so. Good. Shall I stop the recording? What do you want more compliments or what? Horrible band that Vendonk.