https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1Ox6l6kEzgo

 Hi, this is Paul. I've been talking a lot about the definition of the word secular and my last video, some new kids on the block, started out this video. Often when I start planning a video, I have an idea of what it's going to be and then it doesn't become that, but so be it. I sort of like the way this video rolled out, so I'm going to do it. Andrew Root's treatment, and again, if you haven't listened to Paul and Leitner's, especially if you're a Christian, and especially if you're a Protestant, and you haven't listened to Paul and Leitner's conversation with Andrew Root, it's very worthwhile and I'll put a link to it below. If you haven't subbed to Paul and Leitner's podcast, it's mostly an audio podcast. He doesn't do much on video on YouTube, but it's a really good conversation. In many ways, Andrew Root is following Charles Taylor, who's followed Max Weber. It's been the dominant thesis about secularization in terms of secularization theory and it tries to answer the question of the death of God. Why, as Charles Taylor said, was it axiomatic 500 years ago to believe in God, whatever that means, and it isn't axiomatic today, and how has this changed? Charles Taylor has three definitions of secularity, or secular, which all sort of intersect. Andrew Root, in this little trilogy of books that he's writing, I think does a good job of addressing it from sort of a mainline-ish perspective. Andrew Root, my take on him is that he's sort of a tweener when it comes to the evangelical fundamentalist mainline perspective. He's further to the mainline than I certainly am, but he at least has some understanding of the evangelical world. Now, the story begins with an enchanted universe, and again, I should at some point probably do a video on that chapter that I wrote for John Verbecky and Christopher Mastropietro's book, or at least the chapter I collaborated on. The idea is that, well, the insides of the acting world around us must be the same as the insides of me, that if I'm conscious and look around and I see other people, I think, well, they must be conscious too, and then maybe the sun is conscious and maybe the moon is conscious, and the world is a living enchanted place, conscious or conscious beings, consciousness or conscious beings that you can and must relate to to make your way in the world. And as Eric Weinstein mentioned at one point, you know, it's better if there is no God, because if there is a God, you have to worry about what's on his mind. And that's sort of the dilemma of the ancient world that, well, you'd better make good with Poseidon and the gods of the sea and the gods of fertility, and you'd better appease all of those gods, otherwise you could get in trouble. And of course, this in previous videos, I've noted that when it comes to late antiquity, they're in fact, the pagans or the ancients are doing so much appeasement, it's costing them a fortune. And so they want to find one God to rule them all. So they just deal with that one God and then everything will be okay. But that's very much an enchanted universe. And so in that perspective, priests and rituals make a world of sense. There are holy people and holy acts that influence God or the gods. And if you want to make your way or get what you want in the world, you need to be connected into that great chain of sacrificial payoffs, as it were, and of morality and goods and do the biddings of gods. And that's how you can change the world and provide for yourself and provide for your family and get what you want. And so priests and rituals, that's why they didn't recognize any of that as religion. And so, you know, Sam Harris's observation that religion is ancient science, that's kind of 75% right in terms of it's really more ancient technology. And well, did it always work? Well, if it didn't work at all, they wouldn't have been doing it. They weren't stupid. And this gets into, you know, again, a lot of the work that Jordan Peterson had done in thinking about sacrifices and thinking about the way in which human persons and civilization begin to merge in with the genetic stream and the culture stream and all of that going on. So did it work? Well, it depends what you mean by work. It worked good enough that they kept doing it for thousands of years until they stopped mostly because of Christianity, who inherit the book of the Jews, where if you read the Hebrew creation story, which is markedly different from pagan creation stories, where there's the sun and the moon and the stars and, you know, there are places in the Bible where those things are personified and act, but in the Hebrew way, inherited by the Christians, you don't worship them. You know, Saint Francis can sing brother, son, sister, moon, but there are siblings and they express the will of the father. And so in that sense, you almost have a, you have basically the foundation of what will become deism and what will become our scientific world. But in the ancient world, you still had very much a divine bureaucracy. You had layers and layers of gods and powers. And again, if you read much anthropology, you can find this all over the world and missionaries who would go to Africa and Asia and Latin America and would have to deal with this and even going to have Santaria and Voodoo. And so it's, and as missionaries noted, there's sort of a three tiered universe. There's maybe the high god up there and there's all these middle gods and you know, the high god, you got to kind of stand in line. They're busy. You don't have status. You don't have access. So you deal with all these middlemen. So in Voodoo, you might pay a, you might pay a priest to, you know, give them some rum and give them a smoke and say, okay, we'll talk to the, talk to the spiritual powers and have them, have them find my lost things or go and hurt my enemy or bring me wealth or, you know, on and on and on. And that's sort of the negotiation and the transactional spiritual economy that happened in this vast divine bureaucracy. But if you look at the history of the world, you can see that there's a lot of spiritual economy that happened in this vast divine bureaucracy. But of course, you see this is undercut and argued against in the Old Testament that at every turn, the book of judges, you know, stop with your little shrines and stop worshiping the Baals and centralize the official cult at the, at Jerusalem and at the temple. And of course, with the divided kingdom that at Dan and Beersheba, you're going to have official, you know, and so, you know, this stuff just goes on and on and on for centuries and centuries and centuries. But the, the practice is sort of the same that the world is enchanted and either you have to pay off the big God or pay off the little gods or one way or another. That's how you make your way. And of course, the Abrahamic religions change this. And when Christianity gets adopted, I'll have to talk more about that because there's, there's, that's a big important part of the story, what happens with, with, with Constantine. And I mentioned it in a couple of videos ago. You'll find some very interesting videos on YouTube about the question of evolutionary monotheism versus revolutionary monotheism. And I've, you know, even though a couple of years ago, I had no idea what that debate might be. I think it was very much revolutionary. Jordan Peterson sort of promoted the evolutionary idea, but he's not a theologian. The biblical vision is that, that again, the sun, the moon, the stars, the earth, the land, all of these things are functionaries that are obedient to the Lord. And humanity was supposed to be sort of an intermediary and they would have been obedient to us. The animals obeyed the man who named them. You find that in the garden story. And then with our research, we found that the animals were obedient to the Lord. And so, you know, that's the whole point of the story. And then with our rebellion, creation rebels against us. And now suddenly the world is at war. That's, that's the story of the Bible. Now, after Christianity sort of won the day in, in the remnants of the Roman Empire, especially in the West, eventually, you know, God seemed just so utterly faithful and reliable. And again, after the, the bloodletting of the Protestant Reformation, they're looking for a new basis for, for agreement and stability in the world. And so they sort of looked at reason and empiricism. And so the creator delegates and these are Christians. I mean, Europe had been Christianized for a long time by this point. The creator has delegated administration of atheists to the world. And so this is where, you know, we're studying, well, how can we measure gravity? And Newton comes up with physics. And so it seems that these functionaries that we find in Genesis 1, well, they're extremely reliable and predictable. Well, not so predictable that we don't need an administration of atheists to actually do anything. And so, you know, the creator is going to be And so this is where, you know, we're studying, well, how can we measure gravity? And so this seems that these functionaries that we find in Genesis 1, well, they're extremely reliable and predictable. Well, not so predictable that we don't need an administration of constants as Rupert Sheldrake continues to remind us. But, and this is where we get this language of laws of nature. And I know it always bothers people when I point out the fact that you can't But it's etymology. That's where the word comes from. It's not just constants of nature. It's laws of nature. And, you know, there's a lawgiver and then there are citizens of the laws. And so God decrees the laws of nature. And historically, that's why the language developed the way it did. Now, nature goes from being sort of a sister, brother, son, sister, moon, St. Francis, to now this impersonal fixed thing. And you hear that when you have the governor of the state of Washington declare that, you know, climate change isn't natural. And it's like, well, wait a minute. I thought we're part of nature. No, just for exercise of this conversation, we're excluding ourselves from nature. And you just, well, what exactly are we then? Are we the breath of heaven and the stuff of earth, as pretty much Genesis says? What's going on? And so deism sort of comes into the middle. And Francis Schaefer and R.C. Sproul, I found this little diagram on the Internet when I did an image search about deism where I think they basically got it right, where God is transcendent and imminent. God number one, God number two in the Judeo-Christian vision. God is transcendent, but not imminent in deism. And God made the world sort of the clockmaker universe where God makes the world and runs off. And nature just does its thing. You have acts of nature. And nature is in a sense given a degree of agency, but not conscious agency and not real agency the way we see people as having agencies. So now nature is now a fixed set of patterns that God can but doesn't mess with. And this is where you have in the 17th, 18th, and 19th century the debate about miracles focusing on and you can even find this C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, where there are many people who are basically still in Christendom saying, well, we don't think God would do miracles because he wouldn't want to change his patterns. He wouldn't want to break his own laws. And then that sets up, well, does God make laws that he breaks? And how exactly does this work? And you can see that it's sort of a newer addendum. Modernity is developing. Yesterday I did a really wonderful conversation with Andrea with the Bangs and Ryan Bennett that Andrea always does a little editing on her. I don't edit. I just put my videos right out so there's no waiting. But Andrea was the connection between us because I didn't know Ryan, but Andrea had done a talk with Ryan about a year or so ago. And so Andrea had asked if I'd like to talk to Ryan. I said, sure. And I wanted to encourage and support her. So, okay, why don't you put it on your channel? And so it'll appear on her channel first and then I'll copy it and bring it to mine after a little while to give Andrea her hits and her views. But then Darwin comes along in the 19th century. And as Luis Menend in this book that Jordan Peterson often recommends notes that the critical thing that happens with Darwin is naturalistic. Now notice nature, the word nature has already been transformed and nature has changed in our imaginary. So now we have natural and supernatural. And again, people I loved it when Alastair McGrath called Bret Weinstein on the use of that. And they're very polite and really a wonderful conversation that Justin Briarley hosted on Unbelievable. But this split between nature and supernatural, this is part of the deistic modernistic frame. This was not the ancient world. And that isn't to say that people didn't understand what miracles were. But it's this whole framing of it. And again, if you ask Jay Inslee, well, if climate change isn't natural but you're preaching at us to stop it, well then you're saying we're super natural? Sort of what you're saying. But the thing, the big thing that happens with Darwin is, well, I'll read this quote from the Metaphysical Club. For a belief that species evolve is not incompatible with the belief in divine creation or with the belief in intelligent design. Progressive adaptation might simply be the mechanism God has selected to realize his intentions. What was radical about On the Origin of Species was not its evolutionism but its materialism, or we might say its naturalism. Darwin wanted to establish something, something even his most loyal disciples were reluctant to admit. This is, again, this is the middle of the 19th century. Which is that the species, including human beings, are created by, and you really have to think deeply about these words, created by and evolved according to processes that are entirely natural. Notice the new use of the word natural. Chance generated, chaos, chance, no intentionality. That's what we mean by chance there. And blind. What do we mean by blind? There's no saying, I'm going to develop a human being so let's begin at this and we're going to pass through these creatures in Africa and then they'll go out of Africa in a little mixture with Neanderthals and no intentionality. There's no purpose or intentionality in it at all. It's blind. It's chance. It's chaotic. It's, there's, it just happens. Okay. I don't know how you necessarily can see that in a microscope. That's usually the kind of judgment that's actually a question of a pattern. Is that a pattern? Because usually we look at intentionality by virtue of patterns. And we're pretty used to human agency so we can generally spot human agency fairly well. But is there a pattern there that we can detect that there was intentionality or is it random? And in some ways that's, that's where the debate arises. So there's no point then in rituals or priestcraft because there's no purpose or intentionality happening in the world. If you know the laws of nature and you have access to the involved elements, you, you conscious agent, you provide the intentionality because again, now we're into J-Insleeve world because well now people have intentionality so we're not nature. Well, what are we then? We're unnatural. What are we then? Aren't, Darwin just basically, the point of this is that we're the products of chaos and chance. So if we're the products of chaos and chance, how then are we ourselves and our products, not the products of chaos and chance? No, there's something that comes in, well let's call it reason. Well, but how do we know? This stuff gets complicated. So if you know the, just for the sake of argument, if you know the laws of nature and you have access to the involved elements, you, your conscious agency can get what it wants out of the world. So we are not part of nature. But weren't we the children of nature? And this leads of course, this very convenient self-forgetfulness leads to the myth of progress that well, well here we are products of blind chance and evolution that somehow have developed the emergent property of rationality to the degree that it can be trusted and the degree that we can make small predictions. We don't seem to be able to make really big important predictions. I mean we can't, we can't predict whole hosts of things that are very interested to us about the future and civilization and the economy and even when we'll be rid of these blasted COVID restrictions. But smart, educated, well-informed people know the truth and that their mission and it is their mission to banish the superstition from the world. All that old priestcraft and ritual and all that old technology that didn't really work, now we know. Okay, alright. So if people would only give up those old ideas then the world would be a better place. But as we've made you know, look at Clay Rutledge and his point that people sort of go back to older ideas. They go Alex Jones, they talk about aliens and astrology and energy. Energy is a real fun one. And karma and chakras and you know and, and, and. We don't, we continue to see agency and we just sort of re-enchant the world but we sort of pick up the fixtures at a bad antique store. Oh, this one appeals to me. And whereas some of the projects that you know, multiple generations had devoted their best attention to, well we throw that away and we're going to shop at this, we're going to shop at this flea market and that's where we're going to pick up our our enchantment. But the enchantment we have is always sort of cross-pressured as Charles Taylor. Conflicted. Because there's always these, these nagging doubts that it's, it's not real. It's just kind of a hobby or for entertainment value or for, or, or it's, there, there's shows on Netflix that we can, we can visit and, and we are tourists in the enchanted world but then when important things happen, like things in public, like politics and economics and, and medicine and, and all the important things and we got to turn the Netflix off and then we're back in the real world. And, and, and there's, and there's modernity. And there it's demanded that we do what's rational. And you got really smart scientists like Brett Weinstein, who are And you got really smart scientists like Brett Weinstein, and David Sloan Wilson. And I say, now wait a minute, and Jordan Peterson, aren't people also part of this system? Because people are these, these two track beings. And, and Brett looking at the, the genocidal spelling bee as it's called says, wait a minute, we're, we're, we're assassin robots programmed by genetics, but we're also programmed by memes and, and culture and, and, and these two things have been intertwining for, for, for hundreds of thousands of years and, and genetics has, has become in a sense sort of the servant of, of cultural memes and, and cultural, cultural evolution. And so you have Brett's two track system. The culture runs by more complex rules than genetics, but, but the culture is also blindly evolving. And, and it doesn't mean that there aren't plenty of, of, of rational agents, rational complex, you know, complex agents that are seeking their own welfare in the midst of this, of this, of this cultural evolutionary soup. But in terms of the global culture, well that's far too complex for anyone to manage. And even when you have tyrants and dictators that try to control it, it seems they, they can only kind of hold it together for a little while and then the chaos comes back in because there's no God in charge of history just like there was no God in charge of evolution. It's, it's blind. It's, it's all happening blindly. And well, Brett seems to keep forgetting this. And that's, you know, if I ever talked to Brett, you know, this is, and, and, you know, that's not a, I'm not trying to be snarky. To be human is to forget this stuff and to be sloppy with this stuff and only to, to sort of be able to grasp it in our clearer moments. Because I think if I'd press him, I'd have to say, well, human evolution is just as blind according to your rules as the human evolution is. Human evolution is just as blind according to your rules as, as genetic evolution, right? They have all these agents and they're vying for power and they're vying for influence. But if you look at the total thing, the process according to Darwin's laws must be just as blind as the process before we had all this lauded rationality and agency. And, and, and that seems to be forgotten that that you continue to have real difficulty understanding what we mean by this word morality. Because you forget that there's no morality in the blind Darwinian culture code, just like later evolutions in the genetic code are not better or worse. They're, they're just, they're better or worse. Now we kind of give a nod to Jordan Peterson's Darwinian truth. They're better or worse, worse to, with, to the degree that their adaptation helps them to succeed. And if we apply this to cultural evolution, we're in exactly the same boat. Boat, it's the best dog always wins. The best idea always wins. The best, the best meme always wins. And, and you know that it's best because it wins. Now, now we're, you know, I've been listening to, you know, I've been listening to a lot of people who have been listening to, you know, I've been listening to Will Durant's The Story of Philosophy. Now we're knocking on a lot of 19th century philosophy and, and Herbert Spencer. Herbert Spencer, a very big, important person in the 19th century, nearly completely forgotten in the 20th. Now Will Durant wrote for a good part of the middle of the 20th century, he got his, his philosophy degree at Columbia in the early part of the 20th century. So, so William Spencer was, his name was still around today, but not heard from much now. But this, this vision that, well, this, this, this deep application of Darwin, now a la Richard Dawkins, well, okay, well, this is your system. Apply it to cultural evolution. You might, you might argue that, well, you know, we want to be moral, but we want to be moral, but we want to be moral, isn't, is it really different from just winning? Now we want to be nicer and kinder. Well, okay, we'll get to that in a minute. Cause evolution, both tracks, is blind, right? Now you have lots of non-blind beings in the mix, but again, the the overall process is emergent, right? And so it's the, it's the competition of these, of, of people within the cultural frame. There's no species improvement or progress, just adaptation. And so there's no moral improvement in the culture meme evolution, just adaptation. And we're all Brett and Heather and Claire, and we're all just instantiations of cultural evolution vying for the survival and cultural interests of the ideas that have captivated or are possessing us. We're just, you know, that we ourselves are, are just in a sense, the hosts for these ideas. If you read the New Testament, you'll see that we're just the hosts for these ideas. And so we're just the hosts for these ideas. And so we're just the hosts for these ideas. If you read the New Testament, you might be tempted to say, we're just the hosts of these principalities and powers. We're battling not against flesh and blood, Ephesians six, but principalities and powers. That's what Brett and Heather aren't trying to fight against people per se. They're, they're only fighting against people to the degree that the people have ideas that adaptive competition against. And so what's happening on YouTube is just, you know, sort of a virtual, sort of a virtual forum analogous to the Serengeti hundreds of thousands of years ago. But instead of, of teeth and, and blood, it's ideas that are battling. Well, well, shoot, think about the ancient world. When, when the armies of Israel and Babylon were squaring off against each other, Israel and Nineveh and Israel kept losing. The armies of Israel and Nineveh square off against each other and Israel loses. Well, the gods of Nineveh win. That was the idea. Have we changed that much? It seems we're sort of doing the same thing now. The idea of the God of Israel is to make sure that the people who are fighting against the same thing now. Now here's a picture of Brett in sort of his, if Brett were a superhero, this would be his origin story, not his origin story, but his origin story for fame. He's, he's trying to reason with the students at Evergreen, but well, they've been possessed by an ideology, by an idea and reason lost. Consciousness and its fruits are themselves subject to impersonal mechanisms beneath them. Brett is just motivated by the sum of the forces that created him. The students the same way and that's, that's his complaint. These, these, the university has, the university has shaped the students to, to behave this way and it's a bad idea and so it's, it's competition of the principalities and powers and the gods that are not, well, how does Sam Harris imagine the ancient gods to have been? Aren't they ideas or, or ideas something other than kind of the lightweight imaginations that materialists think ideas are? There, there's no more, there's no, there could be no moral privilege of any position because the idea of the God of Israel is to make sure that the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are the people who are living Canada for centuries. The 快 that. Let's see if the camera will focus on him now. That's bloody postmodern neo-Marxism. It's postmodern. It's integrated modernity and some of these ideas in. And so in some ways one way to understand Brett is try to hang on to modernity, but it's like now the reason postmodernity developed was because of modernity. Now again, when you listen to my conversation with Ryan Bennett, we go into this and that was a great conversation. I can't wait to share it with you, but Andrea has to get it done and put her little intro into it and then I'll leave it up for a few days and I'll pull it from her channel. I'll take the intro out and I'll just post it on my channel because that's sort of the way that we've done things. But human beings are unwitting agents of these principalities and powers. Well, I'm using New Testament language. Human beings are unwitting agents of these what? And here we begin to notice the poverty of the naturalist, materialist, modernist frame because they don't really have words for it. But those people who are sort of woke, well, they don't have any better words for it either. They're even more unwitting because their ideology locates them as being unwitting, but they're fighting for justice. And so we have sort of a modernist amnesia, which I think in many ways is sort of the heart of modernity that we forget that we ourselves are patterns. And shoot, this GIF isn't flipping like, oops, there we go. There's Patch. We sort of forget. We look out of one eye and we say it's this way and then we go back to the other eye. And this sort of makes Bret and Heather's protestations deeply ironic given their worldview. Aren't they just products of not only the blind evolution of genetics, but also the blind evolution of culture? And their ideas of morality are simply the products of blind Darwinian cultural evolution. And, you know, they've been primed by the two-track evolution to feel this way and to go on this way, but part of them should pause and say, well, I'm just sort of the mouthpiece of these ideas. And there's no hierarchy between these ideas. It's one idea or the other. And the best idea will win in the long term. And of course, we think we have the best idea, but we forget ourselves. But that's sort of the heart of modernity because we forget that we're a pattern seeing a pattern. And that's where, as I've mentioned many other times, well, you have to recognize that you are a pattern seeing a pattern. And how do I know that my pattern that I'm seeing through isn't monkeying with the pattern I'm seeing, that I don't have a monarchical vision on the world, that I don't view the world from no place, that I have agendas, that I, that, how do I know I'm not just speaking out of white privilege and a desire to see the system that has certainly benefited me and benefited my family and benefited people that I share a certain degree of identity with. And hey, it might not be racial identity, it might be national identity, or it might be an economic class, or it might be a religious community, or it might be a philosophical community, or it might be an ethnic community, or it might be, or it might be, or it might be. And I don't even know the principalities and powers that are working through me. All moral ambitions are the product of individual or group blind genetic and cultural evolution. So I'm just watching the movie, right Patch? Oh, but you can feel meaning and all of those things while you're watching the movie. Yeah, but remember that Star Trek, was it, who was the Pike? It was Pike. He was in that 1960s futuristic wheelchair just there with the blank gaze looking off and the aliens were taking care of Pike. And it's kind of locked in syndrome. I'm completely subject to the principalities and powers and I can't stop promoting. I'm a non-player character. Now this is where Alastair McGrath kind of wades in and says, well, okay, well, what's the tell-offs of your game? What's the end? What's the good? What's the thing that really this whole thing relies upon? Maybe Brett and Heather are just trying to maximize happiness for their homo sapien cohort and the most happiness for the largest possible number of people for the longest possible period of time. It's not a bad goal. The opposite of the goal certainly is a lot worse. The least happiness for the smallest group of people for the shortest possible time. That sounds absolutely sadistic. But this is in a sense modernity's dead end. This is as far as it can go and it's undermined by the hermeneutics of suspicion and it's also undermined by the meaning crisis because at some point Jordan Peterson or John Rovecch or how many others or Dostoevsky comes around and says, hey, wait a minute. People don't live for happiness. They live for meaning. Well, what does meaning mean? Ask John Rovecch. He's got a whole, he got 50 lectures for you. It's an evolutionary and cultural, this is our evolutionary and cultural code. This is the creatures we are and we know ourselves to be by science and then Dostoevsky looks at this and notes from the underground and says, hey, wait a minute, we smash our brave new world out of spite. Spite? What do we mean by spite? What do we mean by meaning? Well, we don't know what we mean. We don't know these words more than 50 or 60% but good enough to use them back and forth. If I just live being satisfied having all the food I need and having all the Netflix I need and every want is satisfied to me, you know, pretty quickly it's the thing that's rejected from me, right? What's his name with the private island? Who are friends with Bill Clinton and Donald Trump? Conspiracy theories? Yeah, well now it's underaged girls because it's the one thing I'm not allowed to have so it's the one I want. Spite, Dostoevsky says. And this explains the sacrifices of happiness that Brett and Heather are making to make the world a better place through politics and science and culture and, you know, they don't have to sit there in front of the camera and well maybe they need their Patreon money, I don't know, but, you know, they don't need to do this. They're sacrificing for the cause and giving money to Unity 2020 and in another couple months it'll be Unity 2024 or 2022 if they're getting into the midterms or, you know, and I kind of expect Brett to run for office, that's my guess. Because if you don't have religion, it's almost always politics, that's running downhill from it. But it feels meaningful and even rewarding to fight for even a losing cause. Meaning trumps happiness. There's no question about it, scientifically. But what if religion offers both meaning and happiness? Well of course Gad Sad says, well I'm a purist so I go with truth and how do you know what truth is? Isn't that also a product of all this cultural, blind evolution? Well maybe you know little chunks of it but you're really dealing in very big pictures that you can't find in a microscope. You're really, along with the rest of us, as David Sloan Wilson tries to rather unsuccessfully impress upon Gad Sad that, um, he's a purist and he's like, no, it's this, you know, my best language for it right now, symbolic, dramatic, liturgical, imaginary. I know that's terribly unwieldy but it's maybe getting close to a fancy vervekey word. It's symbolic, that's right, but it's dramatic. We act it out. It's liturgical. We act it out religiously and it's in the imaginary. And this is the realm that we commonly inhabit and again these are atheistic scientists promoting this. And you might say, oh you sneaky pastor and your principalities and powers, I'm just mapping what they're saying and stuff that I find in the Bible because that's what I know. Gad Sad won't have it but he sure seems subject to it. He's on YouTube with his agenda too. He's there in both, with both hands in meaning and deriving a degree of satisfaction from meaning even if he's exchanging some happiness for satisfaction. He too is a product of blind genetic and cultural forces. But we'll have to sacrifice his utilitarian credentials too because the goal is not truth but meaning. And this is sort of where we come back down to Andrew Root because utilitarian religion tends not to work well. Ask August Comte and he tries, he said, okay well let's set up the Roman Catholic Church with rationality and we'll have our Sunday assemblies and we'll do this and we'll have a rational religion and it doesn't work. And in some ways that's kind of what the main line has been doing but you know that now that the essence of religion switched to morality and then just morality and then it just becomes pure morality and then it just becomes sort of a cheap, a cheapened politics with rituals because people feel meaningful. And again it reminds me of that brother and sister in an emergency room when a loved one is dying and they embrace each other and they sing, you got to know when to hold them, know when to fold them, know when to walk away, know when to run. And I just thought both of these individuals grew up in church. Church has done a lousy job for these two because this is the most meaningful song they can think of is this drippy Kenny Rogers song about poker playing? Poker playing is a metaphor for life. Yeah I get that. And I get folk religion and I get the fact that this stuff connects with us but it says a lot about their cultural formation. And it says a lot about how the church, this church, before I got here, but hey fair enough I'll own it, didn't give them a better song they could sing when they were embracing in that moment. Now they're brother and sister and these things happen in families and I get that but that's my point. Utilitarian religion is crappy and the reason it can't stand a candle to even all sorts of other religions that you might mock or that I might mock. You know, Scientology works better and it's a scam. Utilitarian religion doesn't work. You have to really believe, you have to really believe that can you forget how you got there? Can you exercise those doubts? Might you become what you denounced earlier? That's sort of where we're at modernity's dead end. The church got there first in some ways and has been dying before modernity and in a sense the death of the church that we've seen is the harbinger of the death of modernity and ironically one side is killing the other. The priestcraft is increasingly obsolete and ministers, well the Weber, Taylor, Andrew Root thesis has the Protestant Reformation playing a prominent role, found a very interesting piece by Peter Lightheart with some recent scholarship and this is where we'll get into some of the other secularization theories. Definitely the Protestant Reformation is a contributor but also a symptom of what was happening and you can see it in the book of the Bible. Sometimes people come up to me and call me father. Well my title in the Christian Reformed Church is a minister of the word. I'm not a priest. Why aren't I a priest? Because we have the priesthood of all believers. Well what does that mean? That means that again, sort of a one speed flat Protestant vision of we're going to have a whole holy city not just holy people in the midst of an unholy group and where we have different standards on pastors that, wait we still have that in the Protestant church don't we? Different standards on college presidents whose wives like younger men and they like watching and and and and and. The Protestants couldn't quite fully pull it off but they're ministers they're not priests and and the word difference is important because they're ministers and they're they're ministering to the flock but they're teaching because again in the Protestant it's it's much more cerebral and mental than ritual acting it out. Dramatic although very quickly in Protestant churches it becomes dramatic as well. But it's modernity's dead end. And Andrew Root speaks quite eloquently about the crisis of the main line and he's part of it he's an honest writer. You know the main liners increasingly worked rituals for those who felt them to be meaningful but again they're sort of entertainment and it's not unlike the freedom from religion people that put up the billboard a few years ago that says I can feel wonder too and it's like stories of old that says your life really isn't a story but you can go to the movie and enjoy a story and it's and it's and it's Sam Harris saying on one hand it's all determinism but we have to go out there and save the world. Oh. How really didn't didn't you just saw off that branch you were sitting on. But you know the fundamentalists have their own problems and it's still Esther's tweet about Jerry Falwell Junior still rings. I have a this is before the big allegations I have a modest proposal for Jerry Falwell Junior try being a fundamentalist for a day. In some ways the fundamentalists continue to win because they're actually not feeling so cross pressured. They're living in they're living in it without kind of the internal dissonance and maybe Brett and maybe Sam are too. Maybe deep down we're all fundamentalists maybe maybe this maybe the science talk is actually just a lie or just maybe maybe the science talk is larping maybe maybe the science talk is sort of like dressing up to go to Star Wars. Because you can't really pull it off you can't really live in it. But you don't even know you're doing it maybe it's sort of sort of always larping unconsciously. But fundamentalists themselves they have their own cross pressures and the technology and the social fruits of modernity keep luring luring them in. You know and I always find those those incongruities I mentioned them in previous conversations where you know I don't believe in evolution or any of that modern biology but doggone it when they got cancer they're right in there getting chemo. Where do you think those models come from? Comes from all of these doctors that were taught evolutionary models. They're not worthless they can't be. But how do you regard them? Are they blind? And so here we are and I think in some ways the most honest thing is just to own how little we know. But we don't act like we know little because we have to act and so we we go with our best guess and we try to figure it out. And so of course John with his religion that isn't a religion he's seeing the dilemma and so establishing ecology of practices that afford meaning and self-transcendence and all of the things that religion offers and community and and dialogos where we talk together and we try and grow and I'm I'm down on that project I'm down for that project because I'm learning a ton but and and John isn't allergic to religious people and and I'm not allergic to irreligious people because truth be told and in many ways aside from the aside from the the professions we're making we've got a whole lot more in common and that again is the story of the West and Glenn Scrivner is doing videos on that that that that Christians are far more secular than they want to admit including fundamentalists and fundamentalists and and and and atheists are far more Christian than they care to admit and so well if we're if we're all sort of LARPing at what we're doing maybe we can cut some of the pretension and have some productive dialog and have some real conversation and maybe maybe actually yeah you'll call me on some of my stuff and I'll I'll call you on some of our stuff and if we can avoid getting defensive and and and maybe maybe build other relational connections between each other we can learn along the way. The challenge with sort of imagining we're gonna we're gonna clean where you know we're gonna clean slate this thing is Jordan Petersen's I think quite correct thing that you can't write a fairy tale. We are still the products of all of this historical development and we're amazing creatures that we function and use all this language that we barely understand and barely know but it works sorta it works as well as it does it's amazing but here we are. And so this was the earlier conversation that that that Ryan and and Andrea did I was didn't recognize Ryan because his hair was in front and his beard was bigger he's wearing glasses it's like this is the same guy you talked to a couple years ago but it is and so again I'm I'm so excited about this video I'm so anxious for it to come out because it's a it's a really good conversation. But if if modernism tells you you must inhabit a story that's what the science says for for meaning and for a moral system because in terms of blind Darwinian cultural evolution it's blind there's no morality there's no purpose there's no there's no right and wrong there's no good and bad the right and wrong are simply functions of the story then well you're probably gonna continue to borrow the Christian one because that's the one that's been winning and that's the one that seems to win and that's the one that but you don't know whether it's really really true especially if you know all this other stuff in the way that it's it's cross pressured and right there we're in the middle of Charles Taylor because that's the point he makes he says we can't we can't we can't hold these ideas without the cross pressures it's really hard and they nag us because we can't unlearn what we've seen and and again my conversation with Ryan is just a wonderful conversation again can't wait to share it with you and probably driving you crazy because it might be a few days or a week because because Andrea has her own schedule maybe maybe I'm I'm pressuring Andrea to to get it out there but if you recognize that you are a pattern looking at patterns and of course you know if you're trying to if let's just use a little illustration if you're moving and if you're moving and you're a pattern you're a pattern you're a pattern looking at patterns well you can't fool yourself because I know that I'm moving and I'm know I'm distorting the patterns and so I can't really be expected to judge the pattern so we'll have more people look at it and we'll try and isolate variables and we'll try and do as much science and that's a powerful tool and we'll we'll we'll act as if we have a we have a monarchical vision and we'll we'll do the best we can and we'll get these little gains in small places and we'll try and get a big picture but we always know that that's sort of where we are and what we're left with and so where we wind up sort of is the search for sacraments which is the search of the search for fixed points where where we see beyond our blurry chaotic patterns Islamic fundamentalism I think in many ways is this because I you know I remember looking at the fact that these were these these were not people these are not Bedouins in the desert who were flying planes into buildings these were Osama bin Laden is part of the Saudi royal family that had a western education and these were the best and the brightest of their generation who had been to school in France and the UK and what did they do they saw modernity and post modernity and they rejected it and became fundamentalist why because we seek meaning we live in story shouldn't be any surprise that we're doing this shouldn't be any surprise but it matters which story you inhabit and basically where you go is you embrace the problem and you pray you ask God for help you say I don't know if you're out there but if you're out there can you let me know and when I watch videos on the internet and I look at people and I talk to people yeah it's the dead end of modernity it runs smack dab into religion and it isn't going away