https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YKg3JvBZQ_s

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. A few months ago I preached a sermon on Jonah and the hero's journey and part of what I pointed out in that sermon was that Jonah didn't really follow the hero's journey. Over the last few weeks we've been taking a look at Moses and I just did the little Google image zeitgeist search and noticed that Charleston Heston came up quite high in terms of American imagery with respect to Moses. That movie, The Ten Commandments, really burned itself onto the American consciousness and in fact left a legacy of Ten Commandments monuments throughout courthouses all over America that are continuing to get attention from people. Now Charlton Heston, quite a bit younger than the 80 years old that Moses was, says the book of Exodus at the time of this, was a young and virile and strong man and so we have that image of Moses parting the Red Sea and the children of Israel going across. Well, is that how we should read the book of Exodus? Is that how we should understand Moses? In that video, or in that sermon I talked about, Will Schroeder's take on Every Story is the Same where he picked up Joseph Campbell's monomyth and well you can kind of imagine Moses, his call to adventure and going into the abyss and atonement and return, but again it doesn't really fit Moses' story. One of the things that you should always notice about these monomyths are that the story is always about you. A few months ago I also looked at a couple of videos from a movie, YouTube channel, movie analysis YouTube channel called Like Stories of Old and it's one of the best movie analysis YouTube channels out there, but the guy who does this, he's a Dutchman, I had a little bit of a few interchanges with him after I did my last videos. Basically the thesis that he said was, well stories are not like reality. Reality is random. Stories are only understood when you imagine there's a point to the story and all of the elements of the story pursue that point. That's basically what makes a story. Stories pursue their logical conclusion, their telos. And it's within understanding stories like that that you actually have heroes because heroes move the story along and the story sort of unfolds around the actions of the hero. But now the individual who did Like Stories of Old is, I imagine, sort of a normal contemporary agnostic or atheist and he says, yeah but life is really random, there's no point to it. And so the illusion that you're a hero or somehow a character working out a story, moving the story forward, that's equally as illusory. Well we've been going through the story of Moses in the book of Exodus and Moses, we noted the first week, is contrasted with Sargon of Akkad, an example of worldly liberation. Of course Sargon killed his way up to the top and for most of us, Pharaoh looks evil, but in many ways, Pharaoh is doing exactly what he's supposed to be doing in an empire of the world, which is managing his labor force and trying to keep them in place so they can continue to do the monument building that made Egypt great and is the reason most of us, when you just say the word Egypt, have images of statues and pyramids and obelisks conjured in our mind to the degree that in fact when Washington, when the United States decided to build a monument to George Washington, we took a page right from Egypt. But the question of the book of Exodus might be, who made Israel flourish on conditions of genocidal slavery? Who gave the midwives courage and blessed them with families for defying Pharaoh? Who introduced himself to Moses at the burning bush? Who is the main character of this story? Now we continue with the story. Afterwards, Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh and said, this is what the Lord, the God of Israel says, let my people go so that they may hold a festival to me in the wilderness. Now a lot of people have wondered, is this kind of a trick? Because Moses and God made it awfully clear that, well, the whole purpose of these, of them is to get them out of Egypt, out of slavery. But in many ways, even the question itself is an act of liberation because if you understand anything about slavery in the ancient world, a slave is a non-person. If someone becomes a slave, their marriage is annulled and if someone gets freed from slave, they would actually have to remarry the person they were married to before. That's how non-person a slave is. Now, there's a lot of assumptions from the ancient world that are built into this text. And it's, well, gods have territories and so it's reasonable for people who are patrons, who have divine patrons to go out and do service, do worship to their God. Then Pharaoh said, who is the Lord that I should obey him and let Israel go? I do not know the Lord and I will not let Israel go. Pharaoh is basically saying, you guys and your two-bit little gods. Egypt is on top of the heap. Nations are proxies of their divine patrons and who, what kind of divine patron would be patron to a bunch of slaves? This is just absolute silliness. Make your crazy ideas about going out for a festival and get back to work. You see, and this is going to boil into this hardness that we egalitarian Americans read and we get so edgy because why would God harden Pharaoh's heart? Well, everything in Pharaoh's world of success around him places him on top of everything and feel a feeling of superiority over the Hebrews and their imagined divine patron. And so any attention towards this, he's going to double down because that's his position of power and this is what he's going to assert. So Pharaoh feels himself safe to simply dismiss this request in smug self-sufficiency of his worldly status, which reflects in his mind the superiority of his divine patrons. You see, there's a lot going on in this story about all of the world's assumptions about how gods work and how their will is known. It's very karmic in the ancient world. If you're on top, it means that you're in the favor of the gods, that you have the best gods and that everything you're doing is right. That's how karma works. And so since Egypt is on top and Pharaoh is on top, of course he's going to sneer at the request of these slaves. In fact, he's going to double down. Then they said, the God of the Hebrews has met with us. Now let us take a three-day journey into the wilderness to offer sacrifices to the Lord our God or he may strike us with plagues or with the sword. Now we have a little bit of foreshadowing here about plagues and the sword because, well, what's going to happen? Well, this is exactly what, this is the language that a pharaoh would understand because these are exactly how the gods of the ancient world worked. Basically, the way oracles worked in the ancient Near East was that gods demanded the service and their payment from their serfs, from their people. And in some ways, Moses is making an argument of self-interest to Pharaoh. Pharaoh understands that that's slighting a divine patron has consequences, but Pharaoh is not concerned about the patron of these slaves because again, a patron god of the slaves would be an inferior god than the patron god of Pharaoh and of an empire. And so everything around him hardens Pharaoh's heart and what Pharaoh is doing again and again is simply in his own self-interest from how he understands the world to work and to be. But the king of Egypt said, Moses and Aaron, why are you taking the people away from their labor? That's what laborers are supposed to do, is labor. Get back to your work. Then Pharaoh said, look, the people of the land are now numerous and you are stopping them from working. That same day Pharaoh gave this order to the slave drivers and overseers in charge of the people. You are no longer to supply the people with straw for making bricks. Let them go and gather their own straw, but require them to make the same number of bricks as before. Don't reduce the quota. They are lazy. They have time to come up and make silly requests of me that they go out into the desert and worship their two-bit god. They are lazy. That's why they are crying out, let us go and sacrifice to our lord. They were doing enough work they wouldn't have time to complain. Make the work harder for the people so that they keep working and pay no attention to these trouble makers, Moses and Aaron. And the slave drivers and the overseers went out and said to the people, this is what Pharaoh says. Now pay attention. How many times? This is what the lord says. This is what Pharaoh says. You see, very clearly we are having a competition. Who really knows the truth? Who really is ownership of, who really owns the world? Who really calls the shots? Where can blessedness and punishment be found? I will not give you any more straw. Go and get your own straw wherever you can find it, but your work will not be reduced at all. So the people scattered all over Egypt to gather stubble to use for straw. The slave drivers kept pressing them saying, complete the work required of you each day just as when you had straw. And Pharaoh's slave drivers beat the Israelite overseers. They had appointed, demanding, why haven't you met your quota of bricks yesterday or today as before? Now pay attention to the chain of command here. Pharaoh kicks down on the slave owners, the slave drivers, the slave drivers and overseers kick down on the Hebrew, the Israelite overseers, and they kick down on the people. That's the chain of command in the world. Kick down, kiss up. Then the Israelite overseers went and appealed to Pharaoh. Why are you treating your servants this way? Your servants are given no straw yet we are told make bricks. Your servants are being beaten. But the fault is with your own people. Pharaoh said, lazy. That's what you are. You're lazy. That's why you keep saying, let us go and sacrifice to the Lord. The whole point of this passage is who do you serve? And Pharaoh says, you serve me. Now get to work. You will be given no straw, yet you must produce the full quota of bricks. The Israelite overseers realized they were in trouble when they were told, you are not to reduce the number of bricks required of you each day. Then they left Pharaoh and found Moses and Aaron waiting to meet them. And they said, may the Lord look on you and judge you. What's going on here? They would use the Lord's name to curse them? That's what you do, right? Because surely if it's happening, this is what God demands and requires. You have made us obnoxious to Pharaoh and his officials and have put a sword in their hand to kill us. Well, what's Moses going to do now? And Moses returned to the Lord and said, why Lord? See? See? This is why I didn't want to do this. Why have you brought trouble on your people? Is this why you sent me? Ever since I went to Pharaoh to speak in your name, he has brought trouble on this people and you have not rescued your people at all. See? It's very similar to the book of Genesis. It was that woman that you gave me. This is what we are like. Well, what will God do? Throw a lightning bolt and kill Moses? And the Lord said to Moses, now you will see what I will do to Pharaoh. Because of my mighty hand, he will let you go. Because of my mighty hand, he will drive them out of his country. God said to Moses, I am the Lord. I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob as God Almighty. But by my name, the Lord, I will not make myself fully known to them. I also established, but by my name, the Lord, I did not make myself fully known to them. In other words, he didn't reveal the name to the patriarchs. Now he reveals it to Moses. I also established my covenant with them to give them the land of Canaan, where they resided as foreigners. Moreover, I have heard the groaning of the Israelites, whom the Egyptians are enslaving, and I have remembered my covenant. Therefore, say to the Israelites, okay Moses, you didn't like it the first time, you are going back. I am the Lord, remember? I am Pharaoh, bricks without straw. I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from the yoke of the Egyptians. I will free you from being slaves to them. I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with mighty acts of judgment. I will take you as my people, and I will be your God. Then you will know that I am the Lord your God. Now pay attention, this whole thing is about self-revelation. He didn't reveal his name to Abraham. Now he revealed his name to them, and all of this is so that the people will know. We'll see it's also that. Egypt will know. It's that the world may know. Then you will know that I am the Lord your God, who brought you out from under the yoke of the Egyptians. And I will bring you to a land I swore with uplifted hand to give to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob. I will give it to you as a possession. I am the Lord. Look at how many eyes are in there. What's his name? I am that I am. Well, I am has come and I am is going to do this. Who is the hero of the story? We just thought we were going to get a little physical upgrade. We just wanted better working conditions. Moses reported this to the Israelites, but they did not listen to him because of their discouragement and their harsh labor. Well, Pharaoh's plan seems to be working. Then the Lord said to Moses, go tell Pharaoh, king of Egypt, to let the Israelites go out of his country. But Moses said to the Lord, if the Israelites will not listen to me, why would Pharaoh listen to me? If a bunch of slaves aren't going to listen to me, why would this king listen to me? Since I speak with uncircumcised lips. Now remember last week we had this strange story of circumcision. Circumcision is haunting this. And now, you know, we know when where men get circumcised, then it isn't lips. What is this story about? Well, circumcision is a sign of consecration to God. And well, why does Egypt feel itself in a place of hardness, in a place of superiority, in a place where you kick down? Well because they win, because they're winning. And well, that's why they would say their gods are special, their gods are most important. They're the winners. And Moses said, I'm a loser. I told you this from the beginning. This isn't the faltering lips that we saw before. These are lips that are ineffective in terms of spiritual divine words. Moses is in a sense feeling justified here. Moses has been ineffective. And then suddenly, if you're reading along in your Bible, something strange happens. And the story is interrupted. And it's interrupted by a genealogy. If you had been reading through the book of Genesis, you'd say, well, wait a minute. A genealogy? We saw all kinds of them in Genesis. What is with these genealogies? Why is this, in fact, a clarification? Because verse 13, now the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron about the Israelites and the King of Arrakon, and he commanded them to bring Israel out of Egypt, it seems. And many, many scholars in the past thought, well, this is just some weird insertion by a bumbling redactor who wasn't paying attention. And it was almost like he had a copy machine. And, oh, well, let's stick this one right in the middle of the book. That's not the case at all. The point of this is that Moses is not the hero of this story. Aaron is not the hero of this story. The hero of this story is, in fact, the author of history. And the author of history has intentionality. And he has been building this story for generations. And you can see this because this business about uncircumcised lips comes right back up again, right at the end of the story. This isn't some clumsy redactor who is sort of shuffling papers like you shuffle cards. Now when the Lord spoke to Moses in Egypt, he said to him, I am the Lord your God. Tell Pharaoh, King of Egypt, everything I tell you. But Moses said to the Lord, since I speak with uncircumcised lips, why would Pharaoh listen to me? I don't have the magic words. It's not effective. It doesn't work. It doesn't work. Then the Lord said to Moses, see, I have made you like God to Pharaoh, and your brother Aaron will be my prophet. You remember that from last week. He says this again. He's saying, this is the order. You are going to be like God. Well, who's the hero of the story? The Lord is the hero of the story. But how does he move? He elevates Moses. Moses has uncircumcised lips. Moses has ineffective speech. Moses is not up to the task. That's right. I will take the people out of Egypt. Remember all the I's? You are to say everything I command you. And your brother Aaron is to tell Pharaoh to let the Israelites go out of this country. But I will harden Pharaoh's heart. In fact, Pharaoh's heart has been hardening all along with all of his success. We always look at this as some kind of hidden manipulation by God. Hardly so. This is the product of Pharaoh's success. That's why he dismisses Moses and Aaron. And though I multiply my signs and wonders in Egypt, he will not listen to you. Because he's full of himself. And they're full of their success. And they're full of their power. Then I will lay my hand on Egypt, and with mighty acts of judgment, I will bring out my divisions, my people of Israel. And the Egyptians will know, remember, right before that genealogy people piece, then Israel will know that I am God. Now the Egyptians will know that I am God. The whole world through this story will know that I am God. Genesis 1, the maker of the world. This is who this is. You mean, you mean, this slave people would, their divine patron would be the patron of patrons in the world? And the Egyptians will know that I am the Lord when I stretch out my hand against Egypt and bring Israel, the Israelites out. The Egyptians recognize power. The Egyptians appreciate karma. Well, I'm going to give them more karma than they want. Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord had commanded them. Moses was 80 years old, and Aaron 83 when they spoke to Pharaoh. So who is the main character of the story? Who made Israel flourish under the condition of genocidal slavery? Who gave the midwives courage and blessed them with families? Who introduced himself to Moses at the burning bush? Who will bring them out? Who will change them? Maybe life isn't random. Maybe someone is guiding your life, but he is the hero of your story. He makes hearts hard and soft. He brings justice to the world. Now, Moses is the most humble man. St. Luke of Deuteronomy says this. Moses understood his place in the world. He got that beaten into him early as a failed revolutionary and 40 years of humble service of his father-in-law in the desert. Yes, he had uncircumcised lips. We all do. It is not ours. It is not our power. It is not by virtue of our purity and our sanctity that God moves. Moses is made like God and his brother Aaron his prophets. And he brings his divisions out of Egypt. And what's so interesting about this passage, how does it end? Moses and Aaron did just as the Lord commanded. No yeting. Grateful obedience. Not obedience out of fear. They saw, they understood, they went forward, they believed, they obeyed.