https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qquu1uvDrzI

 I'm going to go ahead and go ahead and turn it off. All right, I think we're on. Let me see. Let me refresh this. Yeah. Yeah, we are on. Yeah. Yesterday's video tomorrow or today's video tomorrow's video. That was a great talk. And you know, his I'm just amazed his little, you know, Jonathan Peugeot is a Marxist. How how triggered everyone. It's a joke, but people are like triggered. But the whole conversation about sensitive. I know people are so sensitive. It's like if you're that sensitive, stay off the Internet. Really, really? Yeah. How do you not get triggered if you're triggered by that? So, yeah. So, I mean, today's yesterday's conversation for me, it was yesterday for you guys. It's today. I'm like Australia. I live one day in the future. But I love it. I love it, Weston, when people do this from work. So it's why I didn't know. Probably not that common. But I mean, I work at a cool place. So, I mean, I guess it works. Well, it does work. Well, when we're doing the open studio, people would often just come in from work. And I, you know, I had a chance to I as a pastor, one of the coolest things is to get an understanding of other people's work. Because jobs are so cool. And I think my job school, I love my job. I wouldn't want to do anything else. But other jobs are really cool. So I have something to share with you, Paul. All right. I messaged and got responses back from a few people you might know about FEC, Fallen Earth Creation, Justin Briarly. He responded. Yeah, he responded back to me. I sent him a link to our conversation. And I mean, I knew it was a long shot. And but and he didn't have that much to say. But he just said, thanks for the note. You're right. You are, in fact, the only person I know who holds this idea. Well, and he just said, you know, given I didn't even like request anything. I was sort of just sharing it with him. But he said, you know, in a kind of a joking manner. And for that reason, I'll pass pass on it for now, you know, and just said, cheers. But and then the second person that responded back to me was Josh Swamodas. He recently wrote a book called The Genealogical Adam and Eve and did he collaborated with William Lane Craig on on establishing at least the plausibility of having a most recent common ancestor not too far in the in the in the past. And he also sent me a well, he he suggested I submit something to a specific journal that he linked to me. And he told me to contact the man by the name of Hudson. And I don't know if that means anything to you, but I just yeah. So I've just been anyways. So that's all. Well, cool. Well, I'm glad I'm glad I was able to give you a little bit of visibility and that that you're able to pursue this thing. And if Justin Briar Lee says he's never heard of it before, it's a good bet, because I would imagine he Justin hears a lot. Well, and he was he responded so quickly. You know, I was just like, really? And anyway. Anyway, so all right. I couldn't even get to your video today, Paul, because I was I'm working in this nursing home that's like basically a death sentence for anybody who goes in there. And like the reception is so terrible that I couldn't even get there. Most of the like I got through maybe 40 minutes and then it was just like whatever. So I went over and started listening to a book, but I did get to make fun of the video a little bit because this guy was kind of funny doing his little little rendition of Nietzsche. I don't know if you got to watch that or not. Well, I haven't had a chance to see it yet. I'm dying. Oh, yeah. I'm dying to hear Mark's reaction to it, because on one level when I was talking to local distance, I thought. I don't I don't know if it's temperament or personality or what it is, but it's like, boy, if I put a whole bunch of hair on Mark and some glasses, there's a maybe not the content of what he's saying, but how he goes about it. It's like I'm talking to Mark with hair. Yeah, you remind me of an evangelical version of Mark. Yeah, that that could be that could be. And I've known other people like that, too. And I don't I don't know what it is, but just just the way you approach things and the way you I mean and I mean, honestly, he and I, we recorded two and a half hours, but we talked for four. Yes. Wow. Yes. Wow. I just finished that conversation at work here and it was the full two and a half. But so, so was he doing most of the talking? Yeah, he did most. I had there are places where I got some. I got a few minutes in there, but he did most of the talking. That reminds me back in the day when I used to take lots of Adderall. Oh, gosh. Wow. I didn't get a chance to watch it yet, Paul. I was looking forward to it as I tweeted to you. And then we got caught up on this initiation to game B thing. Oh, you've just been Manuel and I would just because I put it on on my discord server. I said important videos, you know, and I'm basically like this is the manifestation of something very bad. And then, yeah, it's a we spent all day going through that video in a transcript, ripping it apart because we're going to put that on on my YouTube channel, navigating patterns. And we're going to do a commentary on it because I've been looking. I actually had a request on my last video to do a commentary on either like Jordan Peterson or Contra points envy video that you did the commentary on. And I started that one and I went, oh, wow, this I was like seven minutes in and I'm like, I've got like a page of notes. I'm like, there's a lot going on in this first seven minutes. Yeah. So I was like, man, I don't know if I can get through this. And then you tweet out this initiation to game B video and I watch it and I like every alarm in my head that says bad thing went off like at a volume level previously unheard of. Oh, that that initiation to game video. I watched that. I was like. Was it basically like the digital Ubermensch or something? What's the matrix? But instead of going into a rich metaverse, they go into an eight bit like Atari version. No, yes, I know what that is. But like, are they basically saying that you're going to be like the Superman in creating the new game? Like, that's kind of what I was getting out of it. It's like they do that, too. They do a lot of that. So, yeah, one of the things we noted is they insert you into their narrative as a hero, but they have the authority because it's the three wisdoms and the three wisdoms have authority over you. But they're not telling you that. And they're doing these paradoxes where they're saying nobody can understand this complexity of game B, but you can manifest it. And it's like what? You know, and the whole time they're telling you what game B does. So it's like, if nobody can understand game B, then how can you understand game B? There's all these tricks they're using. We've got like a huge we finished the notes for that video. It took like three hours for us to go through the transcript. And I was like, Manuel, you have to go to sleep because it's like one in the morning. I'm tired. I'm just mentally wiped out. It was really because we kept noticing more stuff and going like, what are they doing here? And taking more notes and line by line in the whole video. That video was that video was was a little terrifying. Yes. Ellie Jo Ellie Jo called it pixel Hitler. Oh, well, I can't the Stowa guys are well aware of Jordan Peterson and if you're well aware of Jordan Peterson and you listen to maps of meaning, then you know the word parasite is probably not a word that you want to use. What's your use it like four times? Yeah, so that that's that's that's a video on my list of I wanted to. Yesterday I started working on a video continuing on with the storytelling theme. We're going to shift from Star Wars to the Matrix and Matrix to the Direction and some of those things. But I didn't I didn't get that done. And this afternoon it was like, am I going to be able to get that done? I don't know if I'll get that done. The the conversation I had with Dr. James, Dr. Jim was was really good. And I know I it's just it's it's just too funny how triggered people get. I mean, what's what's what's people show? I mean, it's it's my own personal lack of it's my own personal lack of sanctification that in certain contexts when people show you their buttons, it's like you got to press the button. I press the button. Well, Paul, why do you think that people are getting so so up for the thought of though? So I think that there's a lot behind that. Yeah. That's involved in this in this discussion, whatever the discussion is that we're having here. A lot of us are really sensitive. I mean, like I can I can relate to the vocal dude to a degree, you know, but like still my impressions of the video first of all, we're just kind of like all of this is old, played out crap that I'm just sick and tired of hearing about. Like we heard about this stuff like four years ago, three years ago, and every Jordan Peterson lecture you ever listen to, it's like this is all mapped territory. I'm sick and tired of it because it's like I spent like three years waiting for the end to come. And now it's like, oh my God, I'm just sick of this crap, you know, but I think that a lot of us are just kind of raw and sensitive to this stuff because it's like it's it's like I was thinking about something that that came out in one of these videos about the sale fragmented. Was it that thing that Peugeot was talking about? I can't remember. No, but yeah, it's like you have like there's like all these different stories that people have latched on to. Oh, you were you were addressing that in that Peterson video that or that you had Peterson up like that is what's going on here. I think like so now everybody's latching on to like the fear because it's like the big story. Right. And so you got two sides of that. It's just exhausting. So so once you so once you understand the whole woke moment and then you see the tricks, then your question is, OK, how do we get because you're not going to you're not going to avoid it or shrink back from it or just go into the past. You have to ask the questions of how to go through it. And when and I I see this little corner of the Internet and the conversations focusing on that. OK, so that's that's that's pretty much how I conceptualize it. And but it was. I think it's I think it's fine. I just thought that there was it was like played out like, oh my God, you listen to another video. My favorite guy is going to talk about some bullshit that I'm so sick of. Just skip it. Just skip it. And, you know, he had he had sent me he had sent me a note and wanted to be on the channel. I agree with you. I have I have very little stomach for for either woke or anti woke. The questions, the questions are. The questions are, OK, how how to move forward. And in that sense, I think this little corner of the Internet is is trying to reconstruct. Yeah, rather than, you know, freak out about deconstruction. Well, and that that's my hope. So like you say, if your video draws. Draw some people, they come for the culture. I think they'll stay for the estuary. And I think we'll work it out there. I think that's I don't know if that's what you're intending to do. But if that's what happens, I think great, because like that's what I believe that this corner of the Internet is doing. It's more aimed at solutions to whatever these problems are. And the solution is being able to talk honestly and openly. I think that's wonderful. Yeah, I don't I don't know if I'd frame it as solutions as much as this is this is how we relate to each other. And the the culture of of relating to one another is is really what we want to emulate and reproduce. And I think that's what we're practicing here. So Jacob, Jacob was, of course, in last week for the Q&A. And, you know, he shared his story of, you know, first he was into Eric Weinstein, but he saw how that Discord server basically got sabotaged and melted down because it didn't have a culture. And so the key is developing a culture where we can have conversation. And he actually brought me, you know, that I see Father Eric wearing his clerical collar. And I know I'm going to get in trouble with Jacob because I haven't put it on yet. But why a Hasidic Jew brings me a clerical collar and insists that I must wear it? That's the strange world we're in. Well, that's that. That's the I think I think what you're really circling around is intimacy. Right. So you can't just build community. It doesn't work. You need the intimate connections. That's what builds a community. And without the intimacy and I would categorize intimacy as part of enchantment. Right. Reinflation. You need a place to have intimacy that requires enchantment. The world has to be bigger than just the material objects. Otherwise, you don't you don't have it. And then you also need to cultivate it. Right. And and cultivating intimacy to some extent means, you know, you got boundaries. Right. You can't can't let everybody try to be intimate because some people are destructive, inherently destructive. And some people are not inherently destructive, but are inherently bad for the environment they're in. And to some extent, that's what happened with Eric Weinstein's portal discord server. I mean, a lot of things happened. There was definitely sabotage. Eric didn't do himself any favors. They never built a community. The whole thing fractured into four other servers. It was it's quite the story. Right. And then, you know, there's all these accusations running around about stolen material and there's still one surviving server that's actually doing work. Right. And it's weird the way it fractured and built for other communities. But I think only one or two are surviving anyway. And and yeah, yeah. And now because it never had that cohesion through intimacy, it you know, it just created a lot of damage. And what you're exemplifying here, Paul, I think, especially with the live stream will say is a walk through an intimate community, a community that is building intimacy into it sort of from the start. And that's what most when you when you try to build community without building an intimacy, they fail. And that's the real the real problem. You need those those containers so that you have a place and a way to to connect with each other. Well, I think that they're sorry, I was thinking that I got to go here quick. But the foundation of the intimacy around here that I loved and I love that you're talking more about this again, Paul is talking about stories again. And you're getting into story of that. I think the whole thing rests on all of our shared stories and whatever the shared story of this thing is that we can't seem to nail down. But I don't want to talk about our sorry. Love you guys. Got to go. Bye bye. Well, I think I think Chad is right in that we we have to we have to know each other to the degree that we can via our stories as persons as you know in the Christian frame as image bearers. And that's that's the foundation of our relating to one another. So you have you know you have Father Eric who's Roman Catholic and I'm a you know Dutch Reformed. But we you know we can know each other we can respect each other we can build a relationship. There are there are certainly differences between the Dutch Reformed and the Roman Catholic. But that doesn't mean that it almost sounds trite. But that's why in a sense you do story first. And with pastoral with pastoral care. That's that's always the way you begin. You begin with each other's stories knowledge of each other and care for each other. So that might be the only way to build intimacy is through story. You know we talk about all these different ways of connecting. But I think they're all invalid. The only way to connect to people and to have people connect to nature and have people connect to the ineffable or the transcendent or however you want to frame that is through story. It's through narrative. And we're so postmodern that we're just demonizing narrative just right off the bat. And that's wrong. It's just it's not going to work. And that was never the problem. The problem was bad narrative versus good narrative. And when you can't tell the difference roughly speaking that you know in my in my conception that's ethics. So when you lose ethics you can't tell a good narrative from a bad narrative. I think that's why the first thing you do if you want to be a dictator and do evil things is you attack the church. You either supplant the religion or you just you make the religion not talk right. You weaken the religion somehow. And when you do that now there's nothing to push back against the principality of the government anymore. And if you don't have that basis you know for ethics and the tools in the framework to enact ethics and to understand ethics then you're going to lose the intimacy anyway. And and once you're not intimate with people you can kill them because there's no connection anymore. So you know there's still people but you're not connected to those people. So their lives don't matter in essence. And I think that's you know that's the story of the 20th century right there I think. Well let's let's practice a little intimacy. I want to find out how Father Eric is doing. And and and I want to find out how you're doing too Casey. So all right. Well I've been having a pretty good go had a pretty good week this week. My pastor was on vacation for like the past two and a half weeks my boss. And so I had a little bit of extra work to do and some days that's a bit much to handle. I had a really good funeral that I was the presider at on Tuesday. And so the dynamic at my parish is that my pastor's been in the same place for 25 years which is an unusually long time for a Catholic priest. And so whenever there's a funeral of like one of the pillars of the community somebody he knows he obviously wants to take it. It's his prerogative. And there we go. Which means that the only time I ever get to do a funeral is it's somebody that Father Dale doesn't know. And so I get to sit down with the family and be like so what was mom like. And you know do the funeral. It works out OK. But this this fella he he kind of returned to active practice of the faith in the last months of his life. And I regularized his his marriage went through that process with him. Fortunately it was pretty simple. They were civilly married and there was just a little bit of things we had to take care of in order to have them church married. And yeah just the opportunity to actually know the guy that I was burying and to know his his widow and to get to know the kids a little bit. It was nice. It was nice. And yeah I felt you know felt like a priest. That's a good day I think. That's a good day. So people people often don't understand the beauty and power of officiating at funerals. It's it sounds people think it's a bad thing when I say it but it's there are almost always highlights. You know there are not they're not all highlights. Trust me I've there are some funerals that are just plain hard because of the lives that people have lived. But others are others can be glorious because what you can what you can actually do is you have it's sort of like the documentary conversation I have here. You have all of the data of this person's life and you can draw out the story of the gospel from this person's life. And usually your church is filled with at least in California half to four fifths of people who never go to church anyway and have no idea what church is about. And so you can you basically have it's the easiest place to present Christ and Christianity and the gospel because especially if a person has lived the gospel well they've seen it but they haven't. You know it's sort of like watching perhaps watching kind of a silent movie and now you're adding the text for them. And I've I've actually in terms of well before YouTube or anything. Sir doing funerals was by far my best church growth strategy. The people I and folded because they came to a funeral and heard it and then came back. You know I probably gained more people through the people I gained that way than any other way that I've ever been that since I've been here. So people think that's strange but it's it's not strange it's not strange at all. What what's I'm curious about regular rising there. Tell me about that because you know we don't have that. Okay. Do we have time for a little history lesson. Sure. Sure. So you get to the later part of the Middle Ages and early modernity and the church had been catechizing people for a while now that it is the marriage vows that create marriage. This actually created a pastoral problem because there would be gentlemen and ladies in a secluded area who wanted to get married all of a sudden. And they would get married. And there would be some of these gentlemen who would get married three four or five times. So this is creating a pastoral problem. But so at the Council of Trent there was a decree that said okay from now on you need to be in front of a priest and have two witnesses. Right. So it's all of that problem. There's no question after that that these two were not married according to canonical form. And that is those down. Is that a piece of it too. The documentation of it. That's on the priest to document it. Yeah. Oh did we lose them. So you've got and it's parish is supposed to have a marriage register and then you send a notice to the place where both of them were baptized and they make a notice on the marriage in the baptismal records. So when it works it's like it all it all works. So. This couple they got married on their front lawn. You know there's no priest there. And so they did not abide by canonical form. So if they didn't abide by canonical form I've got to. Convalidate the marriage which basically means we do a ceremony and they say the vows again. What's what's the. What is the. What in your opinion is the relationship between the state and marriage and how does that. I know in other countries like in the Netherlands there's often a separation here in California for example because I'm ordained when I perform a ceremony it's we fill out. I have them go down to the clerk and they get the marriage license to bring it here and I sign it and they have to mail it in and all that stuff. But the part of the reason that same sex marriage has been so disruptive in many Protestant churches because partly by the way the Reformation happened and and here in the United States they have a lot of different If you're married in the eyes of the government will take your word for it. But obviously you guys are far older and had quite a bit more of a structured system. Yeah yeah so we do I do I do it the same way here in North Dakota and I don't even have to register with the county because I'm a ordained minister. I put my signature on it the state will recognize the marriages that we celebrate as having the civil effects in addition to whatever ecclesial facts we want right. And so you know we believe that marriage is a sacrament and marriage is a sacrament instituted by Christ. And so we can make a pretty firm distinction between the sacramental effects of marriage versus the civil effects of marriage and we like it when the government recognizes marriage because that's good for building up society. But the sacramental effects of what we do so. And that is a distinction for those who don't know and many Protestant churches we have two sacraments we have baptism in the Lord Jesus Christ. We have baptism in the Lord's Supper as we call it or Eucharist and and y'all have seven. At least that's what I was taught in seminary and marriage is a sacrament for the Roman Catholic. Is it a sacrament among the yours amongst the Orthodox. You'd have to ask them but I think so. I we find ourselves strangely bereft of Dutchmen and Orthodox here in our little chat this afternoon. I don't know what's wrong with the server. We have a fallen Earth creationist one of the very few. We've got a mark I still don't really know how to describe Mark. Oh I thought you looked familiar. You were from that video. I remember that video. He was at home then. Weston now now remind us what you do for work and describe that a little bit. Yeah. So can you hear me OK. Yeah OK. I'm an aerosol scientist. So before you jumped on my my guess my official title is I'm a research scientist and we're a small company and I'm you know not there. There's not much of a hierarchy here. So and my boss he allows me to you know be flexible with titles or whatever. But I basically what I do or what our lab does is anything you can think that would be aerosolized in the air good or bad. We we simulate it in testing whether that be an air filter that wants to clean the air or like a nebulizer that you want to nebulize a drug into your lungs. And so we test all types of devices and then we have all we have a slew of other services we do. That's that's our bread and butter. And I happen to be at work so I can show you the test chambers if you'd like. But so besides covid what other kinds of things do they do people want tested or probably all kinds of rights I would imagine. Yeah stuff you wouldn't imagine or like like lots of spray bottles you know like spray deodorant defogger or like foggers for you know pesticides. I'm trying to think of a unique device. Here's here's a couple of unique devices. There's like wearables people like to type they'll send these wearables with like with like catalysts in them that are supposed to clean the air. They don't work. This little thing you're supposed to wear around your neck and it's supposed to ionize the air in front of your face. Stuff like that really doesn't work. But people send that stuff all the time and they're really popular like it's kind of like a touristy. I almost imagine them being like in in in you know tour shops and stuff like just because the idea of them sound can sound really cool. So we'll test stuff like that. I'm trying to think what else is unique. Before you jumped on I was telling them that someone sent us a like a hormone chemical that you spray on your orchard and it confuses the male moths mating habits. And so they're unable to mate and therefore your orchards orchards remain free of moths. And so he presented it to us as a as a harm as a you know as a non harmful measure against these moths. And I mean it is I don't know how well it worked. We just tested how its behavior in as an aerosol. But so that was really unique. That is that is I imagine people are experimenting with all sorts of things these days. Oh yeah. For sure for sure. I think the biggest the biggest new avenue is like bioengineering. So you know you can you can now get a little gene fragment you know put a little protein capsule around it and nebulize it into you know disease people's lungs like cystic fibrosis. You know they're it's getting very specific. The the the types of drugs drugs that are being experimented with. I would imagine taking things you know I don't even know the correct nomenclature you know basically via your lungs. I mean obviously to bet we've been getting tobacco and nicotine in that way and all sorts of things. And I would imagine instead of necessarily piercing your arm with needles and trying to get something in the bloodstream bringing it in through your nose or mouth. That's a pretty effective way of getting something into our body. Yeah you know what's crazy. The magic number is five micron five micrometers. If you can get a product down a particle down to that size it will go all the way to the deepest part of your lungs and will deposit there. And you you'd be surprised how much drug doesn't make it. It'll like impact on the back of your throat and you'll swallow it which it won't do anything. But that it doesn't matter. They they sort of account for that. Pharmaceutical companies will and health care providers you know account for that and they know OK a third of the drug is going to make it all the way to where we want it to make it to. So you know let's let's have a nebulizer this amount to compensate. Huh huh. Wow. Interesting stuff. How did you get into this. You know I I was actually in medical school and I sort of became disillusioned with it. I love the basic sciences and and then as it got closer to clinical the clinical side I wanted to do something else. And so I I you know took some time to figure out what I want to do. Still didn't know when I applied here I didn't know. And this was kind of just fell into my lap. It's it you know it's it was nearby and I applied it with with my skill set. And here I am. Wow. Wow. That's pretty cool. Pretty cool. Well I've driven the conversation and if you guys have anything you want to throw at me or throw at each other. Hmm. Well I thought your conversation that you posted today was was interesting. I when you started it I was clearly missing some information because you were like OK now tell me what made you so pissed off about you know postmodernism. And I was thinking oh this is going to be a good one. And of course it was. And man I all what I heard from him was a man passionate about that topic. I mean wow. And he had you could tell he had thought about it in every which way. You know he had he had ways of describing it and thinking about it that really you know for someone who doesn't know as much could catch him up. You know he had a lot of different analogies so I thought that was cool. Yeah. It's it's funny the way the different social media platforms work and that's way too broad a word. But so he's he's basically got about sixty five thousand followers on Twitter mostly fighting a war fighting the woke war. So what does that mean at some point you have to ask. And how does that shape you. And you know as we you know as we're talking with Chad before he left to me the woke war. I'm sort of done with the woke war. And I because of you know because I built a channel in some ways commenting on Sir Jordan Peterson. People see me in the context of the woke war but I do see the work that we're trying to do in this little corner of the Internet as basically what comes. That guy Paul. What's that. Oh shit. Now you come in and you're cuss on my live stream. I don't even know who you are. You don't have your camera on. You see she just bumped in the room. I'm on the Internet. But you know the question is the question is. And this is part of I think that the limitation of meaning as a gyroscope. You can you get a lot of fields meaningful fields fighting a culture war. And I don't find the I find you know as a pastor I want people to find life and life is beyond just getting the enthusiasm of owning or dunking on your adversary or. And so that's that to me is always where where where we have to what we have to pursue. So. I don't know. But it's it's clear it's clear that and I knew when he was talking I told him I said you know response to this video is going to be interesting and Nate Nate Hile jumped on it almost right away and I thought yeah I knew I knew Nate was Nate was going to be all over this thing as as a number of others are because you know we've got we've got people in this community that are. They're not into a woke at all and they're a little woke ish or you know they're that's that's kind of the diversity here so we got somebody else coming in. Well the troublemaker of all the troublemaker of Israel. You asked for a Dutchman and here I am. I summoned a Dutchman and I know the voice and I know the label so that's that's none other than the John Van Donk so maybe it's best if he does keep his camera off. He probably can't figure out how to turn it on. That is actually true. That is not truly. That is actually true I do not know how to do this. So. Now do Friesians count. Friesians oh we were going to go there. I'm half Friesian and so when you bring I always like I'm yeah anyways. Good man. There's also there's also an orthodox guy waiting in the waiting room here Nathan Doane is orthodox and he would be happy to join. He can come in I up the limit of this room so there's room in this room for him. I'll go tell him. Okay. Hey Nathan come on in. How do you think the internet works John. You just talk to your computer. Yeah. That's it. Just talk to your computer it'll work out fine. Oh. Well did it work. No. No he's in a different room you can't just. I just texted him there I just I just wrote him there. Oh I went to back to the other room. And leave this room John and message him. You know it's this is like it's like trying to I I spent a while trying to train people a generation older than myself in the way of computers I did that about 25 years ago and you'd say people would be like you know they want to get a document into the computer and they're kind of flapping it against the screen. What do you mean though who just joined us here Paul. He made it in. Who just joined us here. And why do you think that happened Paul. How do you think that happened. You're welcome Nathan. Hello. Thank you. Welcome. Hello Paul it's an honor. I love you. Well thank you thank you. Well why don't you. Maybe the other people have met you here a little bit but tell us a little bit about yourself. Oh boy. Well I'm 32 years old. I live in Eastern Pennsylvania and I've always been kind of a searcher my whole life but I was brought up in a pagan you know just just a child of the world. So yeah I read the Bible right after college and started to learn about religion a little bit and looking and looking and looking and eventually I found a little Russian church up in Maine and Jordan Peterson helped somewhat for sure. Jonathan Paget helped quite a bit. And now I'm Orthodox and and I really enjoy this estuary space. I think it's very juicy of course but I'm but I'm I'm entirely Orthodox like like like in fact I I think the true stance of the Orthodox Christian Church is that well everybody should become Orthodox you know. And so that's kind of my attitude and I and I like to I I'm interested in maybe the the more missionary stance of things or the like also like what are the conflicts between these different denominations and are we afraid of this conflict like you know you can't be Roman Catholic and Protestant at the same time you can't be Orthodox and Catholic at the same time like we have disagreements and that's something that I really enjoy talking about. But to a fault you know to a fault for sure. That's me. What do you think Father Eric can you be Orthodox and Catholic at the same time? That depends on what you think about the Eastern rights that are in union with Rome. Some might accuse them of trying to be Orthodox and Catholic at the same time but I think they're properly Catholic which means being about the whole. Good answer. I like I like these I like these priests that I've met I mean so far I've been you know I've been impressed by the preparation for for many of them. Some some Protestant clergy you meet are well prepared. Others not so much that's just kind of the way it is with Protestantism so. So, so how long ago ahead, Nathan. I have a question Paul. Did there used to be like a history in the Protestant churches of arguing about who had it right like did the Presbyterians used to fight against the Methodists, you know like, no, you've got this wrong you've got that wrong you should join my church you should join my church did they used to be that kind of dispute of spirit at all. I'm not aware that it ever stopped. Oh really. There may have been a couple of wars about it I'm not certain. Really? Well, it certainly has stopped. I mean now we live in this non denominational. That's the spirit of the times right is like let's just get along everybody. We all believe in Jesus. No, it's not denominational just means crypto Baptist. Usually like the in house fighting got worse, you know, right like gizmos within within reformed within Presbyterianism. Yeah, it's all over the place. In fact, if you're around here and you see us not doing it. That's the exception. And and it's not it's not to say that there aren't things to talk about because there are plenty of things to talk about. It's just some of us have been in unproductive conversations and you get your fill of them. And then you want a productive conversation to be genuinely curious about how the Orthodox or the Catholic or the Baptist or anyone that's not in my own little silo. How they construct their world and then to learn from it and probably to grow from it. And I think you're right though, Nathan, to a degree that in many places now I am able to express appreciation for Catholic ideas or formulations or traditions and Orthodox ideas and formulations and traditions that in the Christian reformed church. I might not have been able to express 20, 30 years ago or 50 years ago. I can now. So in that sense, the heat has reduced partly because in many places in the West, we're no longer allowed to kill each other over these things, which has helped lower the heat and helped increase. I think the quality of the conversation. So that's my take, at least. And it makes the arguments a little less exciting. Well, just just to clarify, Nathan, I mean, within within Holland, there are some major rivers and everything below the rivers was traditionally Catholic and everything above the rivers was traditionally Protestant. But that also has within it the collective memory within culture of the Spanish war, which actually from which Holland separated itself in the 1568 to 1648 to 80 year war, which was was purely a religious war. Well, insofar as it can be purely, it was framed as a religious complex, right between the Protestants and the Catholics. And then and then as soon as the Catholics were ousted, the Protestant, the Calvinists that remained promptly within the next, I'm going to say, three centuries divided themselves into 140 little cluster denominations. And did those but within Protestantism, did those fight quite a bit? I mean, certainly nothing like the Protestants fought the Catholics. Am I right? Well, they might not have fought in physical war, but a separation, for example, of the upskiting in 1834, where were certain people didn't really want to belong to the state church. Those were heated arguments and they resulted in people physically taking their church elsewhere and saying, hey, we are not going to participate and consider ourselves members of this. And they started the Griefmederkerk, which is a denomination all by itself. But it didn't it didn't last very long. And they were arguing amongst themselves about whether or not women should only wear black stockings or could also have non black stockings. I work with the Amish and there you go. There you go. Same thing. A whole lot of these things happening all the time. You know, they fight about whether you can use a tractor or not. That's a very serious conflict. And they have regular schisms over these sorts of questions. Well, then I'm a little bit puzzled by your question, because if you know that about the Amish, it is really true in almost every denomination. And here in this country, quite frankly, here in this country, there were literal wars fought between the North and the South in the Civil War, where whole denomination split along those lines. Well, so now you have the Southern Baptist Church and you have the Northern or also called the American Baptist. I mean, those were physical literal wars. But. Right. But those examples that we've had so far are examples of splits within a church. And I'm I'm kind of missing the the the days where, you know, Martin Luther would, you know, where you'd like, you know, nail your objections to the door like, like, you know, disputes between churches. I feel like there's a. That wasn't between churches. He wanted to raise conversation within his community of scholars and monks about these issues. And the problem was it escalated the history of the Reformation. If you find some good books on it, it's plenty written. Yeah. And then how to contain these things. I mean, it's it's an interesting question. So the Protestant Reformation happened in certain places, but not in other places. And it's a fascinating study to see, to ask the question why that is. Perhaps the dynamic that you are referring to, Nathan, when I was at Fuller Seminary, which, of course, at the time was historically a reformed seminary, but quickly opened itself up to all kinds of denominations. So every denomination was well represented at Fuller Seminary in those classes and before and after classes. There were intense debates about, you know, what was wrong with your denomination and what's wrong with my denomination? You know, those kinds of discussions would actually happen. I mean, I had one friend who was who was a member of a Methodist church and he was very attracted to the reformed tradition. And I was kind of intrigued by his more freewill Wesleyan tradition. So we we had more friendly conversations, but there were others that were arguing with each other. You feel, do the other people in this room feel like there's sort of a dearth of those productive interdenominational arguments today? Well, no one hates Calvinists more than hyper Calvinists. I don't see a lot of conversation, right? And to the extent that there is, I mean, I think the problem is if you're not going for intimacy where you're finding commonality and connection, then you're in rebellion. And we're so stuck, especially in the US, like the ethos of the United States is just rebellion. Like the government said something, not that. I think whatever the government said, no, right. There's a lot of people like that. I think that that's the opposite of intimacy when you're when you're trying to break apart and trying to find differences. Right. And it's weird that in the in the Catholics, there's Catholic orthodoxy and they don't recognize the pope. And yet they're part of the Catholic Church. So that, you know, there's weird areas where there's some crossover and commonality, but we're so focused nowadays on division and on making sharp lines and then finding reasons why that separates us that the productive conversations are hard to have. I also wonder if having a Christendom doesn't occasion inter-Christian squabbling, right? Because it's like we need to distinguish ourselves. You know, there's like a limited slice of the pie. But once you're in a more apostolic mode where the culture is not upholding Christian values, vaguely stated, if that doesn't make make us all of a sudden realize, hey, we're really not all that different. You know, sometimes, Paul, I hear you talk about total depravity and I feel like Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson was like, that's not total depravity. Yeah. Yeah. And I think part of what's happened right now is when, for example, when the United States was a much waspier nation, the, you know, the anti-Catholicism was much more vehement, and that would scale down. The we're we're in the midst of some pretty dramatic cultural changes right now. And these have been going on, especially since the counterculture. And but but the whole 20th century. And so a lot of churches don't have the energy to fight battles over the minutia of internal doctrines. And so everything has just sort of been polarized into these into these far larger culture wars. But I again, I continue to believe that many of the issues within these wars are all issues within Christianity and and sort of teasing teasing these things out. It's a lot. It's very hard to actually try to synthesize it. That's why there's always new ideas coming out. Maybe this is a way into it. This is a way into it. One of the reasons I'm so fascinated with this question, I think, is because my experience of Christianity my whole life as I was raised apart from it was nothing but like seeing I was very critical of all the Christianity that I saw around me. And I didn't see anything that seemed authentic is the word and juicy and reverent. Anyway, and so when I fell in love with the Orthodox Church, I see all those things. I see it in the liturgy and I see it in our saints. And I feel like I want to shout it from the rooftops. I want to like accept challengers like what you think that your saints have anything on our saints. And I want to shout it so that all the other Nathans out there can hear it, you know, like because I feel like I would have appreciated it. So that's kind of where I'm coming from. I feel like that's like what I've discovered is so earth shattering for me personally that I want to shout it out. And I know that means inviting dispute. Would you consider yourself then a militant Orthodox? I would. I don't think there's any other way to beat that. And actually, that's extremely common in terms of the first kind of your it's the honeymoon phase of your conversion in many ways. It's you know, it's it's it's not I don't think it's terribly different from let's say infatuation where you see that person they can do no wrong and you fall in love. And you know, that's that's right. And now in time, probably a more mature love will settle in and you'll you'll see some of the flaw. I mean, people people stand up in front of the world to pledge their undying love. And seven years later, you know, that person is their mortal enemy. I'm not saying that's going to happen to you with respect to your church. But I that's any as a pastor, I'm sure as a priest as well, converts come in and they're they're filled with enthusiasm as a pastor. You love it. But you also know they're going to cool off a little bit. That's going to be OK because it's going to be part of the maturation process. So but there's there's plenty out there on YouTube and the Internet. The Internet. Oh, people are all over willing to fight it. I mean, religion is is second only to porn in terms of popularity on the Internet. I have a thought I'd like feedback on in on this topic on something you said, Pastor Paul. I want I always wonder, I can't get this out of my head, this idea that that maybe one element that less talked about one influence of the reformation that's less talked about is the is the social hierarchy, the differences in social hierarchy among, let's say, barbarians and civilized Romans. This this would be going back, you know, either reformation and before. And that maybe or is it possible that the the the Catholic Church fit better among Romans because it reflected reality in it, at least in the sense that, you know, this large ecclesiastical structure is mirrors. The society are already live in. There's there's a Roman pontiff. There's an in at higher latitudes, your social circle didn't get bigger than a hundred, two hundred people. So for them to go for them to pay homage to the Catholic Church or for them not to pay homage to the Catholic Church, that's that's no big deal. They were used to splitting and resplitting because that was sort of what the northern areas demanded of them anyways. And so it seemed like it was no big thing. I don't know. What are your guys' thoughts? If you look at the areas of Europe that stayed Catholic and the areas that went Protestant, you know, there's there's culture, there's geography. And then, you know, the areas that stayed Orthodox, I mean, these things go so deep. That it's there's, you know, people will continue to say, look at this aspect. And then somehow the map lights up and it's like, oh, there's that, too. There's so many layers to this. That's that's right. And that's why I think it's interesting moving forward beyond this moment where, you know, the Roman Catholic Church was changed by the Protestant Reformation. You know, even responding to it, the Orthodox Church in America is going to be changed by America. And I think we see the beginning of those transformations. And I, I, you know, if if Tom Holland is correct, that a few centuries from now, if the Lord tarries. The 1960s to 1970s will be regarded something like, you know, 1515 to 1525 in terms of sea change in the world culture. You know, it's I don't know what new I don't know what Christianity will continue to look like. But I am convinced that my money is on Christianity because I think out of all the major world religions, Christianity showed a capacity for cultural adaptation without losing itself, even though plenty of things do. And. Yeah, go ahead, John. Well, I was wondering if we might not also now be in a time where the Internet the Internet becomes the great leveler. And I wonder if any intellectual or communicative or communal manifestations of church is going to be able to withstand this this this leveling because communities were always able to maintain their own level. They were always able to maintain their identity by preaching to the choir and within walls. And now the walls have been taken down and it seems like everybody is talking to everybody. And contrary to Nathan, we are not all fighting and we are actually attempting to find some common shared meaning and shared understanding of various dynamics. And I I'm thinking that all churches are, like you say, going to change. But I also think that the the the non-Christian community is going to find its own groove. And we may have to deal with that. A big a big question. You know, a big question in secularity is and again, Tom Holland sort of pursued this. To what degree are people who claim to be secular, not as secular as they claim? And again, some of this code was added by the Protestant Reformation because of how the Reformation went out, whereas before Catholic and Orthodox, if you're a part of the village, you might never go to mass. You might go twice a year, but you're Catholic because and you had a self identity as Catholic in Protestantism. You know, Protestantism was like, well, hey, you're in or you're out. And if you stop coming on Sunday, you know, and but my sense is that, you know, the Roman Catholic Church in some ways adapted to some of that here. And, you know, like we started talking a little bit about marriage, the boundaries, the boundaries around Catholic marriage, that fence is that fence is maintained much more than in many Protestant circles. You know, there are John knows this, too, that you don't just you just just just walk in and say the priest. Oh, gosh, your sanctuary is beautiful. Can you do our wedding? And I think that's good. And the Orthodox have even gone further in some ways. You're a lot more likely to hear, oh, your stage is lovely. Yeah, that pretty golden box. You have my sympathy, Father, you have my sympathy. Stage is lovely. So, yeah, it's there's no there's no end to to what's changing now. And, you know, figuring it out. This is a little bit paradigmatic, though. What we're looking at right here on the screen in the sense that that there was a time when this could not have happened. Oh, yeah. Yeah. People people with that with the enormous diversity and background being able to come together here and and and well, it's going to be really hard to kill each other for starters. But I know. Wrong. I've got the power of this little finger right here. You can right click. Oh, OK. Oh, that's right. Yeah, you can do that. I've got administrative privileges on this server. No, that's right. And I. I'm not going to do that. No, that's right. And I. I am I am happy to be able to do what I can for this. And and and not only in terms of within the church, but I have I have long seen and many of us have. Christian Christian values and those who don't believe in God. And OK, so how can we how can we talk about that? And how can we at what level can we share life? And, you know, obviously, but but, you know, what always what always gets me is OK. What is this? What is what is being a Christian mean? What does it mean when I say that? Now, there's I got lots of ways that I can describe it. But there is a there is a this is, again, part of why I stay a Calvinist, because I finally believe that it is God who it is God. The the finally the identity that matters is the is the filter through is is what God says we are. That's that's finally what really counts. And because what I say I am, what do I know? But what I don't know what you mean by that. So like, does God say that I am, you know, to be a plumber or or to be, you know, like, like, what do you mean exactly? What God says I am or who God says I am? Because my understanding is that God calls us to be like him, like Christ, you know, like his disciples. So and so the purpose of the Christian life is to approach approach him. Yes. But he you know, so Jesus will have, you know, these, you know, Lord, Lord, did we not, you know, did we not see you preaching in our streets? Did we not follow along in your triumphal procession? Did we not? And Jesus says, depart from me. I never knew you. So in other words, us knowing him is secondary to him knowing us and us claiming him is secondary to him claiming us. So that's now in terms of the Christian life. Yes, you're called you to be a Christian means to be his to be to belong to him. So and he does call you to. But then when we say be like Jesus, does that mean wear sandals? It means something. And then finding what that means in this cultural moment, two thousand years later, with all of the relationships you have with people and things in this world, that's part of what Christian discipleship is. It's the calling to figure that out. It's not a small thing. And saints, you know, we talked about saints. That's that's the that's the that's what saints do. Saints figured out. But what you find with even now Protestants, we don't have official saints, you know, like the Catholic or the Orthodox do. But and I don't remember where this was before, but someone had mentioned one of the amazing things, even when you have little saints, How different they are from each other. And and here the church says, this is what it's like to be Christlike. And it's like, well, wait a minute, they're all very different. And yes, but they are still expressing. They are still they're still bearing witness to the spirit of God, how the spirit of God moved through that individuality. And even even if you had two saints living next door to each other, you know, they will be different. Yet they're both saints and they're both they've both achieved and reached a degree of Christlikeness, which is extraordinary enough for the church to say, look at them. I don't know. Did I get that right, Father Eric? I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Yeah, and something I just thought of recently is this idea that the reason that Jesus has to come back again and he has to transform reality from the bottom up is that the world as it's currently constituted is not big enough to hold Christ. Like he's got to like like expand the template, the whole thing, because it just doesn't make sense. And whoever he is, he's just too big for the world. Yeah, you know, so it's got to it's got to be built for the bottom up so it can fit him. Yep. Go ahead, John. We are having a conversation around our church right now, which maybe of some interest in this context. So discipling is thought to be making the disciples like the rabbi, making the disciples to be like the master. And so act like the master, talk like the master, be like the master, have priorities like the master, value the same things as the master. So the end result of that kind of discipleship to all become transformed into the image of Christ and all the discipleship of Christ. All become transformed into the image of Christ and all have the mind of Christ in us would yield considerable uniformity among the disciples. On the other hand, and that's where the tension comes in. I am eager to know both about myself and about other people in the congregation. Why did God wire me the way he did to be the kind of person I am now living here in this specific location for such a time as this? I want people to think about that. I think about that myself. What am I doing here right now? Why did God place me here in this situation to do what I'm doing right now? And what gifts did he create in me to bring that to bear? And that is, per definition, going to be different for every individual because we all come to our current moment from a different trajectory, from a different place with different gifts, with different God wired us all differently. And he brought us along different paths and trajectories and brought us to different locations. And here we are on Thursday afternoon. And for some reason, we're all here in this room right now. But what's that all about? And you cannot come with a notion that if we're all going to be like Christ, we're all going to be doing the same thing. And we're all going to act the same way and talk the same way. So there's always going to be that kind of tension when you speak about spiritual formation and faith formation in a church. You know, you cannot try and have the cookie cutter approach. So then the next question is, OK, if we're going to do something other than the cookie cutter approach, what will that look like? So the God of the God of redemption is the God of creation. And I love how Eric put it. It's similar idea in C.S. Lewis's The Great Divorce, because Christ's resurrected body is, in a sense, creation 2.0. And part of the reason they can't get their mind around him is not because he's somehow less than them or less real than them. It's because he's already bearing in his resurrected body the flesh that each of us will bear with its capacities, with its. So that's I love how Father Eric put that this world is too small for him. And so with his return and the transformation of a new heavens and a new earth. It's but but we begin we begin that process. So the diversity we see in the Saints, you know, that that's going to go further up and further in. And I mean, when you start when you start to get a vision for. When you start to get a vision and a sense of its reality. This is the kind of thing that will motivate and energize and and inspire to to do the kinds of things that saints do. Usually sacrificial. When I think about this, about the description of the Saints, you know, what it sounds like you're talking about is they all exemplify the archetype in the form. Right. And from different starting points. And then I really like what Father Eric said, right. Because Jesus comes in and makes the container bigger for all of us. Right. And in that, you know, maybe in that in that larger container. Now we have more possibility of transformation or more instances of the archetype of Christ being acted out or being able to be acted out so that we can see it more clearly. Right. Because you need contrast to see. So if everybody looks the same, you actually can't see anything physically. Your eyes. That's how your eyes work. You can't see anything if everything's the same. So you need that contrast that John was talking about. Right. You need that in order to see it all. And then that's why you to some extent that's that's the only reason you need. I mean, I need different people starting at different points and being dropped in this place with different skills in order to see the archetype. Otherwise, I can't I can't I can't grasp my mind around it. And of course, I'm a big fan of this Jesus container and getting larger thing. I think that's great. So my question is, is part of the problem that we're trying to create smaller containers within that larger container that is Christ. When problem when you get specific. It's really not. It's really difficult to not differentiate and then fracture and theology. You know, theology is always trying to see us. Lewis said this in this letter to his friend. Theology, you know, look at look at the look at the evolution of Christology. They begin by worshiping Jesus as Lord. And someone's going to come around and say, hey, wait a minute. What does that mean? And so Christology, Trinitarian theology, they take things off the shelves of the languages and they try and piece it together. Once you're in that process, you're doing differentiation. And once you do differentiation, there is going to be division. So it's I think it's part of the process. And I think that I think the thing see I mentioned the Trinity and guess who shows up. Hey, I said part of the part of the process is that differentiation. But then you have the question, how how must that differentiation be manifest in our other relationships in our world? And so what does that mean? And what it seems like, I mean, at least to me, it seems like more often than not, part of the issue is that because God has allowed us not to be backed into a corner with his complete eminence, it seems like it's at least part of the issue is, I mean, even though there might be baskets that should not be it shouldn't be a trap or it shouldn't be a container error. Yeah, it shouldn't be completely contained like how we've talked about the fringes and stuff like that, leaving things on the side and how it rains on the righteous and the wicked and etc, etc, etc. The different body parts. I mean, there's so many things that that map out the distinctions that are that are out there that are allowed. And I was just talking about how in the waiting room, we were talking about how denominations to some extent are to some extent, they're kind of like Christological kingdoms that God allows, even though he he preferred Israel to be ruled, you know, direct from him through the other prophets and whatnot. But to some extent, he's allowed us our preferences, which are, you know, not ideal, but he knows our strengths and weaknesses and each church has their strength and weakness. And each can hold this hand can can be a conduit for the spirit of God, who is not constrained in any way, except by his own will and his covenants, right, which is part of his character. You know, but that's my two cents. I have no idea if this is appropriate, but I feel like I don't hear it enough and I feel like this that the Orthodox have to say I don't feel like I actually belong in this in this conversation in this in a certain sense, except to say that we disagree about, you know, what you just said, nine digit era that God has like, you know, condescended to allow us these kingdoms like like this is not as it's meant to be. We're to be one in Christ, like, you know, just as just as I am the father are one, you know, unity is our calling. And, you know, I've had this thought with respect to a number of other things that have been mentioned in this conversation. And obviously I can't speak all of my disagreements, but I just think it's interesting. I really do feel like orthodoxy is really a different Christianity than than what I hear Protestants discussing and I don't and Catholics to for sure. But that's a different universe also isn't it. Can we wrap our minds around God? Was that Oh, well, we don't have the same creed actually. I mean, you hold a lot of the same creeds that we do. I know, but but the filioque is a real heresy. So I mean, the problem that we run into is I actually think about the same sort of thing about Catholicism, right. You know, you kind of let off your bit in this conversation. You think everybody should be orthodox. And while I'm trying to be polite and ecumenical and all that stuff right here, like, I actually think the same thing about Catholicism, right. And it's like, OK, well, now we have a problem. Because neither of us want to move. And I've got my pope and I may say that it's better to have a pope you don't like than to have no pope at all. And yeah, so that's just that's where these conversations end up is that these intractable these intractable differences, you know, and that's kind of why they don't want to do it. Because I feel like there's not there's no place for what I just said in this conversation, because we're all having we're trying to have a nice conversation. And in a certain sense, I can't speak unless it's going to be an argument from an orthodox perspective about what all y'all are saying, I feel like. But I have the right solution for all of us. Oh, boy. And it is not your representative, your local churches. It is the estuaries attached to those churches. Mark has a channel, Gris has a Patreon and Vendonk has an estuary. I'm just wondering if I may be so bold. I would just love to share for the benefit of all here what happened yesterday and today. I have estuary meetings, I have estuary leader training sessions. I've been doing this for a year, twice a month. And people show up on Wednesday from five to seven and on Thursday from 10 to 12. And then again, from 12 to two, I had upward of 20 people. Wait a minute. 25 people between those three sessions, 25 people who joined in our conversation. And generally, we manage to tackle something of a somewhat controversial nature. And then we always bring it down to, OK, how do we need to frame these conversations in such a way that we can be hospitable to all comers, including. Myopic Orthodox and welcome them into our space and say, hey, we can have this conversation about the specific points that you bring up. And then we only ask each person to listen carefully to what each other are saying. And so that's how we are able to make. And then the beauty of it is that each one of these people that shows up at these sessions for us has made a kind of a commitment to either now or sooner or later create an estuary on the ground and perpetuate this process with real people in real communities conversing together the same way we do now, except if you get really crazy, then we can kill them. That escalated quickly. Nathan, I'm glad I'm glad you I'm glad you feel the tension you feel. Because without that tension. There isn't a there isn't a reality. So I don't I'm not offended by your profession of faith. I'm not offended by what you've just done. And I don't I don't I don't say that there's no place in here for you because you defend the the teaching of your church. I, in fact, want you to maybe you'll convince me that you're right. You know, you're certainly not the only person that thinks the longer Vanderklaas beard get the closer he gets to orthodoxy. I got I got Hank Cruz just waiting for me to to join Father Eric in the Church of Rome. And so I I think there is a place for you here. And there have been plenty on this Discord server that have that have held forth for the orthodox. I love your channel, Paul, because I know that you do welcome all people. And this is a place for everybody to figure out what they think by speaking, you know, and to to to practice our thinking, you know. And so I so much appreciate this forum. And and I think I'm just trying to I'm just coming to understand how I'm going to have to. How? Yeah, like. I can't be I cannot be rude and confrontational, but at the same time, I cannot apologize for presenting the way things the way I see them. And so I just got to move beyond this sort of it's some kind of a silly thing in my brain playing out. I've just got to be who I am and say what I think, I suppose. Yeah. And that's nobody. Nobody on this Discord server will will fault you for that. In fact, if you to some degree, if you come in here and say, I'm orthodox, I just joined, but you'll have a lot less respect here, frankly, because we want people to believe and to defend and to speak because that, you know, some of somebody's right about this. It might be you. I might be wrong. If I'm wrong, I should figure that out. Maybe you'll help me. So I'm OK. I think one of the things that I just keep on coming back to is can we actually contain God? Can we have a whole I mean, I think we can I think there is a right understanding of God that we're all poking around at and we are capable of perceiving his full glory and bits and pieces. But we're we're not worthy exactly, except by that which has been bestowed upon us. So I think we're we're we're gifted with what has what what we are capable of, what we're ready for. And and then a whole heaping dose of grace on top of that. So I come from a scientific background as an atheist and a guy who studied science in college. And that was one of the things that really, you know, that's that's one of the things that really turned me off about Christianity is how they talk how Christians talk about God so casually maybe. But I've come to this understanding of God as, you know, as, you know, the as being beyond all named things, you know, he is love, but he's not like our love. He's beyond our love. He's he's beyond our light, our truth, all things that we that we have a concept for. He's beyond it all. And that sort of intellectual humility was that was maybe like the hook actually that like that sold this former atheist on God on his being possible even because if he's if he's if he's not beyond everything, then then then that just seems foolish, you know, to believe in some silly caricature. Yeah, that Nate Nate, our grail country, you know, writes, no, it doesn't follow that someone is right. Someone might be closer to right and more right or, you know, and, you know, he has to play Switzerland, right. But he plays anarchist. That's what he plays. No, he doesn't. He can't be an anarchist and a Christian. Those are those are antithetical. Oh, he's he's trying really hard. Yeah, well, Casey is something. Yeah, he says it. Yeah. What's up, Casey? I've been listening to mere Christianity. I listened to it like twice in the past two weeks. And what what Lewis says is something it's like God doesn't want what we say about him or anything like that. He calls us to be a certain type of person. That's what he wants. He wants us to be a certain type of person that has full communion with him and participation with him. It's not you can say whatever you want about your beliefs, but it's the type of person that you are that actually matters. Someone that can have a right relationship with everyone and everything and with God. Yeah, that's what truly matters. Right. There's a hierarchy there. But but and that that then can sometimes people will throw off, you know, all of these things. But I can, you know, I if I if I have a terrific relationship with my wife, there are other things that I know about her and can say with a sufficient degree of certainty and and accuracy to those things aren't antithetical. But there is a hierarchy there. And I think that's right. Yeah, we reject the submission. But then, you know, when you when you listen to Nathan here, he talks about the freedom of in humility in not having to understand. And that's why I sort of disagree with Eric. Like, no, you don't need an understanding of God. You need any understanding of God. You need right relationship to God. But you don't need understanding. And because you don't need understanding that frees up your mind to think about more important things like how are you going to eat and how to be intimate with the people around you and your right your right relationship to your church and your community that that I think is more important than the understanding is the relationship itself. Also, I think there is one understanding that is probably and I say understanding loosely, but I think there's a reason why Jesus used the faith like a child thing. Like you have to understand that compared to God to Christ, you are I am a child. Doesn't matter how old you are. You're always a child, maybe maturing. But I think that's the one understanding you need to have. If there is such a, you know, so much as we can. Yeah, exactly. That's the understanding of why you need humility. Right. And then you make humility your cardinal doctrine. See, if I was going to poke the bear, I'd say this is why we shouldn't be calling anybody father, but whatever. Go ahead, John. I'm going to leave. I'm going to leave at what at at three quarters at the three quarter hour here. So and so anybody who wants my slot wants to keep talking in the discord come in then. But that's when the that's when the live stream the live stream is just the frosting on the cake here. So go ahead and dunk. You can if you come in after I leave, you can actually talk to John the dunk. That's harder than it is to talk to me and probably better. So get your chance to talk to John the dunk. Go ahead, John. Thank you. Well, I was just wondering in connection to what what Casey just said, that the idea of the relationship being more important than what we understand. I mean, if I know my church history correctly or even just general history, there have been many centuries where a very few educated people understand understood even anything remotely connected to the Bible, the gospel, the organized life of the church, the hierarchy, the doctrines, the the the the canons that all very few people knew anything about it. And the rest of them just showed up when the Saints went down Main Street on their way to the Plaza and and you join the parade and then you follow the parade through the village. And then afterward, you all go have a beer at the pub and then you go back to work. And so this whole notion of the of the of the the barely aware population of ordinary, uneducated, often illiterate people, that their their sense of connection to the mystery, I think in some ways should almost teach us something. I think that there is something kind of we are so arrogant that we think we can think it all through and understand it all. And there was a whole other kind of participation that happened back then and in some places still today that is much more naive and almost childlike and pure. Yeah, I agree. I agree. I agree. And again, for me, I mean, so Nathan gets to gets to talk about his orthodoxy. I'll talk about my Calvinism and that the heart of my Calvinism is that it's it's not my grasp on him. It's his grasp on me. And I don't think Father Eric would say that's anti Catholic, would you? Grace first, grace through grace in the end. Amen. There we are. See, we just we just fixed that. Now, you know, as we are known on board, we did the Reformation right here right now on the bridges of meaning Discord server. Boom. Let's all join the parade and meet afterward at the pub. That's right. I dropped my ticket sign. I don't know where it was and to begin with. Well, I am going to take that as a probably a good way to end the live stream. So for the people who joined on the live stream and those who will have to figure out a title, titling these things is not easy. Yeah, I know. You saw the Reformation and you go, you know, wait, resolve the Protestant Reformation. There we go. Mostly peaceful BOM live streaming. The dog remains unadulterated. I got to write that down. I forget. Mostly peaceful. Oh, no. BOM live stream resolves Protestant Reformation. That's a good title. Through estuary. Through estuary. Oh, thank you. Nice. Oh, warm the dog's heart. And everybody's happy. Wonderful. Everybody's happy. Phileoqua notwithstanding. Dare I write that? Yeah, right, right, right, right, right. We're not there yet. Isn't that the only thing that really truly separates them? There's thousands of things. I mean, I think literally. I mean, but no, no, very much more than the Pope and the Phileoqua. There we just we just lost it all. Oh, no. You should have cut it off before you go. The schism is a separate issue from the Reformation. That's right. That's right. The Reformation next week. We'll get we'll fix the schism. That'll that'll show up. That'll show up. All right. I'm going to end the live stream. Let's see.