https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RuvtcBkdJ0Y

 There we go. Now I got Zoom telling us recording in progress. Well, Drew, we've never spoken in person, but we've met on Twitter a little bit. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah. So I'm originally from Washington State. I'm a Tacoma native and lived there pretty much my whole life until I graduated high school and then moved to Ellensburg, Washington, where I studied music education, got my bachelor's in music ed from Central Washington University. Met my wife there. And while at Central was probably the most spiritually formative part of my life was being a part of a campus ministry from the Assemblies of God called Chi Alpha. And that's where I discovered Christian Brotherhood and fellowship and had some really important experiences during worship and at retreats and things like that. And then felt a big calling for the nations through some different conferences I attended and some mentors who poured into me and cast that vision and eventually felt called to Indonesia. And after my wife and I got married, we taught as teachers for a year. And then the year after that, we did Chi Alpha in Indonesia. There was some campus ministry stuff happening there for a year. It was a program called Give a Year, Pray About a Lifetime that they were doing. And the whole idea that they were calling young Christian men and women to give a year and pray and ask God if that's something that would be for a lifetime. And during that time, we were being mentored by our pastor there. He was really encouraging us to consider how could we use our teaching certificates to continue to live overseas because we felt really confident that that is something that the Lord had led us to do. And so yeah, what happened was we cast our reels into the water and eventually got teaching positions. So now we live here in North Africa in Tunisia. And so I'm literally streaming to you live from Carthage of Hannibal fame. And so here we are. We're in our fifth year here in North Africa. Wow, that's wild. That's great. Great. Now if I go to North Africa, I got someone to visit. Yeah, I can take you to all the church ruins. Yeah, that's fascinating. Yeah, literally like, like a dog walk would be to go to the ancient baths where Augustine perhaps would have bathed and you know, there's a church where they believe to be the site. You know, it's you know how, you know how you know, Lord develops, but it's believed to be the site of the Council of Carthage and you know, things like this. So yeah, pretty wild. So cool. Yeah, it's pretty wild. That's so cool. Wow. Well, you're good at telling your story. You did that just, you know, just get all right in there. Well, what did you want to talk about today? Because I know you wanted to talk because again, you're on Twitter and I didn't know any of your background. So this is this is really cool. Yeah, yeah. I mean, there's, there's, there's, you know, it's always like you think about, well, what could we talk about? And then, you know, when you're in the flow, it just becomes, you know, whatever it becomes. So I don't really have a lot of preconceived notions about where this conversation is going to go. But um, well, why did you found me? Why, why do you, do you, do you listen to my YouTube channel or my podcast or I mean, I don't know. Yeah. Uh, so on me on Twitter said, oh, this is a talkster and uh, so that we get this can, I can flesh out this part of my story a little bit more than, um, so after arriving here in Tunisia, I, I also at the same exact time began doing my master's in ethnomusicology online. Um, and ethnomusicology, basically it's like the anthropology of music and, and, and music in world cultures and societies. And uh, this would be in 2017 when I began this program. And, and, and this is when I really first start learning about, um, postmodernism and perspectivalism, um, and wrestling with questions of meaning on a, on a, on a more intellectual level, I suppose. I hadn't really had to be put through the ringer thinking through these issues. And so now I'm, you know, I'm reading these, you know, authors and scholars who are, um, approaching at it from a secular anthropological frame about, you know, how meaning is made in, in human cultures and how that's expressed through music. And I'm a music teacher. Um, that, that's, that's what I do here. Um, I teach at an international school here and, um, um, you know, music has always been a way that I was able to connect with people across cultures, um, specifically through learning music, like in Indonesia had lots of experiences working with Indonesian musicians, learning about gamelan and, you know, how can I, as a jazz musician sort of, you know, collaborate, you know, across that. And, and we develop lots of great bonds that way throughout the musicology. Um, it sort of gave me a lot of those, the analytical tools, I suppose, to, uh, to read culture and to, and to, well, the first thing that that did was it sort of dispelled a lot of my preconceived notions about what is music. Um, and, uh, just one example, like I study Arabic music as a, as a primary focus of study and in the Arabic music system, they have doubled the number of notes. Um, you know, and so in the Western system, you know, between C and C is 12 notes and the Arabic system, it's 24 because it's more subdivided in the intervals. And so anyways, the music has a different tonality. And so that's, you start to then realize, oh, okay, well, some of the stuff is say social construct as they would say. Um, and then, um, later that year, a colleague of mine, um, just said it out loud. Someone I really listened to is Jordan Peterson. I'm like, who's Jordan Peterson? And, and this was that, you know, this is during, you know, faculty lunch and, uh, and she was, she's an interesting character. Um, and so I checked him out and like my jaw dropped just like listening to him contradict a lot of the postmodern say orthodoxy that I was getting from my readings. Um, and, uh, um, anyways, I was really surprised by that and he just hooked me in. And so his war on postmodernism is sort of what got me into the Peterson bandwagon. And then I discovered the Bible stuff. And my, my connection to you though, is actually through Esther O'Reilly. I don't know how I started following Esther on Twitter, but then she said, Hey, you got to check out Paul Vanderglay. I'm like, who's Paul? And so I go on to Apple podcasts. And so I become an audio listener. I actually wasn't a YouTube watcher for several years. So I've been following you pretty, my wife could testify. Your voice is constantly like, uh, resonating in our concrete walls, in our apartment. Yeah. There's a lot of resonance in my voice. It was my wife and my mother. I grew up. My mother's always turn it down. My wife, I'll be doing something outside. She says, I can hear you inside. Do you have to be so loud? Yeah. So I'm, you know, dog walks and doing the dishes and, um, and, uh, and so that was, you know, about two and a half years ago when I started following you um, and, uh, and so, you know, you've turned me onto Charles Taylor and some reading a lot of that and meeting crisis and, um, you know, where that's led me to now is, um, having lots of interesting conversations with, with some of my, say some of my coworkers who are Sam Harris followers and, um, Eric Weinstein followers and, uh, and, um, bringing a lot of those concepts that you brought to the table when you were discussing the Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris debates and Eric Weinstein, um, and, uh, and I was able to use a lot of the frameworks that you talk about on your channel, like group A, group B, um, scientific image, manifest image, and, and I appreciated that as a musician and as, as an ethnomusicologist, because like, if you look at music scientifically, um, that, that can only ever get you so far and we humans universally participate in music on a level that's directly at the meaning level, um, and, and we can't define music adequately without, without recourse to the subjective, without recourse to narrative and mythos, and so, and so combining what you were doing with my studies, I started investigating, like, music as a kind of apologetic almost. I don't know if that's the right word, but you know, what, what, you know, like I started noticing how, how like IDW and, uh, new atheists, like on YouTube, whenever you see like a clip of like Steven Pinker talking about music, it's like the one thing that they're satisfyingly mystified by. They're okay with it being a mystery and there's like, there's weird like loophole in there, you know, everything, everything is, you know, we can explain things this way, but then, oh, well, music, we don't really know what that is and it's kind of a mystery and they, they love it. Whenever you hear a quote from a new atheist, like Richard Dawkins is like hilarious whenever you listen to him talk about his love for box music and, um, and, and then, and then Christianity, and that didn't bother him. Right. Um, and then Karen Armstrong in her book, the case for God in the, in the introductory chapter, she refers to music as like an example of, you know, this is something that's like the most abstract art form, you know, quote unquote, uh, and yet all humans do it. Um, it's, it's, it's a, it's, it's the universal way every human culture has sort of approached God through ritual. And so anyways, it's, it's opened up lots of avenues of conversation for me with, with people. And, and I think, I think the thing that like really, really sealed at home for me that this was a thing that people are starting to catch onto is when I heard a conversation between Glenn Scrivner and, uh, Justin Briarly and Glenn is interviewing Justin about the state of apologetics today. And, and Justin says, um, uh, you know, you know, for a long time, it was mostly about, you know, Christians using science to counteract, you know, the scientific arguments of atheists. And, and he says, you know, it really, I'm more interested in what Justin Briarly said, he's more interested in meaning and how people find meaning. And the thing that he invokes is music and he's, and, and then he says music is sort of the unexplored apologetic in this. And so that's what has, that's been a little bit of, you know, in my, when I'm not teaching, when I'm not doing grad studies, you know, that has, that's been sort of my, just sort of my passion project in terms of research and reading and things like that. That's really cool. I, um, last night, actually, so, uh, of course, you know, Tom Holland is a, uh, favorite fascination of mine and they just released a, uh, the rest is history episode on the Beatles. And I know that Tom Holland, one of his book projects coming up is he wants, he's, he suspects that the 1960s, seventies, you know, the sixties are really 65 to 75, more than 60 to 69. Uh, the 1960s might be regarded, um, in the level, at the level of like the, um, 1520s in terms of dramatic, significant turns in religious cultural history. And he sees the Beatles as critical for that. Dominic Sandbrook was skeptical. So, last night, actually, my wife had a very long day because she's starting her school work and all my kids were out of the house. So I got to watch what I wanted to watch on TV. And so I turned up the YouTube and watched a very interesting BBC four documentary on the origin of the Beatles. And, you know, I was thinking a lot of, about these kinds of questions where you're exactly right. Music is this, we have no idea what's going on with us and music. I mean, scientifically you can say, well, it's sound, it's, it's vibrations in the air. Okay. But why, you know, and, and so I was watching, you know, I didn't know much about the origin of the Beatles, frankly, because they never were by any means my favorite band. And I know I just spoke heresy for a whole bunch of people, but, um, I always thought their music was a little simplistic. Some of their songs I like, but a lot of it, a lot of the early stuff, but then, you know, looking at the, of course, for me, with my history and, you know, African-American stuff, you know, the, the impact of African Americans on, you know, the history of music in England at that period. And of course, what was really nice about Tom Holland, Dominic Sandbrook, Sandbrook is a modern English historian, English historian. So he's talking about these post-war years and, and, and so then why, why there did the Beatles just sort of, you know, get this and the Beatles, of course, were kind of playing around in Liverpool and then we're over in Germany for a little while. And really, it sounds like really learned a lot of stuff when they were in Germany, sort of in this red light district and then went back to Liverpool and suddenly people noticed, wow, they got skills, they didn't have when they left. And then you switch out the drummer and then sort of a professional comes in who sort of tunes them and bang, you know, they just explode. And it's like, you know, we, we, it's kind of amazing what happened with Jordan Peterson, that explosion, but the Beatles was a lot bigger explosion and why, and, and, and how does that fit into everything? Oh, it's such an interesting, interesting topic. Yeah. Peterson made the observation on one of his videos. I figured he's talking to a, he's talking to an author and he just slips it in that how, like music, like in the, in the, in the death of God and in the, in the, in the, you know, in the removal or I suppose in the secularization of, of the West, that music in the 20th century, especially in that era starts to fill in this void with the development of all these subcultures and you like with the Beatles, people who are avid followers, like, okay, so I'll give you an example. I have a, I have a friend who has had identified as atheist for a while and I don't know how he would self-identify today, maybe agnostic, if I could be generous towards him. He's a friend of mine and we have these great conversations about faith and, you know, and he is a big fan of Sam Harris and so uses a lot of Sam Harris-isms in our conversations and, you know, it's just sort of, you know, we just, you just have to be rational about God and, you know, let's, let's be real, you know, and, and, but he's also like a meta, a participant in what he calls a doom metal band and is this just avid super rocker and I made this observation to him. I said, you know, like, it's almost like you have these, you know, music historians called it the Apollonian and the Dionysian, you know, and, you know, you have your Sam Harris Apollonian, we got to be rational, reasonable about this, but then you have this like Dionysian side that just needs to come out and where's that coming from and what's the impetus there? And can you justify it? Right. There's no need to justify that. Right. Exactly. Right. It is. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Music is like, like the role of the artists today, you know, the just when, especially when COVID hit, we really started to see like, oh, go to Spotify and pay money to support the artists, you know, that are trying to get through this time. And when we see people, they weren't starving before. Right. And, and there's almost like this moral, like, push to support musicians and artists, you know, because they're the ones that sort of carry us through culture. And it's like, it's like artists are like priests to use a Peugeot. I'm going to go sort of Peugeot in here, you know, artists are like priests who mediate meaning cultural meaning, you know, that's relevant to the zeitgeist, you know, and musicians, sort of most mysteriously of all, because it's the least iconic form, I suppose. And, you know, it's no surprise that all these subcultures have a soundtrack that go with them, you know, and, you know, music is always connected to an identity group. It's connected to generations, ethnicity, class, you know, there's just all sorts of ways that, you know, you know, music has these, you know, connections. And I think when you when you ask the question, what is music, like, I always sort of trolled my Facebook followers, because I'm a music teacher, but I'm always making these things like, I don't know what music is, you know, I'm teaching music, but I don't actually know what it is. And especially like, the Karen Armstrong point about how, like, you know, music like what, rather than asking the question, you know, what is music as a noun? It's, I prefer to think of it as what does music do the best, ultimately, like, what are some things that need to have that? And for me, the conclusion was ritual. And it seems like everyone, regardless of who you are, regardless of you're a skeptical scholar, you know, atheist or, you know, Christian, if the understanding of where the arts came from is through, you know, ancient rituals, and let's say liturgies, or cultic practices, shamanism, and, you know, drama comes from this comes from liturgies, you know, comes from, you know, the ancient Greek religious rituals and things like this, and the music comes from that, too. And so, you know, you can live a life technically, you know, without music, you know, but you can't express your God without some sort of participatory, you know, ritualized setting. And that's, I think that's what music does the best. I think that's sort of how it points us to the image of God. And this is something that, you know, I love talking about with other people who are musicians, you know, like my friend who's an atheist and the Sam Harris follower, but also is in the doom metal band, and just trying to suss out, you know, like, where does it come from? And, you know, why are you doing it? And in today's age, like, like with what you've been talking about with the rise of the nuns, and, like, we're starting to see, we're starting to see a lot more, I don't know if this is the right word, but sacramentalization or ritualizing of secular meaning through rituals, where, you know, in the secular space, things like mindfulness and meditation is like, oh, that's a normal and good thing to do. You know, things like yoga, and music has always been there doing things like that. So I find myself in my, where I'm at in my secular workplace, seeing a little bit more of that sort of creep in, that our notion of what it means to be in a secular society, what it means to work in a secular, you know, work environment, that the, what that looks like is different than what it used to be. Perhaps it used to, you would classically define secularism as saying, okay, well, we recognize that everybody's religious, let's just sort of agree to just not interface that way. And we'll just sort of have occupied this neutral space. But now it's increasingly becoming more like secularism, not only is the default, but then there's also these forms that are, these are, these rituals are good to do and okay to do, and we can force you to do them because, oh, it's secular, it shouldn't affect you. You know, those are not good, we need to keep those out. It, I just finished a conversation that I'll probably share tomorrow. Guy was just sharing some of his journey through, he grew up United Methodist, was in an Episcopal church and really enjoying the Episcopal church. And then the word came down from the hierarchy that they had to figure out how they were going to participate in the Pride Parade. And he said, we don't participate in the Veterans Day Parade, we don't participate in the Fourth of July Parade. Why is the Pride Parade, and it's, but that's exactly what you're noting, that secularism has never been quite as vacuous as it was, we imagined it should be. And, you know, it's very interesting what you say too, because one of my favorite lines from John McWhorter in a video where he's talking to Glenn Lowry is, he's at Aspen, I think it's at Aspen, and there's this big, very elite, high-level grouping, and, you know, racism is on the dock, and of course McWhorter's written a number of books about racism, and everyone's talking about we have to come to terms with racism. And so he just tells the people, what do you mean, come to terms with racism? Tell me what that looks like. And then he says, I can imagine a soundtrack. And when he said that, I thought, oh, that's really telling. And that's exactly right, because when he's pushing them and saying, what exactly, you know, he says, you know, what we're going to do is we're going to walk out of here, we're going to take our bottle of water, and say, oh yeah, that was really deeply meaningful, and we're all going to agree with that and go about our lives, and nothing's really going to change. So please tell me what coming to terms looks like. I can imagine a soundtrack. And I thought, that is so interesting, because he's exactly right. He's put his finger on it. And partly through now the, let's say, the ritual of cinema, which, you know, I remember talking to one of my friends here, and there was a couple different friends, and one of them said, yeah, you know, this guy here, he's got weird taste in music. He says, well, what is your taste in music? He says, I like listening to movie soundtracks. And it kind of took me back a little bit. But a few years later, I was kind of watching some of the things that I was paying attention to with respect to music, and realized movie soundtracks are in some ways, what hymnody was to Christendom. Because movies have become such a deeply formative aspect, usually for the very young, older people, sort of, you know, they might age out of movies to a degree. But, and, of course, part of the power of cinema is, and now especially with special effects and CGI, you have an incredibly broad canvas to paint upon, and you have all of these extremely powerful artistic elements. I mean, when is the last time we watched a movie that had no soundtrack? And if you're just watching a movie and you're paying attention, oh, let's pay attention to the soundtrack. And, you know, I was just talking about the podcast, The Rise and Fall of Mars Hill. One of the things that got my attention right away with that was the soundtrack. It's enormously dependent on the soundtrack. Whereas, I don't even have an opening, like Peugeot has, or like Peterson has for my videos. And part of that is like, I just can't be bothered. But another part of that is, I actually did choose a piece of music, and I actually contacted the musician who wrote and I got permission to use it. But I've never pulled the trigger on it, partly because, as a pastor, another one of the things that I know is, we have all of these churches, at least post-reference, you know, I've spent a lot of time on theological confessionalism. But any watcher of churches in the United States knows, probably nothing is more determinative of your audience in a church than the music. And even, really, I remember hearing Rick Warren, who's one of the most successful mega church, you know, said, well, the church was kind of doing okay. And then we got our music guy and then things took off. And it's like, so what's that say about your preaching? Huh? Yeah. Yeah, I, you know, this is, this is good. There's a lot of ways we could take this. When I was in university, I mentioned Chi Alpha and going to some retreats. At one retreat, there was a, it was a Saturday evening service and the worship band was there and they'd started playing the music. And then there was, at that time in my life, I was, you know, struggling with some things that young men would struggle with and praying through it. And, and there was a moment where the leader of the worship band invited people. It's like an altar call, basically, come forward if you want prayer. And, you know, a lot of times when that happens at church, I'm like, is that for me? You know, I don't know. And I just sort of, you know, I just sort of still, I stand, you know, but I'm in my seat. And, but this time was very different. It was an automatic that my legs just sort of carried me to the front. And I actually like cognitively was like, I don't actually know why I'm coming to the front, but there I was. And then I knelt down and I started praying and, and someone else had put his hand on my back and asked me from a different part of the state and asked how he could pray for me. And so I was just confessing some things. And, and then he started praying for me. And then, and then I started praying and, and, you know, you know, the worship team is playing and it is loud, you know, in those situations, volume wise, it is loud and that's an effective thing that, that they do. And, and, and so then I started praying out loud and then, and then I felt something happen in this moment that it's the only time I've ever felt anything remotely close to this was basically like, I started just watching myself worship, you know, and, and, and I'm, I'm literally, I'm screaming at the top of my lungs, but I can't actually hear myself screaming at the top of my lungs. And I feel like I'm just watching myself do things. And it's like the closest thing to like literally being drunk. And that's just how not in control of the members. They're just crying out to the Lord. And, and I was in that state for maybe a minute, minute and a half or something. And then just, and just came out and just felt this, just, just, well, I felt really, I felt really at peace after that had happened. And, you know, and, and since then I'd always been like, well, what did that moment mean? You know, and there's, there's all sorts of layers of analysis that could come on that kind of a situation. On a social constructionist would might look at that and say, well, you had the music going, you're in this social context, there's these people there and you're agreeing together in this powerful thing. I have a Pentecostal background. So I would say something like that was the spirit of God working in me. And I'd always sort of wondered what was the role of music in that situation? You know, if I didn't have the music, would that have happened? And does that even matter? You know, all I know, you know, just coming from that is like, that was, you know, like that was a moment. I know people who, you know, they go to, they've been to South America, they went to a cave and then they took a hallucinogenic and had this like amazing spiritual experience, or they go to Burning Man and they take something and they have this amazing, you know, I didn't take anything. I was just worshiping and I had that experience. And, and it happens all the time. You know, I mean, this is, this is, this is all over the place. And people are like, well, I think you really need to, and it's like, I don't know why you're, I don't know why you think this is so remarkable. It's, we've got, we've got buildings and institutions committed to this all over the place and it's happening all the time. So no, you're exactly right. Yeah. And you, um, while back, um, you were talking about Bethel, um, Bethel worship specifically, and you're, and you'd made this reference about how like, well, if the guitar player just does this one thing, if I hold the note just right, you know, there is an aesthetic, um, that's, that's, that's the sound, right? And if you don't do that sound, it's not, it's not the whole, it's, that's not music of the spirit. Like, like there's just a so association. We pair these sounds with these experiences. Um, and, uh, well, that opens up a really interesting conversation about, you know, what is the role of music in church? And when you start comparing confessions and then you go to like, you have Gregorian chant and Orthodox chant, you know, and those are, I, I don't want to dovetail too far off, but like one of the things that I am sort of dealing with in my own, in my own faith life is it's like, I have an evangelical slash Pentecostal background, sort of, I don't even know, I don't even know where I would sort of pin the tail on the donkey, but, um, somewhere in that mix. Um, and, but not very liturgical in the sense of a traditional liturgy. Um, right. And nothing, nothing high church assemblies of God has a liturgy. Yeah, right. Right. Yeah. They just don't call it that. Right. Right. Exactly. And in the last few years, since I've been, since I've been on this Jordan Peterson, Paul VanderKlay, Jonathan Peugeot journey, um, sort of like recognizing that I do have a longing for some, some grounding in, um, I don't know if it's neo-sacramentalism is the right word, or if there's just some sort of, just, I need a thing. I need to do a thing. And, and, um, well, here's a, here's an object lesson. So, so we went back to the States over the summer and my wife, like my wife and I like to go to antique shops and things like that. And I, anyways, I found this, this is like a Lutheran prayer book and I was like, okay, well, I'll check it out. And I started flipping through that. And, you know, lately in the last couple of months, it's, it's been a regular part of my prayer life. It's that there's daily prayers, there's evening prayers for four weeks. Um, I have, uh, I have a picture of, of, uh, um, the, uh, Christ Pantocrator from the, the Hagia Sophia mosaic. I don't know if it's the actual Christ Pantocopher, but anyways, I have that like up here in my office right here. It's like an icon, but I'm like, here I am a Pentecostal, you know, or evangelical, but I have this like, you know, I don't like pray to it, but when I pray, I'm like facing in that direction. And anyways, I find myself going through these like shifts in how I, in how I do, in how I walk out my faith and, and, and how I practice it. Um, and so coming back to music, um, like when I, when you look at what's happening with, with Gregorian chant and an Orthodox chant, what you have is a tradition that, um, that is a Christian tradition in the sense of when you hear that sound used in a secular context, you know, they're borrowing it from the church, historically speaking. Um, whereas there's, there's a little bit of an inversion in, in, in this world, in the Bethel world, say where there's an aesthetic that's sort of being plucked from in the secular musical world, that's then sort of being re-appropriated into this context here. And, and anyways, that's sort of this inverted image that I have right now of just sort of what music means in the church. Yeah. I was, I wish you had been, I wish you'd been with me yesterday. I was at a memorial service for, um, African-American woman and it was in a black church and the, yeah, I've officiated and participated in many black funerals and, you know, they have their own liturgy. They really do. And I kept the program. The program is quite lovely and they had her obituary and she's the mother of someone who's been, um, who I've been pastoring. I'll say it that way. And it was, you know, I was, you know, I was very happy that I could go to the service. The, the service was about two hours and 15 minutes long, um, which is not the way white folks do memorial services generally. And the, the message in that service was about 45, 50 minutes. And the, that pastor doesn't do eulogies like I do eulogies, but it was classic, uh, black, apostolic, you know, you have the organist, you have the preacher, they were insane. They were, I mean, he was working so hard to try and get someone to come forward to be baptized that I was ready to be baptized just so we'd land the plane. Um, it's like, if, if you're, you're just, you're just, you're just really working hard on this dry tree here, buddy. Um, but anyway, but I, I thought a lot about, um, you know, the, the, the, the way the music, the ritual, the rhythm, the words, because I've, I've seen, I've seen a fair amount of it. Um, and it, it just is, so, you know, I'm, I'm sitting there and why not pay attention to what's going on and try and think about it, but you're, you're exactly right. And, you know, I, you know, your use of ritual here, I mean, even that word is, what do we mean by that? And it's, and it's, it's sort of, in some ways, you know, if, if, if music is vibration of air, you know, ritual is in some ways, the vibration of motion because it involves repetition, you know, but it's also repetition and variation. And well, and as soon as we start talking about any of the arts this way, um, um, you start to see how in the, like in the West, our conception of what is art, what is the arts, what, you know, like, like our, our fundamental association with music is as an art, what is an art? And, you know, I'm a, I'm a music teacher and like music is part of the arts program. And, um, um, you know, you go to an art museum and you see these paintings on the wall where we fundamentally think of music as like, okay, well, it's this thing that's, our, so our word association is art. And I think in the Western sense, um, what we've done with art is, I think, I think to use Taylor, Charles Taylor's concept of the buffered self versus the poorest self, where that word art can just be slapped onto just about anything. And then it becomes a buffered, it becomes a buffered thing where, and I see the, I see the biggest, I see the biggest like contradiction of terms when they say something like Islamic art, where it's like, okay, here's a book of Islamic art. And what are you looking at? You're looking at the Quran, you're looking at mosques, you know, you're looking and you're reading about the recitation of the Quran as their music. It's like, they don't say it's art. We say it's art because from our lens we're adding this buffered thing. Whereas from the poorest, the poorest self, right, from within, it's like, no, a Muslim is not going to say that the recitation of the Quran is music. And that's a whole subject that comes up in Islam of, you know, and we're seeing it right now with the Taliban in Afghanistan. I just saw an article about a folk, a folk musician who was executed and worried about, you know, the band on music. And that just opens up, well, you know, what is music and how do they define music? And, you know, why do we have the right to define music as one thing, you know, versus those, it's a very different definition of what is music. Even though the Taliban have like, say military chancer songs or something like that, you know, there are some certain kinds of form like that. So. Yeah. And the, one of the, somebody made the observation recently that the, the protests in the wake of the George Floyd incident have unlike many protests in American history, of which obviously these protests attempt to, they're certainly participating in the ritual of American public protest. There's been no song in this movement, which is its absence is fascinating because there's, there's song for Vietnam protests or song for the anti-Jim Crow civil rights protest. There's, you know, many protest movements in America have, have had song associated with them and those songs, you know, in the church, I grew up in those songs, sometimes we're in and out of the church. Sometimes church songs are appropriated for protest songs with these, with these protests, there are chants, you know, no peace, no, you know, no justice, no peace, you know, things like that, but there's no song. And I remember one of my, one of my professors in college talking about Cromwell and the, you know, the English, the some of the English civil wars. And he was saying, you know, these are, these are armies that sang hymns. And he says, if you're, if you're facing an army that's singing a hymn, you know, don't, don't, don't think that's an incidental or small thing. And he's exactly right because that song, you know, creates, turns that army into a unity and, you know, gives them a sense of, you know, and you read this in the Bible, oh, there's a God among them. And so then all their enemies flee. Well, if you're, if you're singing a hymn together, well, there's a God among them. And don't think that's incidental necessarily to the outcome of the battle. So I mean, this stuff goes down a long, long ways. Yeah. And when I, when we talk about music as like, so someone would look at the Bible and say, what does the, what does the Bible say about music? And we have like the NIV that uses the word music, like, bring me a musician or, and they led the music, like the word music literally is not in the Hebrew Bible in terms of our translation of music. They use all these different verbs and the verbs that are connected to musical processes are directly, it's, it's, it's like, maybe it's singing, or it's like pulling as in pulling on a string. And, and when we, when we start to try to have like a music centered conversation with like the word music, we have that sort of, I think there's kind of an anachronism that we're applying on all of these things. When music per se, outside of its context of what it's being used for, is that this, we don't want to disembodied things. Like we live in this headphones culture, when I can just, I can listen to the London Symphony, you know, just on my headphones, like just without being at the concert hall or seeing the musicians or things like that. And, you know, I think just appreciating that all forms of music are equally musical, you know, whether, whether it's a folk song or a chant or a symphony, that these are all things that sort of, I think, just come from this human impulse to ritualize things. And, and I am, I am using that word a lot. I wanted to talk about something really quick. So I, you, in your, in your response, Before you go that, the question about the Bible is very interesting, because it also touches on technology. Because of course, the Psalms, what are those Psalms? Yeah, you know, but what we didn't, they didn't have technology to, you know, they didn't have notes. I mean, people don't recognize that, you know, sheet music is technology. And now, of course, you know, recorded music is technology. So I mean, there's lots of layers. Anyway, I just wanted to get that in before we That's good. Yeah, that's good. Thank you. Thank you. That's good. So you did a, you're doing a response video to rise and fall of Mars Hill. And the you were you were juxtaposing in your latest one. Driscoll with what was her name? Nadia Boltzweber. Yes. And well, anyways, on, I think it was on that video, I left a comment about Donald Miller, where so this is interesting. And I wanted to sort of talk this through with you. So so blue like jazz, as I'm a millennial, and it was very important to me into that generation of readership, in terms of like, sort of this, the emerging postmodern zeitgeist of finding meaning and being able to articulate what is the spiritual life, and it actually was not a it was not a shade thing to say I'm spiritual, but not religious, I even myself had said that when I was like 18, you know, I'm a Christian, but I'm, I would prefer to identify a spiritual not religious because religion is a relationship, not a religion. Yes, exactly. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. What do you mean by that? Anyways. And, and I remember, like, for it was, you know, one of the one of the nights of the DNC, where Donald Miller, he leads a benediction prayer, you know, and, you know, why was he invited to pray for that? Well, it's he's connected to this thing. And, and, well, somewhere along the line, he capitalizes on this concept of story, you know, and so he writes blue like jazz, and then blue like jazz becomes a movie, and then he writes a book about that process of blue like jazz becoming a movie. And, and then he starts applying the concept of inventing this fictitious Donald Miller, you know, what what kinds of obstacles is he going to face in the movie? And how can we portray he applies that that same sort of story framework to his life? Like, you know, and he says in the book, he's like, basically, a story is a character who wants something who overcomes difficulty to get it, and he sort of just boils it down to that little formula, and then he starts applying it to his life. And he goes to Machu Picchu and, and, you know, participates in these road bike races and things like that, and then starts applying and I would call it a heuristic, he's using stories like a heuristic, in that sense, to motivate him to do things. And then, and then that turns into story, storyline, storyline, which, which is, it becomes like a self help tool for people who, they can turn their life into a story, and it becomes this organizational tool for your life. And then that turns into story brand, where now he's applying this to businesses and corporations, and storyline is all done away with and, and now, like, I look in my email inbox, and I type in Donald Miller, and it's just like hundreds of emails of like, ways to get your subscribers to read your newsletter, how to, you know, raise revenue with the best ads, and it's like, everything is all of these just like, you know, just like sales pitches, and then you go on to his Twitter page or his Facebook page, and he's, you know, he's got the tie and the code, and, and like, his logo is not hipster at all. It's like, really old school-ish, boomerish, you know, and anyways, he just went full on capitalist. Yeah. And I just thought, anyways, I just thought that that was an interesting development, I suppose, of this person who was like, held up as like, this postmodern icon, the spiritual Christianity, you know, you know, meeting guy. I, and, and you sent me that stuff, and I, so I did a little bit more digging, because I, I actually, a few years ago, I had to do a book culling in my office, and so I have a couple of boxes of books, and I don't, I think Blue Like Jazz didn't make the cut, so I have to go dig it out. But, you know, when you, you know, when you mentioned that, I was like, oh, wow, you know, I had forgotten what a big deal Donner Miller, Donald Miller was, what, 15 years ago or so? I mean, everybody was reading that book, in circles that I knew, and, you know, women's Bible studies, and, but, but usually of millennials, and, and I'd remember just in the back of my head, oh, yeah, he kind of, he kind of turned this thing into a brand, so then I went and looked at his Twitter, and I was like, wow, he went hard, but that's, but that's so interesting, because, you know, one of the interesting things about Mark Driscoll is that he begins, he and, he and Nadia Bolzweber both begin as sort of anti-elite, populist, grungy rebels, and then, of course, along the way, you just watch Mark Driscoll become just completely seeker, he so, he completely succumbs to the, to the institution, and now Nadia Bolzweber becomes the face of the ELCA, and it's like, so much for the revolution, but, you know, this is what we're seeing in American culture, just this continual, you know, it's a round, it's a revolution, that's what a revolution is, but it's just this continual recycling. Oh, there you go, never even thought of that, yeah. Yeah, well, that's, you know, these are the revolutions, you want your, the wheels on your car to, like, the wheels on the bus to go round and round, that's what's happening with these revolutions, and to, to, to look at, and I, you know, you sent me the, I hadn't looked at the DNC prayer thing, because I wasn't in a place I could listen to it when I open Twitter, but I, you know, when I looked at him, it's, and this to me is where you sort of get into the, the Sermon on the Mount, because when Jesus says, you, no one can serve two masters, you can't serve God and mammon, he doesn't say God and Satan, you know, it's not a, it's not a dualism, it's not a good and evil dualism, and I'm not saying that there isn't good and evil dualistic strains in Christianity or themes, or that good and evil isn't an important thing to look at, but it's very interesting, I mean, if of all the things that Jesus said, no one can serve two masters, and then say, okay, what, what is the other master, because one's clearly God, and then the other is mammon, it's like, wow, and, and, you know, I wrestle, I wrestle with that, I wrestle with that a lot, because, I mean, part of it is that when I look at people who have, let's say, you know, the fancy word now is deconstructed, when I look at people who have walked away from their faith, money, the faith they usually walk to is money, and it becomes about the money, and that's a good point, it's really hard to resist, it's because, I mean, money is this, money is God-like, because it is so fungible, yet, we all also notice that, you know, thinking about Cast Away, the Tom Hanks movie, you know, at some point, probably burn paper money, just because, you know, can you got any more of that money we can burn? Maybe I'll wipe myself with it, you know, it's, it's, but money is sort of, you know, money is in some ways, sort of fungible status that can be, it's metered status that we can sort of count, not perfectly, but so, so to see, and I'm not saying Nadia Boltz Weber is a sellout, it's just, it's just fascinating watching the evolution, and so then I was, you know, I was looking at, so then I went and looked at Mars Hill Grand Rapids, because I found it phenomenal that, you know, both, you know, Mark Driscoll and Rob Bell, they both name their churches Mars Hill, you know, one's in Seattle, one's in Granville, Michigan, which is an area that I know quite well, and, and so then Mark, you know, Rob Bell is long gone from that church, and now it's Mars Hill Bible Church, and I just thought, oh, culture is, culture is like gravity in some places, you know, it'll, it'll, it'll bring you there. Yeah, and all of these people that were talking about these Gen Xers in that time period, these were all people that, like, you know, in college that I'd talked to with other, you know, young Christians, they would, you know, talk about Rob Bell, you know, and they would watch, like, new Numa videos, I think was, was what he did, and, you know, we'd watch them in small group, you know, and, and, and, and then I also had my friend who was super in, on the, the Mark Driscoll train, and was constantly sharing sermons and things like that, and John Eldridge, another one, you know, Wild at Heart, Wild at Heart, everybody read that book, if you like, if you wanted to be a man, that was the book to read, you know, and, and, and look, I read it, like, a couple times, I was like, this is, and it's very Jordan Peterson-esque in the sense of, like, you know, what are men doing with their lives today, you know, and, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's, it's, and, and, you know, another interesting thing to note, Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson, Brett Weinstein, Eric Weinstein, Paul Vander Clay, you know what, you know where we're all at demographically? We're, we're, we're, we're just at the end of the boomers, and just at the cusp of the Xers, we're not really boomers, because you'd find the memes on Facebook that are like people born, you know, in the, in the 60s, how am I a boomer? You know, because all of these boomer rituals that people born from, let's say, you know, 45 to 60, people 60 to 70, and that range in, during those years, those, that was done, and the Xer hadn't really started yet, and, and there's, oh, there's so many layers to to this world, and then music too, because I was old enough to be, you know, I was old enough to know a lot of the 60s, early 70s music, but I came of age much more in the rise of disco, and the death to disco fight, and, you know, of course, growing up in all the different stuff goes on forever. There's a new documentary that's coming out, like next month or November, it's called The Jesus Music, which is, and there's a bunch of interviews of contemporary Christian musicians, you know, in this, Lorne Diego, and all sorts of other, you know, famous ones, but it's, it's connecting the origins of contemporary Christian music to the Jesus movement, and, and music from that time. So I'm looking forward to watching that when that comes out. But there is some, like afterburn, or afterglow, you know, musically speaking, you know, you might, your pastor might be the oldest school Bible thumper, but if your musicians up there are evoking the sounds of that movement, then, you know, that's it, man, like that's, you're still participating in that, and it's still living on, it's still moving forward, you know, that, that era of artistic, you know, outpouring, you know, Woodstock in the church, it's still going on in some sense. Absolutely. It would always, you know, because it was, it was well into the 2000s when I would catch, you know, newspaper articles that were saying things like, there's a new thing happening in the churches, they're playing guitars and drums instead of the organ. And I'm like, I can tell you haven't been to church in a long time. That is not new. Well, it's so fascinating to me because, you know, even so Rob Bell, pastored this Granville Avenue church in Grand Rapids, but that grew out of a Calvary Chapel, I think I've got it correctly, a Calvary Chapel church that was in Grant, I mean, there's, there's these, these connections go back through in, in fascinating ways. And I just got I haven't thought about the emergent movement in a long time. I name it every now and then, but I hadn't, I hadn't paused and thought about Donald Miller or, you know, and then once, of course, once the name was there, it was like, oh yeah, that was, that was the whole thing. And you know, I can, it's hard to describe, but I can imagine a soundtrack. Yeah, even jazz, I'm a jazz musician myself, but just the invocation of jazz in that, you know, in that illustration. Well, and when you look at, so, you know, what did Bill Hybels do? It was fascinating because I came back from, I came back to North America, I came to this church, and when I came to this church, our classes had this whole classes wide junket out to Willow Creek, and I have no idea who Bill Hybels or Willow Creek was, I was living in the Dominican Republic. What do I know? And am I all my attention to, you know, African American stuff? And there's just not the thing that I was on. I go to Willow Creek and it's like, okay, we're playing jazz. We're sort of in a big auditorium that could be in a junior college. And, but the message is basic American revivalist evangelicalism from a guy who grew up in the CRC. And, you know, I'm just watching this. And so, yeah, well, we've taken, you know, four spiritual laws and the Roman road, and we've taken all of those things, and we put jazz on top of it, and we took the crosses down. Then, of course, the emergence are like, you know, we're not going to put crosses up, they're going to put lots of crosses up, and we're not just going to put crosses up, we're going to have candles, and we're going to have intentional ritual. And because, of course, the seekers stripped out all the ritual, but music, oh, did nobody, you know, well, then, of course, then there's the intentional absence of music. And I mean, just, yeah, it goes on forever and ever. Well, my last question, is it, is it Vander Clay or is it Vander Clay? That's a good question. Or is it Vander Clay? Yeah. So technically, there is a space, but that space, when computers became du jour in America, I can't tell you how much, how many issues that space created, because now computers are getting sophisticated enough that a name can have a space in it. But I mean, just recently in my most recent driver's license from the state of California, I now have Vander Clay as my last name. For a long time, it was Clay. And so I get all sorts, I always knew it was junk mail, somehow culled from the state of California when, dear Mr. Clay, it's like, okay, I know where you got that name from. So it is, so often I just scrunch it together because it just makes it easier, which just tends to confuse everything. So whenever my wife or my kids have to sign up, so they're trying to think of what it is that we signed up for and space or no space. So I know Hollanders that have just, they scrunched it together and they kept it scrunched together and said enough, but others are out there because many Dutch names are Van, Dur, Clay. So I don't know what to do with it. So at times we've had family discussions. Now we should, we should all agree, space or no space and we should, but then it's already on like social security cards, driver's licenses, documents to actually do a formal legal name change to abolish the space. I don't have time for that. I'll go to my grave with the ambiguity. That's good. That's good, man. Well, listen, I just, you know, I'm just glad I was able to talk to you in person because I have always wanted to tell you that, you know, I just, I really appreciate the work that you do. And, you know, your work, you say this about, about John Verbeke all the time. Your work has always helped me so much. Well, your work has helped me so much. And, you know, for all the people in the discord server and, and it's brought a lot of, well, you, you come up directly or indirectly and in my personal estuary, you know, wherever that is, you know, out in the world. And, and so anyways, just thank you and God bless you for everything you do. Well, thank you. Well, this was fun. Can I, can I share this talk? Cause it sure was fun. Yeah, please. Yeah. Okay. Good. Good. Oh, that's good. Well, thank you, Drew. And now I'll, I'll at least have a story and a face and a lot more substance to think of you when I, when we go back and forth on Twitter or wherever we meet. And maybe if I get over to Tunisia sometime, that would be fun too. Oh man. I almost ran into you in Yellowstone, actually. My wife and I did this whole road trip of the national parks over the summer and we were there like two days before you were there sending your photos on Twitter. I was like, I was there, you know, just a couple of days before. Oh man. It is, it freaks my family out when we sort of bump into someone who knows me online. They're like, I don't know if this is a good idea. Anyway, Drew is a delight to talk to you. Yes, you too. Take care. Bye.