https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RPH8jzUWumY

 Hi, my name is Paul and if you found this then you've found my YouTube channel and you've started watching this stuff. I've, I start, well I'll get into the comments. I started out doing this for reasons I don't fully understand and it's gone in ways I don't fully understand. So I, well let me explain myself a little bit. I'm a pastor of a small church. I like small churches because in small churches I can know all the members. I can know everybody by their name. I can know them by their lives. I can have face to face relationships and I find people to be fabulous and chimps full of snakes as Jordan Peterson says. And so I like a small church because I like dealing with people and in large churches pastors are up there on stage and people can come in and there's a lot of filters between the pastor and the people and I'd rather have there not be so many filters. I'd rather have it be more personal which begs the question of why I'm doing this on YouTube. When I began this I fully expected that 20 or 30 people might watch these things, maybe a couple hundred and so I'd get maybe five or six responses and I could converse with those people. I expected there to be some people who hated it, some people who liked it but I expected face to face conversations or nearly face to face conversations but slow conversations where people can be known, where people can get to know each other because I think we all want to know and be known and we want these relationships to be face to face. I wasn't prepared for the response that my videos got. I'm not sure they warrant them. I'm not criticizing anybody who's watching but it's kind of taken me by surprise and so I'm so appreciative of the comments and the notes and the emails that I've gotten. It's been wonderful and again I'm a small church pastor and when people come up to talk to me I want to talk to them back and so I'm struggling with figuring out how to respond to everything. I've decided to do a little video on comments that I've gotten and so let's jump into it. Here I'm not set up. There we go. Comments, responding to comments. Before I do this and before I, YouTube video comments have a reputation of course and I've been pleasantly surprised by the generosity and the kindness of many commenters but before I read comments I always think of some of these proverbs. Do not rebuke mockers or they will hate you. Rebuke the wise and they will love you and I think about this in terms of me. I want to be wise and so when people rebuke me I should try hard to not get defensive, not go on the attack but to listen and to learn from them. Rebuke the wise and they will be wiser still. Teach the righteous and they will add to their learning. One of the things I've appreciated about Peterson is that he's a clinician and so he deals with people face to face and I think there's no substitute for that in terms of having face to face relationships. Whoever heeds discipline shows the way to life. Whoever ignores correction leads others astray. Rebuke the wise and accept discipline and at the end you will be counted among the wise. And so I, you know, not all advice is good. Not all the advice I give is good but I should at least try to listen to advice. And so let's start with comments that are critical. E.J. Gahn says, why are you screaming at me? Thought I was watching an educational video only to get hit over the head with your voice. Are you angry about something? I don't understand. E.J., you and many people who know me in meat space are very much on the same page. Ever since I was a small child, my mother kept saying, turn the volume down. And the larger I grew, the larger my voice got. And often if I get excited, I talk fast and my voice gets loud. And so, so E.J., you're dead on right with that comment. And I have to, last night my wife said, well, let's, because I told her what was happening. She says, well, let's watch one of these. So I showed her the one on the office because we've been watching the office. And it's, if you know, if you ever take a video of yourself or recording of yourself public speaking, even as a preacher, I've done this for years, it's still painful. And so God bless you all who are watching this stuff because part of me watches it and thinks, Oh my goodness. But one commenter made the point about ranting and made the point about rambling because one of the things that mystifies me about Peterson is that he rambles. I mean, he rambles on and on and I keep watching and obviously lots of others keep watching. So as a pastor, I usually try to condense my message into points and get to the point. And I'll deal with this in a comment that's coming later. But I tend to ramble. And so part of this YouTube thing has been, well, I'm letting myself just kind of speak here. And because I think that's part of the medium. So let's, so E.J. Gons, you are dead on right. I'm sorry. I'm not angry. I do get angry. I get excited. And then I talk loud. The most comment, the most repeated comment I used to get when I was a starting out preacher, and I think I'm doing often in congregations with older people was, I like it. I can hear his voice. So I am very loud and I'm sorry. I'm not angry with you. I'm not angry with anyone. And this is a real weakness of mine. Okay. Seven Strings Shredhead says, Oh, look, another pastor trying to leech off Peterson because their literal belief in God isn't resonating with people. I love this comment. I love this comment. And so this is what I answered. It's always hard to know our own motivations. Is it people pleasing or grabbing attention on my part? You know, I, this, so what's resonated with me about Peterson is how right he is that we are these, this hodgepodge of personalities behind us and who comes through and why do we do what we do? I mean, how much of this is grandstanding, people pleasing, seeking things? And another part of me, you know, then stops and says, well, what's the sanity of this? Why, why am I doing this at all? I, I, I love my church. I love my life. I love what I do. I love doing small things. And now there's all these people subscribing and I don't know how I feel about it. So yeah, I love this comment. I really don't think I'll stand to gain anything in terms of time and money by this project. If anything, it gets me in trouble with the people who support me. It is in competition with legitimate needs and attention to the law at the local level, which is my church. These are the people who employ me to care for them and to, and to do this ministry. At the same time, they're very generous people. And so they've always, they've always tolerated or even sometimes encouraged my little projects. That said, I think the real contribution Peterson is making is forcing the West to challenge the concept of literal. You know, this is, this is something that I think about often because this, this word literal and the concept behind it is, is a fairly recent thing that has entered into our culture. And so when I, in the past talked about modernism and fundamentalism, part, part of the problem, part of the reason we get off track is because we're not reading the Bible within the cultural frames of the authors of the Bible and the groups to whom they were addressed. And so what, you know, has taken the American church is this idea of literal. Now again, when I say that, I say that in a context and some conservative literalists will be very upset and scared by that. I read the Bible all the time and huge sections of the Bible are not literal depending on what we mean by that word. So that's, that's a great comment. I'm, yeah, I, yeah, it's a great comment. Anyway, thanks for your comment. Critical questions are critical comments are helpful and, and I really enjoy how they challenge me to think. Android Zombie posted a number of comments, which I enjoyed. Wait, I'm confused. Are you making videos to amuse yourself to death or to sort yourself out? Oh boy, is that a great question. Why am I making these videos? I think they're rambly. I am, you know, like that sorting himself out video guy that someone left the link in. And I subscribed to his channel because I thought that was a totally cool project. Yeah, I'm doing these to sort myself out. Now some of you who are living in your mom's basement might think, well, he's got a wife and kids and a church and a job. Here's the thing. We're never done sorting ourselves out. And I have a fair number of people in my church in their eighties and some in their nineties and they're still sorting themselves out. And one of the things that I've learned is that you'd better do a lot of sorting yourself out when you're young, because by the time you hit your seventies and eighties, your health is going to go, your relationships are going to be enormously complicated. If you have money, you're going to have a lot of questions about what to do with it in terms of your children and other people. If you don't have money, you're going to have tremendous challenges in terms of figuring out how to live on fixed incomes. So sort yourself out when you're young. The sooner you get yourself sorted out, the better. But we never finish sorting ourselves out. Our whole lifelong, we are working on this. And part of what's behind Android Zombie's question is, and I think about this too, again, my sub personalities are wrangling about this new thing that has come into my life in the last week and a half. And I'm trying to sort it out because I think there are ways in which this medium, again, if you read Neil Peterson, not Peterson, if you read Neil Postman, I got someone here. See, I'm in a small church. I don't have a secretary. a small church. And so I don't have a secretary and folks come in and they want to talk or they got stuff to do. So that's this is what I do. So yeah, all of the all of the criticisms that Postman has of TV, I think a good many of them are true of YouTube. One of the things that I've realized as I'm making this is, you know, just look how I'm setting this video up. Here's my face and television, television. I mean, all of what Postman says is that, you know, that the discipline, Nietzsche, another commenter correcting my language. Thank you for that. I don't know if I'm still saying it right. But Nietzsche, Nietzsche, Nietzsche, you know, made the comment or Pearson through Nietzsche made the comment about West being under the discipline of the Catholic Church. The you know, Postman makes the comment that, you know, especially in colonial America, tremendously literate culture really fostered logic and reasoning and and making valid arguments in a straightforward way. What value to that is is is YouTube good for that? One of the things that I wrestle with is is that OK, so I I'm really enjoying Peterson. I have a friend of mine read his Maps of Meaning book and said he couldn't get through it. And my friend's a really smart guy. I haven't I haven't bought his book. So one of the things I often do is I'm I'm an auditory learner. And so I listen to a lot of YouTube and I do a lot of audiobooks, but I always buy the Kindle book, too, because that way I can go through and work this out. So what I used to do also when I was when I was listening to a lot of Tim Keller sermons, I would I would outline Tim Keller sermons on my blog because often he would make a point and I'd want to go back and remember the point, but I'd have to find it. And I've had this exact same issue with Peterson that and this is what prompted me to do the commentary things because I want to mark what he says so that I can go back and I can listen to it again. One of the things that I've seen is that I will sometimes listen to a point he makes and then I'll come back and then I'll come back and each time I come back, I'll see more and I'll understand better. But that requires me being able to somehow digitally organize what he's doing. And that's really hard. Now, YouTube offers some things I can have timestamps, but but to actually to actually get this into a usable format is critical. And then Postman's greater criticisms, I think, are valid. And so and so I wrestle with the question, well, should I be doing this on YouTube at all? Does the medium itself undermine the undermine the mission? And and there are there are very interesting conversations that that I've had in the church world about TV church and in what ways are these biases polluting and and really warping the initiative? Well, I'm the jury still out with me. And and on one hand, I recognize and appreciate all of these criticisms. On the other hand, you know, a lot of what Peterson notes about reality, I always have this saying that ontology is its own justification, that that just as Peter says in the in the Weinstein Joe Rogan episode, how, you know, we you can't just reinvent a fairy tale and you can't just reinvent what is actually working. So so in that sense, I listen to the pragmatists and I say, OK, if something is happening, pay enough attention to it. And this is this this is some of the same reason that despite the cross pressures, I I continue to deeply appreciate the Bible. There must be something to this book that for how many thousands of years has has captivated us. And so I fully appreciate the criticisms of of skeptics and cynics and atheists and agnostics who say, ah, it's a bunch of hooey. I feel those pressures. But at the same time, if we're going to be just and balanced in this, you have to say that that millions and millions of people reading this book, there's got to be something there. Now, is that an argument that an argument to justify all of the faith beliefs that the church makes? Well, probably not. But, you know, something there. So, again, Android Zombie, great comment. This comment was amazing. Hey, Paul, by Matt Bacon. Hey, Paul, I want to like your videos, but I find that you take about four times longer to make a point than you need. Guilty as charged. You also tend to come from a seemingly disingenuous position that there aren't ethical paradigms that are more ethical than Christianity, which are not inhabiting its corpse. That's a that's a very lovely Peter Sonian sentence about the corpse of the dead. And we're feeding off of it. The difficulty I have is that how are we to evaluate which ethical system is more ethical? You need you need a criteria outside of those two ethical systems by which to judge them. Where will you get your standard to judge the ethical systems? And this this is where we get into Jonathan Haidt. Haidt. Again, I got a comment on that correction. Jonathan Haidt gets into the question of, OK, well, well, how where where do our where does our morality come from? Obviously, if you're in a theistic frame or a Christian framework, you have a God. And then finally, God is the arbiter and the decider of not only all of the ethical systems, but how we inhabit these ethical systems. So so so Matt Matt's point is is is a good point. But but I would push back on it and say, yeah, but as a Christian, I obviously prioritize or privilege a Christian framework. And I fully understand as an atheist, you prioritize an atheist framework. But but I think it is it is. If you go back in my videos, when I talk about kind of the history of Western civilization, the assumption was that that after the Protestant Reformation, when you had rationalism and empiricism, that somehow you could establish a a system of values based on rationalism or empiricism. And and the idea was that that ethics could become a science just like physics or or chemistry. And, you know, biology is more difficult because biology is more complex than chemistry and physics in some ways. Maybe I'm incorrect. Come on in. Again, sorry for the interruption. It's just my life as a small church pastor. They're figuring out how to buff the floor. So so back to back to back to Matt, for example, Sam Harris's conception of ethics isn't even related or similar to Christianity at all. I think that's. If he's if he was if. Again, this is this is a point that I find Peterson making to, you know, why does my dog why can why can my dog and I understand each other? Well, we're close enough that that that we can do that. That's why I can have a better relationship with a dog than I can have with a lizard. Now, Sam Harris is I don't know a lot about Sam Harris. I've listened to some of his podcasts and so I'm not a fair person to judge. But in the times that I've listened to him, he's not he's not that far. He's not far out of the mainstream. I think if he wasn't connected with Christianity or at least from this common Western base, which, as Peterson says, I think he's dead right, has been deeply influenced by Christianity, he his ethic would be vastly different. And I think the reason we know this is if we look at a look at people all around the world that come from there aren't many of them left anymore because of the world has become so homogeneous. But but if you if you look at people from around the world who come from very different cultures, that they'll often have very different ethical systems. And and the fact that Sam Harris can, you know, move quite easily in North America, I think speaks to the fact how much how much commonality there is between these two systems. So let's see. Also, please stop smuggling in your faith, a Sartre term, around your apparent fear based reasons for having faith by implying the only alternative is nihilism. Trying to get my mind around that, I'll I'll accept that. I I'll have to think about that more. I'll have to think about that more because I'm trying to find it, trying to figure out exactly what you mean by it. I don't let me say this. I don't think. I don't think our best faith comes from fear. I know in the American church scene and in the history of medieval Roman Catholicism, there was a lot of trying to motivate people to faith on the basis of fear. Love Jesus or you'll go to hell if the only reason you love Jesus is because you're afraid of hell. I don't know if that's real love. And so nihilism, I guess, I guess for part of me, some of this is. If I weren't a Christian. I might be a nihilist and you say, oh, pastors, pastors shouldn't say things like that. I want to be honest. And and the role, you know, when Jordan Peterson, part of why I think I like Jordan Peterson is he's he's close enough to a Calvinist in terms of his assumptions about the about the capacity of all of us for evil. I listened to the Glenn Beck show today. I've never listened to the Glenn Beck show before. He's not at all in terms of my political likings. But because Peterson was on it and because somebody sent me an email and said, oh, you should listen to this. I listened to it. And, you know, I was I was really moved by by Peterson. You could you could hear here. Here's again one of the things I like about Peterson. I think he's completely sincere. He truly believes what he's doing. Now, right, wrong, good or bad is at least sincere. And and and you could hear him choke up when he's talking about, you know, when he after college as a young man goes to Auschwitz. And I think this this is this is what I this is what I deeply respect about Peterson, because in my experience, a lot of people go to Auschwitz and say, oh, can't believe those Nazis can't imagine what they did. I think Peterson's response is dead on right. And and in terms of my faith, Peterson's response is the foundation because because Peterson goes to Auschwitz and says. I am that monster. This is what I am capable of. And now I'm not going to try and sneak my Christianity in here. I'm going to put it right in the forefront and say that in my opinion, this is in fact the first step of faith that we make. It's when it's when you know, I think it's an apocryphal story by GK Chesterton, but it's when Chesterton stops and says, you know, what's wrong with the world? I am now. Now, again, you might say, well, VanderKlay, have you killed anybody? Have you? Well, you don't know the darkness of my soul. You don't know. You don't know who I would be without accountability. You don't know what I'm capable of in terms of selfishness, in terms of malevolence. I know some of that and and it's deeply sobering. And some of it I know because I'm not going to tell you why this is not a confessional, but I know it. So what does that say? Well, if this is true for me, I it's not hard to assume it's true for most of us. And I'm not going to name names or point fingers here, but. I think this is so that the. I have plenty of atheist friends and none of them are nihilists. And this is where Nietzsche's criticism, I think, is well-founded, because Nietzsche and Kierkegaard, in a sense, looked at their looked at their societies and said, you all are feasting off the dead here. And, you know, if you really want to, if you really want to have a clean system, it's going to have to be a lot more. It's going to have to be a lot different from what it is. And this is in some ways where, you know, there's there's certain tyrannical blank page thinking that that that there is in common with, you know, Peterson's nemesis, the the postmodern neo Marxist, because because both these groups say we can remake humanity. I. I'm skeptical. And again, this is perhaps why I appreciate Peterson. So. Problem is not that you can't find better ethical paradigms without Christianity. The problem is that most people are too stupid, lazy or dishonest with themselves for non-ideological solutions to the question of morality to currently take hold on society. It's not a lack of mean of meaning problem. It's a humans are lame and stupid problem. I'm a Calvinist, so I agree. Humans are lame and stupid. And and I'm lame and stupid. But I don't know the solution to that. See, and this is where in a sense that the 20th century. So so to get back to Yuval Harari's book, you know, homo Deus, the 20th century, the Nazi problem to people being lazy and stupid is, well, get rid of lazy and stupid people. Well, here's the problem. It's and Solzhenitsyn puts his finger on it. I'm probably saying that wrong, too. So that guy out there, you know who you are is correcting it. Keep corrected. It's OK. Lazy and stupid runs through all of our hearts. If I like retelling often the story of Noah, because, you know, people people often have the world saving idea that the way we deal, the way we save the world is to get rid of all the bad people. Well, in a sense, the story of Noah is is that story because God looked around planet Earth and said, I'm going to wipe out all of the bad people. And I am going to say, even if you say, you know, everyone's tainted by bad, I'm going to save the absolute best guy and his family and I'll repopulate the earth with them. And what happens after the flood and Noah gets up and he plants a vineyard now. Again, if you listen to my talk, son, Isaiah five and or my Sunday school lesson, that's a that's a big symbolic thing in the Bible, the vineyard. Noah plants a vineyard and he gets drunk. And and his son comes in and laughs at him and he curses his son. This is who we are. I do not I do not have any confidence we can save the world by getting rid of bad people or lazy and stupid people, because that's all of us. So Matt Bacon, great comment. And I again, I deeply appreciate it. I really do. Comments about fair use. This was a great comment, because I've been thinking, you know, I thought a lot about this even before I did some of the videos. You might consider reaching out to Dr. Peterson. I'll I'll give it a try. I doubt I'll get through just because I would imagine there's so many people going there. And I by no means want to impinge on his intellectual property. So so if any of you can give me some guidance out there now. And I noticed when I did videos with Peterson that YouTube tells me, OK, this is copyrighted material. And so I assume that the segments I use, I haven't monetized my YouTube channel at all, because I, you know, again, I thought I'd have I go from 20 subscribers to 30. And I'm not asking any of the rest of you to leave. I'm just saying you're going to have to give me a chance here to figure this stuff out, because I don't know what to do with it. But and I welcome it. Again, it's all of my subpersonalities back there are having one heck of a conversation in me over the last four days. And I'm trying to sort this out. So. So, again, if anybody out there can give me some wisdom on this, see, I haven't monetized my channel, so I assume that any of the Peterson or Rogan stuff that I linked to YouTube said that gets monetized. And so those people get the money for it. And and I think and ads for it. I think that's absolutely appropriate because I am I am I am not in this to make money. I have a job. My church is very good to me. And so, you know, I this this was a hobby that's gone in a very surprising direction. So, yeah, if anybody has any wisdom on that, I what I what I did, you know, again, part of this part of why this project grew is because I I wanted to engage with Peterson's videos. And I thought, well, you can write Jordan Peterson a message or leave a comment. Well, what on earth is that going to do? I mean, YouTube is this mob out there. And and so and most of this I want to do for my own reasons. And I was blogging a little bit about it and I put in a link and then to put in some commentary. And the more I did that, I thought, no, this is a YouTube thing. I should I should engage with this on YouTube. And so then I thought because of Twitch and seeing seeing what gamers do with watching each other game and seeing some other reaction videos to movies, I thought, well, why don't I try some of that with Jordan Peterson? And because when I'm listening to him, I'll I'll have a thought and I'll add some commentary. And I thought, well, I'll try this. But I very much want to stay within fair use. And and I I don't know. So if anybody has any guidance on that, you know, let me know. So so thank you. Not coach food. Cloud nine. And these are comments critical of the church. And again, I. Christians should not be defensive. Christians should be secure. Optimistic. Open, quick to listen, slow to speak. Now, that's that's a problem for a guy like me who's kind of a motor mouth and it gets loud, as so and so said. But I really love these criticisms of the church and the church should listen to them. Having said that, the church also can't be an institution that just takes the massive criticism and then tries to construct an entity that looks like whatever it is, the whims of the crowd. You can't do that either. So it's it's enormously complex. So cloud nine. Great comment. Paul, the reason why people, including me, are fleeing from church and flocking to Peterson are five fold. Five's a lot. So we'll take it. We'll take a look at it. I hope you will listen. So cloud nine, I'm listening. And now I am sure that there are plenty of people in that long list of comments whose comments I have never seen. I deeply apologize. I I have a day job, as you saw, I've been interrupted twice. I this is I'm trying to carve this out and not hurt my church or be irresponsible with my own time stewardship. So I can't read all the comments. And and and some of you have left some comments that I've tried to answer to. Some of you sent emails. I've tried to respond to those. I was talking to an author yesterday and she told me, Philip Yancey, who is a prominent Christian writer, gets a gets something like a hundred letters a day and he tries to respond to everyone. And I think, oh, my word, C.S. Lewis tried to respond to to even children that wrote to him. See, to me, that is what a Christian does. And this is why I'm a small church pastor, because I, you know, you might say, well, you know, cloud nine came to my church. You know, what would I do in cloud nine after the sermon would say, pastor, I think your sermon is is full of crap. And it sure do I have an ego. Yeah, part of me with that. That would hurt. But I want church to be an open place where we can actually have a conversation, because if cloud nine feels that my sermon is full of crap, but he still wants to come to the church and listen, I think, gosh, then we have a conversation. Then we have a chance to talk. I thought of that when when Jordan Peterson was on Glenn Beck today and I thought, Glenn Beck, does Peterson know where Beck is in terms of the American political landscape? Is that really where he wants to talk? And after I thought that, I thought, but you know what? Jesus. Jesus was probably Jesus made a lot of enemies with the people that politically and religiously should have loved him. The group that were likely most critical of Jesus were the Pharisees. And in some ways, if you map out the landscape of the first century, Jesus and the Pharisees were the closest in terms of a bunch of their a bunch of in terms of the matrix of where they would all stand. But they were most critical of him. And I think partly because, again, Jesus would. Heal Romans and Jesus took on the Jesus had a disciple who was a tax collector. You know, Jesus, Jesus crossed these lines. And so, you know, should Jordan Peterson be on Glenn Beck? You know, when I first started listening, I thought, oh, boy, I don't know. But but after I listened to it, I thought that was exactly where he should have been. And he said some things to Glenn Beck that I certainly would like to say. But, you know, and I think Peterson, you know, when Peterson got down to the nub of what I think is, is, again, the beginning of a Christian profession, which is that that I am the problem, that that the monsters are not out there. The monsters are in here. I thought he made a credible witness to the gospel. Now, again, don't take that statement too far. And, you know, just. People can make a credible statement to the gospel, surprising people can make amazing statements to the gospel. If God can talk to Balaam through a talking donkey. OK, it's a myth. Bear with me. The story is there for a reason, whether you believe it or not. The point of the story is God can use surprising things to make his points. So now maybe you don't believe in God. Maybe it's an idea. So on and so forth. That's the conversation we're having. Those are the issues I'd like to engage. Not necessarily to debate, but I think they're they're fair to talk about. So let's see. Now I'm rambling. So Cloud 9 1 pastors look down on their audiences using corny jokes as public speaking tools and telling stupid life stories to spread church dogma, which comes off as which comes off as very phony and act like they have everything together. Jordan Peterson, on the other hand, is genuine from his heart, speaks with conviction like Jesus, and doesn't mind being vulnerable about what he doesn't know. I can't speak for all pastors. There are lots of them. And and your criticism of pastors, I often feel I am a third generation pastor. What you said? Yeah, yeah, you're right. But but here's the here's the here's the thing. So so let's say and this is another pastor schtick because, you know, it used to be that pastors had to be high and lifted up. And so pastors play that role. And then, oh, we want our pastors to be transparent. So then pastors play that role. But they're still playing a role. And but then one of the things that you learn as a pastor is if you're too transparent, well, that comes with territory. And especially if, you know, people aren't just out there in YouTube land, but people are all over here in your life. Pastors learn to create filters and you say, well, nobody should have filters. Well, we have a president right now without much of a filter. What do you think about that? Even some Republicans wish he'd give up Twitter. Maybe it's a good thing. Maybe it's a bad thing. I don't know. But filters are complicated things. And they're not always bad because there are appropriate times to say things and inappropriate times. So your criticism of pastors? Absolutely. It's complicated, though. So that's point one. I should get to all the points because you asked. I hope you will listen. So cloud nine. I'm listening, baby. Two. Churchgoers tend to be effeminate, weak and culture like in their beliefs, activities and reinforcement of those beliefs. Example, save people and leadership. Absolutely. Here's the funny thing about churches. Probably most of your criticisms are well founded. Most of your criticisms have everything to do with the reality that churches are made up of people. And and so, yeah, a lot of churches have this is something as a reformed pastor in the reformed church and in my tradition, which comes out of the Dutch reformed, we have a tradition of strong councils. I don't own the church. I don't run the church. I want my elders and deacons to, you know, to govern the church and my elders and deacons come in and out of rotation from the membership. They're elected from the body. In my tradition, councils are things that pastors are afraid of because councils are full of people and people are chimps with full of snakes in them. And and so we don't want councils that are that are yes people. But we don't we do want councils who are yes people because we want to get our way. And so part of what I've seen in other church traditions is that councils church leadership is often just the the supporting staff or the pastor. I think, frankly, that's a bad way to do church. That's my opinion. That's the opinion of my tradition. We don't have a hierarchical tradition where we have bishops and and potentates. Actually, in my tradition, it's churches are governed by the laity. But but I won't be fooled. Lay people off and listen to the pastor. So that's that's a that's a real dynamic cloud nine. Three church life is shallow, embarrassingly infantile and can't offer rich and mature life experiences. That's an interesting one, because in many ways, a lot of this has to do with size and church. And a lot of this has to do with whether people will stick to a church. Well, one of the things, you know, 75 years ago in the Christian Reformed Church, for example, if if if a church didn't like its pastor, they would, you know, church pastors circulated quite a bit and you'd wait out your pastor. Today, churches are imagined to be consumer organizations. And some of your criticisms are upsides and downsides of consumer organizations, because we expect churches to cater to the needs and likes of their consumers. Well, that's problematic, because some of what church is supposed to do to help it not be such an infantile, shallow place is is for churches to say things to people that people don't like to hear. Now, that's a dicey thing, because I think part of what part of what many of us are enjoying about Peterson is that he's saying things that we don't like to hear. But there's a part of us that likes to hear it that way. One member once said, Pastor, I like fire and brimstone sermons. And I thought, yeah, well, either because you like you're hoping somebody else will hear that or you've got another complex that that makes you think that the worse I make you feel about yourself, the holier you are. I don't think either of those things is right. So so your criticism, again, absolutely well founded. It's really complex to deal with. And and I don't think that the kinds of changes that have happened in the church in the last 50 years as a function of being part of consumer society has necessarily helped the church on that score. Although these problems have always been with church for churches are places where you can't say what you really think because of peer pressure. Pastors surround themselves with yes men. Pastors lament that people are leaving church, but they refuse to acknowledge the real reason by design. Again, another great comment and criticism. Again, this this gets again gets into the question of filter. Think about people you know in your life who have no filters. Do you like being with those people? How does having no filter work for those people? There are a number of commentaries about I really want to avoid political stuff, but. People without filters get themselves into trouble and so I that there are places. I pastor a small church. There are lots of group homes in our community. There are a number of people who come in and out of our church with some mental illness issues and some of these people stand up in the middle of the church and talk back to me. I'll ask a rhetorical question and they'll answer it and they'll stand up and and debate a point of mind in the sermon and that happens and I part of me always enjoys it that happened in the church. My father pastor to I grew up with that. It doesn't bother me. It bothers the rest of the people because people say, well, I didn't come here to listen to you. I came here to listen to the pastor. So it's complicated. But I do believe which I said earlier in this that churches should be places of honesty and transparency. It's just that churches, just like with the rest of life, have to negotiate the appropriate spaces for honesty and transparency. That's why, for example, when I have a small group Bible study. Or a small or a class and if you watch some of my Sunday school classes, you know, people will often come up with an easy answer to a question I'll ask and it's a it might even be a correct answer, but it's a pat answered. So I usually not take it and push them further because you're exactly right. We tend to to grab towards the facile. So cloud nine. Five churches project an image of public life that is fake or a persona and not relent to the rigor, complexity and pain of real life. And again, this is this is part of the the this is part, I think, what what consumerism has done in the church because the church even churches that. That say that they are counter cultural or resistant to the culture or label the culture as antithetical to the way of Christ and always use culture in that way. They are all affected by culture and And I know, you know, I know some churches that are that are very real and they also tend to be very small because, you know, once I had as part of a worship service, I had some people stand up and and tell their stories and people told stories about domestic violence in the homes they grew up in and stories about child abuse and and And on one hand, on one hand, people and some of the people in the church listened to that and said, wow, that was really cool. That was very transparent. A number of other people in the church said, why aren't they telling this to their therapist. Why is this in this space. So, so the question of filter and transparency and honesty. It's, it's important. And yeah, so, but again, cloud nine. Great question. Criticism of the church. You mentioned that pastors have a hard time filling churches while Dr. J. sells out concert halls talking about the Bible. As a listener to Dr. J. And I can't help think of a basketball player, but that's my issue, not yours. Someone who left the church and And someone who left the church and discussed, I can say that for me church no longer offered truth or conviction. It's all milk toast and platitude. Even some of the great church leaders of our day hold their punches and don't apply the sciences. We've all come to know That that's a that's a great question. And you're exactly right. I know pastors. There's a difficult dynamic. And again, there's so many of these difficult choices you a pastor is supported by his church. What does that do with the pastor's ability to be honest. With his church. If the pastor begins saying things as people don't like well as a pastor you wind up losing your job. Well, you wind up losing your job. You wind up not being able to feed your family. So okay, so churches shouldn't pay pastors. Okay. And there are traditions that do that. Where does that go. Well, churches don't have time to Watch Jordan Peterson videos or or study the Bible or read commentaries or develop lessons and sermons become kind of off the cuff. Oh shoot I opened john six today and these are my thoughts on it. There you are. And what happens, you know, just as Peterson notes stories through generations get weak. The same thing has happened through church traditions that over time church traditions continue to refine their practices difficulties happen when churches when cultures change quickly because churches are institutions and they struggle to adjust and religious traditions struggle to adjust. So Yeah, those are those are really good points. And but but at the same time, I think it's also fair that you know many of the pastors that I know that say are are skeptical about science or skeptical about evolution. Are being sincere about that they have questions. Now part of this goes into the fact that when I think something I think it's obvious. Okay, good for me. When someone else thinks something they think it's obvious. And again, if you listen to Jonathan Huffman, he's a great guy. And again, if you listen to Jonathan height, I'll try to get that name right when you listen to Jonathan height. We all think what we think is obvious and we're not terribly rational. Someone gave me a link again from the comments section about a Jonathan height talk in 2013 Terrific talk. We're not we're not rational. We're we've got all these we've got this committee of personalities in the back of our minds vying for what we do. So and pastors are exactly the same way and churches are part of this too. JP is saying that study of the Bible has value whether or not you've had faith in a certain interpretation of the idea of God. This is a revelation to many atheists and skeptics who felt that the Bible was a value only to people of that faith and thus no relevance to them. John Davis said that and Connor. Carney said it's understanding religion with no dogma attached and is attached to logic. And again, I push back on that because And this is a comment I got into with with the Sam Harris comment a little bit. If you read that comment I gave gave to Matt Bacon. The point that Peterson is making to Weinstein and Harris is this wine Weinstein as I noted in the earlier comment says I think materialism is the base level. Here's the difficult. Here's the difficulty with that. And this is exactly what Peterson the point Peterson makes again and again in his maps of meaning and his personalities film video. Reality concrete reality the reality of physics and chemistry and biology is all out there. But it is nearly infinite if I'm sitting in my office and and you see this sometimes with I believe the current research on autism, for example, is that it's a filter issue. People with autism and certain other certain other diseases have difficulty filtering things. And so you might, you know, it's the person that was hearing me yell. You know, couldn't get by the yelling. I get that. That's something I need to work on. But you might be watching this and be completely distracted by all these commentaries. And I know people I know people who are like that. And, you know, I can be having a conversation with them and the conversation goes way off in another direction. Many of the schizophrenics that I know are like that. Some people with obsessive obsessive compulsive and they start obsessing about something that I that I did or said the difficulty with saying that. The material layer is the ultimate layer is that it doesn't work for people. We don't live like that because I think it is a function of consciousness that we have to storeify everything. It's simply the only way we can meaningfully interact with this physical world. And and and I think Peterson is dead on right with that. And and I think I don't know that Harris and Weinstein fully appreciate what that means for society. And I think this is exactly the reason why Harris and others. Are having a difficult time trying to establish a foundation for ethics and values on the material layer that we access through science. So. So. I think, and I think that's why Peterson is correct that it our values and now he interprets Kant that our values come first. We I when I come into my office, my eyes will go to one or two things. And I'm showing you the cleanest part of my office. It's incredibly messy. So yeah, all you sorters out there. I have not sorted out my life sufficiently to keep a clean office. I'll leave it at that. But but when I walk into my office, what do I look at immediately? I look at a few key things. Why? Because they're germane to the story. If you get a phone call that your house has been robbed and you run over to the house and you go and you run into the house, what are the first things you're going to look at? You're probably going to look at the busted door. And then you're probably going to look at, you know, look for the valuables you had in your house. Maybe you had things that are precious to you, things that are important to you. Or just recently in Northern California, there were some fires when people go back to those homes, they have things in their mind. They're in shock because of the loss, but they have things in their mind that they're looking for and they're going right to that. And that's exactly the point Peterson is making about the reality of values and the reality of the material layer. And that is, I think, why ethics, which is a function of values, it's always a function of values that you're not going to reliably derive ethics from the same foundation that you have for your physics and your chemistry and your biology. And that, I think, is a critical point. And then it begs the question, what are people to do? And that is, in fact, the main question that Peterson is dealing with. So again, great questions. My vision for church, I've talked a lot about this, I think churches should be places for honesty. I think churches should be places for people to work out their stuff. And the vast majority of my friends who are pastors believe in those two things with all their heart. The difficulty is trying to have that work in their organization. Right now, culturally, I think 100 or 200 years ago, there was a lot of status you got out of being a pastor. There might still be some of that within religious communities, but for the most part, most of the pastors I know who are living in a place like California and out there in the world with normal people, they don't brag that they're pastors. And part of the reason they don't brag it is because they know it's complicated. Oh, you're a pastor. Oh, pardon my French. So they'll stop cussing. So, you know, it's a complicated business. And so I appreciate the questions and I appreciate the opportunity to engage them a little bit. And again, follow up in the comments. I'll try and pay careful attention to this, the comments from this video. I'm still working out the cyber side of that. And I think institutions can't simply be consumer organizations, especially churches, because that's not the mandate of church. And that betrays what the church should be. And so institutions are needed to go through a time, needed to go through, institutions need to go through, because anything that's individual goes away with the individuals. Institutions are ways that we travel through time. And when you have rapid social change, that's difficult on institutions. So institutions need confessions. I'm a minister in the Christian Forum Church and we have confessions. And what confessions are, are their way to kind of put our cards on the table and say, okay, this is what I believe. Now, saying this is what I believe doesn't mean that necessarily some beliefs say this, but doesn't mean that, okay, you can't believe anything else. Because part of what we're dealing with in our contemporary culture is that we have a strong cultural value that says, you know, people can believe anything they want to believe. People should be able to say anything they want to say. And I think that's true. I think that's right. I think it's honest and I think it's productive. But at the same time, what a church is, is kind of a group of people that come together and out of common agreement and these confessions display agreement say, we're going to bind ourselves together and we're going to work together. We're going to hold each other accountable. We're going to commit to one another to get further along the path. And it wouldn't be a lot different. It would be something analogous to, let's say, a group of five or ten Jordan Peterson fans who are trying to sort themselves out. They get together once a week and they ask themselves, how are you doing on your sorting? And they challenge you. Is your room clean? Are you lying? Are you lying to yourself? This would be a healthy thing. And in a sense, churches are kind of like that. But churches have other things they're trying to do too. So it's a very complicated situation. And, you know, I thought about this during the Glenn Beck interview too, that there's, you know, maintaining a tradition is a complicated thing because just like Jordan Peterson's comment about fairy tales, if you think you're going to rewrite a fairy tale, there's not a lot of humility going on with you because you're probably not fully appreciating what a fairy tale is. And I think Peterson's making that same point about myths and Peterson's making that point about the Bible. And I think that's a critically important point that, you know, part of, you know, I suspect having worked with people for a long time that this is what's happening with a lot of Jordan Peterson fans because this is what happens at church. So you listen to, oh, I just listened to a Jordan Peterson video. I'm so inspired to sort myself out. So then you start and then you realize, oh my goodness, this is hard. And so this is why Peterson, you know, having been a clinician, works with a lot of people and says, okay, start by cleaning your room. And, you know, I'll work with that with people. I just had someone come to me who, you know, he's got some serious medical issues and, you know, he was in the hospital and I visited him in the hospital because his mother comes to church here and, oh, pastor, I'm so glad you visited me. I'm going to come to church. Okay. And people will say that to me and I'll just kind of shrug because, you know what, coming to church every week is hard. And if you didn't grow up doing it, so then a couple of weeks that came back to me says, okay, pastor, I've made it a goal of mine to at least come the first Sunday of the month. And I said, good for you. Start with a workable goal. And then let's see you hit that goal. And then maybe you'll say, okay, I'll come twice a month. Okay, good. And that might be, okay, I'm going to clean my room. Well, how clean does it have to be? I know some OCD people that, you know, they need to stop cleaning their room. And Peterson does too. So it's complicated. And what you discover is that, yeah, I am a complicated creature and I'm not in control of myself. And again, this is why a lot of what Peter Henson has to say. And I am rambling. And so I'm going to draw this to a close. This is the first time I've tried to, I've never had YouTube comments before. Before I did this video, I had zero YouTube, maybe one or two, hardly any YouTube comments. So, yeah, so this is new for me. And, you know, see, unlike the people in my church, I don't work for you. So I can't say what I want. And so, well, I'm going to have a filter because if we all unleashed all of the personalities in the back of our head and, you know, let them out on the world, you develop the filter as you grew older. You want to see someone without a filter? Look at a two year old. You developed a filter because you were socialized. And you began to learn that standing up to the teacher and saying, you're fat, didn't work for you. And so, again, this again gets into a lot of the Petersons stuff. We developed filters so that we can figure out how to engage productively with the world according to the values that we hold from wherever those values came from, because we probably didn't construct them logically. We probably inherited them from our parents and our context and our religion and all of those things. That is who we are. So, you know, part of me, part of me making this video is thinking, well, I'll make this video and I'll be unfiltered with you. And, you know, maybe a bunch of you will say, I subscribe to this mess, unsubscribe. And OK, I'm truly not offended. And again, as I, you know, I appreciate many of you have sent encouraging notes and comments and I deeply appreciate them. I wanted in this video, I mean, to sit here and read encouraging comments would just be way too narcissistic. And as some of the commenters noted, they didn't say it in these words, but pastors have real issues with narcissism. We as a society are having real issues with narcissism. There's some really interesting stuff out there. So to read those comments would be rather narcissistic. And you could say, wow, but reading critical comments and being seen reading critical comments, that can be narcissistic in a very sneaky way. And yeah, you're right, that can be too. But I don't know what to do with that and still try and play with this project. So maybe I shouldn't play with this project at all. But there we have it. So, again, thanks for your comments. And this has been a scary and thrilling adventure so far. And like the Truman Show, we'll see where it goes. Maybe two weeks from now, everyone will unsubscribe and I'll go back to having 20 subscribers on my channel and I'll continue pastoring my little church that I love. And and everything will go back to normal. Or maybe it won't. I don't know. But anyway, thanks for listening and I'll stop wasting your time.