https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YqETO9anTQ8

 I do it. Yep, it's going. Okay. I have a technical checklist here. Okay, I got to do that too. Yeah. Okay, I think that's working. So I'm doing what the pros do where I'm using Zoom, but I also have a secondary camera that can record me in a higher quality. And then I'm going to put you on your side, me on mine. Hopefully you'll be higher quality too, because you'll be compressed. You'll be smaller. I'm hoping. Like if I take a full, so we'll see. But, Oh, and I'm supposed to clap so that I can sync the thingies. You're the first, this is the test. All right. Oh, that's fun. Yeah. Okay. Okay. And then, okay, I did that. Okay, good. Okay. Well, first of all, of course, as always, I'm really happy you joined me. I've had kind of a summer break by accident where I was trying to figure out what on earth to do with the rest of my life. And, uh, did you figure it out? No, but I'm closer. Good. It's kind of the way it goes. Anyways, I wanted to start by reading something. So first of all, I guess, I don't like to do much of an intro. Um, um, I've had you on before, uh, pastor Paul VanderKlay, I am Julian. I do the intros differently now every time. It's more fun. Um, and, um, we, in my first episode of the reboot of this show, we talked, uh, about, I guess religion and philosophy, I'd say lightly, but I saw you tweeting about, um, a homeless man that you interact with and help, I guess, and perhaps some others as well. It was a while ago, so I don't remember the exact details, but I sent you this message and I want to read out again because it took quite a while to write it. And I thought I did say what I wanted to say. So said, hello, pastor. I was just reading your tweets about a homeless man and homelessness. Perhaps like many, I have felt guilty and ashamed, disgusted, awkward and afraid walking past and often ignoring beggars on the street. Perhaps you could help me develop a more healthy and constructive response. Would you like to come back on my channel to talk about your experiences over the years? And you'd mentioned that you'd, your father had helped homeless people as well. So this was a long running, um, experience. Um, and I just want to add to, I thought of this this morning that this isn't a conversation as far as I'm concerned, this isn't just a conversation about other people because I don't feel I understand anything and particularly something like this, unless I can connect it to my own life. And my feeling and understanding is that a lot of maybe the main reasons for people being on the street has to do with addiction and mental health problems. And as far as I'm concerned, while I have not been diagnosed with either of those things, there's a things that most people, including me in some sense flirt with at some point in their life, excesses of some kind. And so it's always useful. I don't like to have too much of a moral to any of these podcasts, but personally, one of the things I would hope to get is a greater appreciation for just the value of figuring out how to deal with those sorts of things. So that could be right or wrong, but that's, that's where I'm coming from. And that's, I think enough from me. So do you have anything else you want to say before we get into it or do you want to? Oh, we can get into it. Okay. So do you, I have no notes beyond this point because I thought I know nothing. I'm going to go into this completely clueless for all. I know you've made a million podcasts about the subject. I don't think you have. I really haven't. No, that was my feeling, but I don't know. And I didn't look anything up. I just thought I'd so I given, I've, what I told you in my intro and my DM on Twitter is basically where my thinking is at my experiences at, right? I know nothing. I've just walked past people on the street. The one other thing was also what I said in my intro that I'm not, I had heard from someone who deals a lot more with the homeless than I, that it's that homeless is perhaps the wrong word because it emphasizes the fact that they don't have a house, whereas it's really how they got there. And there's nothing, and that's entirely a practical, helpful compassionate way of looking at it. I don't see any downside to, I'm not big on rearranging words and choosing different words necessarily, but he does sound like it's convenient. That's one word. Yeah. But it sounds like homeless is perhaps not helpful in terms of understanding. So people, people, they keep, we keep wearing out words because we think, Oh, that word develops a stigma. As if the new word we pick isn't going to develop a stigma. I mean, there's a, there's sort of a Pollyanna view to language in there. And I mean, we've been through that for a long time. And I hear now, I mean, a lot of the circumlocutions around homelessness that I hear people offering, someone experiencing homelessness. Well, you've just completely infantilized or de-agite, you know, got rid of that person's agency is like, Oh, I'm experiencing homelessness. Whereas sorry, it's like a side effect of a medication. Exactly. It's drowsiness. Exactly. And so, but, but they want to avoid, you know, sort of a, an identity label, but that itself is a, not, not an unpredictable byproduct of sort of our identity, happy culture. So let me, let me say this. Human beings are in our culture, prefer to live inside, especially if you live in a someplace like North America and the further North you go because it's cold outside and shelter, especially in a place like California is, I think the median home price in California is now $800,000 for a single family home. And that is a crazy amount of money. You know, it, housing has gotten enormously expensive in a place like California. And what that usually means is that those with fewer resources and those for whatever reason, who cannot basically live with other people are going to have a very hard time. So there are lots of parts to this and there are lots of different, you know, if we imagine homelessness as sort of a category, there are lots of different kinds of this. You know, for example, when I was at Calvin seminary, one of my friends and classmates, yeah, I didn't know this because he kept it a secret and I was a security guard on the campus at the time. I mean, he slept in his car most of the winter. He was a hardy Canadian and he didn't have much money. So he slept in his car and there are a lot of people sleeping in cars, getting cheap RVs, sleeping in those, sleeping at friend's house, couch surfing. It's sometimes called squatting. You know, maybe, I mean, two of my adult children stayed at my house during the pandemic. Didn't I didn't charge them any rent. One of them has since moved out. The other is hoping to move out, but it costs a lot of money to get a lease, rent an apartment and even a modest apartment. So there's definitely an economic factor involved, but with almost everyone that I've known, there has been a something happened. And it's usually relational fundamentally because they were living somewhere with someone and something happened and that person put them out. So currently there's a guy who's actually been living on the church property for over two years now. He's completely without shelter. He's living in sort of the back corner of the property, that sort of the corner of a wall. And he got there basically because his wife, just would not tolerate his drug habit anymore. And so she put him out and he, he is in his seventies. I would imagine he's, his grandchildren sometimes come to visit him because a car will pull up over to that side of the lot. Sometimes they'll bring him places. He panhandles at the local supermarket where I buy my groceries. And he, you know, to talk to his grandchild, granddaughter, she'll say he loves the drugs more than he loves anything else. And that's true. So he spends a lot of his time panhandling, getting money for drugs and getting money for food. And that's how he has chosen to live his life for the last few years. Now it's quite likely he had been, he had been developing this drug addict for habit for some time. Now a lot of the individuals that, so there are different layers of this. And so I live in a, not the best part of town and that's where the church is. And there are a lot of group homes here because in the eighties, California wanted to mainstream a lot of people with mental illness. And that meant starting a group home system. And this neighborhood has houses built in the, in the sixties, which tended to be a little bigger than houses built in other generations. And the neighborhood was depressed. And so often, people looking for some kind of income will buy an old home and put as many people as possible in it. Group homes have to be licensed. A lot of other, a lot of other housing is basically just room and board. Where someone will own a house and they'll basically rent out as many beds as the neighborhood and code enforcement will allow. And this is in California right now, where a lot of poor people are really living. If they don't have family members that they can live with. And those are often the people that wind up homeless. They, they probably were marginal through a lot of their life. They probably struggled over their lifetime with alcohol, other drugs, usually mental ill. A lot of people that I know who are struggling with substance abuse have some underlying mental health issues. And they're sort of coping with street drugs. That's very common. And so often I'll talk to people and I'll start, I mean, if they, if they come and look for shelter or ask for money, I see that as a license to be nosy and ask about their story. You know, it's not unlike what I do in my channel and the store patterns develop out of the stories. Many times people had a variety of ups and downs in their life. Sometimes they lived with their parents until their parents got too elderly or died. There was one individual, he's an unmedicated schizophrenic. He lived right down the road. His parents, sort of kept him in the house. And then when his parents died, they put the house in a trust for him to live in. Some felons on parole started living with him, sort of taking advantage of him. He had two sisters that were sort of keeping an eye on the, on the place. And on him, we worked with the sheriff to get the, to get the parolees out of the house. Once the parolees went out of the house, he actually burned the house down. He's an unmedicated schizophrenic. He's not in control of himself in the same world that the rest of us are. He lived in a shed at the church for a while. Eventually I found someone else who had some, had a room to rent and could probably handle this guy because he, he wasn't a very big guy and he was getting up in years, but he could be violent. And with a lot of these people, especially men, the story with women is completely different, but with men, they, if they're not in jail already and they have some mental illness and their homelessness, they've probably pretty much figured out what fights to get into and what fights to not get into. And so I, I basically found a place that a guy who would rent him a room and kind of take care of him. And that went for a number of years and, you know, lots of stories involved in helping to make that work. And, but he had a few resources because he had insurance money from the house and he had his disability. A lot of these individuals are on disability, but managing money is tremendously difficult. And many of them prioritize their drugs and alcohol over shelter, I knew a guy early on my years here, he would sleep on the church property. He wasn't a schizophrenic. He was just sort of a lifelong alcoholic. I remember he sat in my office one day, put a can of beer on my desk and said, my life is in that can. And basically the way he managed his life was he, when the weather got bad, he would sort of tighten up and, you know, buy hope, you know, get a cheap hotel during the, during bad weather. He would, he was a painter and so he would work for cash for, for a guy who had apartments. And basically after someone leaves an apartment, the landlord goes in and repaints the apartment. And so he would go in and he would repaint the apartment. He was a painter by trade. He would get paid in cash, probably had some social security too. And so, you know, homeless, figuring out whether or not to pay for shelter was for him, just a question of priorities. And he lived that way for many years. I knew him for a number of years. Many of these individuals when they live on the streets, getting hit by cars is a big threat. The guy who burned down his house eventually got hit by a truck, wound up in a nursing home and it's town south of here. He's still there to the best of my knowledge. The guy who was told me about, you know, the can and my life is in that can, he got hit by a car and, you know, was in the hospital for a while. They, you know, stitched together, broke his hip, stitched together his hips. And then he was living in the, in the bushes in the church across the street with a walker. And so you see a guy who's pretty lame. Now he couldn't really paint anymore because he had been hit by a car. And then he disappeared from my radar, which probably meant, maybe he got into a nursing home. Maybe he died. You know, another guy who I've written quite a bit about, because he spent about eight years literally sleeping against my door here, because part of the reason he slept against my door was he knew for me to get in my office, I'd have to ask him to move. And that was just a little bit of civil interaction. He was raised as a Mormon, a very committed Mormon in many ways. Even though, you know, he's got, he's, how can you be an alcoholic and be a committed Mormon? He's been kicked out of almost all the Mormon churches in the area. Now he's not allowed to come here anymore because he attacked a church member at some point and there's a restraining order. He's not supposed to be on the premises. So it's just story after story after story after story of this. And, you know, I, when I got here, the first day I showed up for work, there was a woman sitting with a suitcase in the middle of the parking lot. And a lot of the people at the church here, they didn't really know me at that point. They were worried, Oh, what's the pastor going to do about this? Cause other pastors had been annoyed, frustrated with the constant, with this constant line of people. But I had grown up watching my father deal with this. And so for me in a church, mental illness, substance abuse, that was just all part of what churches lived with. And you tried to help people when you could. Often there's not a lot you can do for them. So you try and extend some kindness, show some humanity, but at the same time, don't, you know, try really hard to walk that line and not enable because you can make their lives worse with your kindness. And so figuring out how to help and not hurt is never, it's sort of an art, not a science. It's, you never get it right. You have to deal with your own conscience. Sometimes you have to manage things. Like recently I, I turned off all of the water that was sort of on the periphery or the obvious spigots. There are a lot of spigots. I turned off all of the water that was sort of on the periphery or the obvious spigots. There are some that are open, but there are some of the obvious spigots around the church, basically because that was a homeless encampment was starting to develop. And, you know, nobody wants to, I mean, the church isn't doing well anyway in terms of, you know, our congregation is aging. The churches try to survive by attracting new members, and people will say, who on earth wants to go to a church where there's all these shopping baskets. There's scary homeless people. There's, there's feces in the, in the shrubbery. You know, there's an inebriated guy sleeping in the parking lot. You don't want to run him over. I mean, it's not an easy thing in a consumerist religious landscape, but at the same time, churches also need to have a conscience because to just be draconian about keeping these people away, well, what does that say about your Christian faith? We follow a master who told the story of Lazarus and a rich man. So you're always walking this line and it's never easy and it's never clear and you get a lot wrong, but you just keep working it. And when Jesus says, the poor you will always have with you, 2000 years later seems to be holding. And so that's just a little bit of what I've lived with. At the same time, I think it's vitally important for the health of your soul to walk those lines with people. Because one of the things, as you said in your introduction, one of the things you realize is that none of us are too far from them. And really what keeps us from that is the capacity to not alienate family that at one point or another, if you do something or I do something that sort of sabotages our life, someone will take you in. And by the time someone knocks on my door, who I don't know, and asks for money for gas or for bus fare or just food or some help, nobody's hatched into this world. And what that means is in all likelihood, they have burned through any network and web of family relations that they would have gone through first. And what that often means is that there's likely a power in their life that is stronger than family. Now, not everybody is born into the same kind of family network. And in some ways, the better family you have, the more resistant you're going to be to addiction, the more safety net you have. I mean, strength leads to strength, but dysfunction also leads to dysfunction. And there's obviously structural issues involved there. There's generations and generational issues involved there. This one particular Mormon individual talks about the fact that his two grandfathers, both of them were alcoholics. So then you look at, you know, there's clearly something going on in terms of family lineage there. One of them eventually beat the bottle and straightened up and lived into his 90s and was able to live a clean, decent Mormon lifestyle. The other threw himself off a bridge in the Bay Area and took his own life. And it's between these two poles in some ways that this individual lives. And he, yeah, I've known him for about 10 years now. And so he was here for about seven, eight, he was here for about seven years sleeping against my door. Then when I went on vacation, he attacked one of the older members of the church that was cleaning up garbage that he would always bring here. And he got violent that sent him to jail for a couple of years. And then he got out with a restraining order. Of course, he came straight back here. First Sunday, he was free. He walks right into church during the church service. And I looked at him and I said, you know, you can't be here. And so he turned and he walked out. But I've been playing that game with him for almost two years now. And but the last six months, he's 61 years old now. The last six months, I've noticed that his basically his short term memory is shot because a day or two, he'll come to me and he'll ask me a question that we I know we had a conversation with even sometimes just a few hours before. Like when he comes to this, can I call my father? His father is 91 years old, lives in Utah. So I'll bring him in, set him down, call his father, just facilitate that. It's really encouraging for his father. His father just lost his wife, my friend's mother. And so if they can have 10 or 15 minutes of meaningful. Positive conversation over the phone, that's generally a good thing. And then he knocks on my door, can I call my father? So just talk to your father. I did. Yeah. And I hadn't seen that in the last 10 years. So short term memory is going his when he's in the hospital, they control his bipolar. He's not smoking, he's not drinking, he's not doing street drugs. They're able he's there, he's able to eat, he's able to sleep. And if you know anything about bipolar, sleep is a real big issue. He's able to eat, he's able to sleep, spends two, three weeks in the mental hospital, comes out clean in his right mind. Immediately back to the beer, back to the pot, I mean, his drug dealer is one of his first calls. And and then within a day or two, he's already settling into this. And then now within about a week, he's coming to me and saying, I can't I can't do this anymore. So you want me to bring you to the hospital? Yeah. So then I'll bring him to the hospital three more weeks in the hospital. But, you know, there's a social worker that's trying to help him. But unless he does something criminal. The way the situation is is is right now in terms of California, unless he does something criminal, they're not going to hold him. And each time they sort of patch him up and get him in his right mind and he feels strong again, he wants to go back to his lifestyle and then he'll get out and he'll come right back to me. And I'll say, you know, when I see you, when you're out of the hospital, you're looking good, you're looking well. You really when you're living inside, when you've when you're on your meds, you know, you know, you feel better. You know, your life is better. And he always says, but I'm not going to pay. Basically, I'm not going to pay my money is one of his favorite phrases. I'm not going to pay someone to annoy me. And what he means by that is he knows that for he gets about a thousand dollars a month from disability. He knows that if he go about his only options for housing are a board and care or a room and board. That's going to cost between seven and eight hundred dollars a month. So eight tenths of his money. And that'll give him some, you know, a couple of crappy meals every day and a bed to sleep on, probably with some roommates who are very similar to him. Mental illness, substance abuse issues, difficult time getting along with people. And so he's he's a smart guy. He says, you know, I did this for years. I'm not going to do that. So goes goes buys a sleeping bag at the local sport and good store, you know, starts working on the beer once he's on the streets. The only almost the only thing he takes in his beer and, you know, the beer, the alcohol, monkeys with all of the psych meds that the hospital has just been putting into him for the last three weeks. And again, now, within a few days, he's not wearing shoes, he's shuffling around. He's defecating in the bushes. He's not clean. Then I passed by, I haven't slept for three days. I know, which means he's manic. And that means that four or five days from now, he's going to be not getting out of bed, urinating in a sleeping bag. You know, I know this because I mean, I at that point, I was homeschooling my kids during the day and I would work sort of evening hours that way, I could sort of double shift homeschool my kids in the morning and work in the evening. And he would just lay against that door. And I just could hear his self-talk. I'd be sitting here in my office working on my sermon, do stuff. And he was just he would just lay here cursing his own existence when he was in his low phase. And I just listened to him just, you know, and it was it was. There's very little I could do for him. There's very little I could do for him. And basically what I was doing for him was letting him there's kind of an overhang here outside my office is kind of sheltered by bushes. You can see people coming. You're up elevated off the street. And so this is the one place he felt safe. And so I basically let him be here. That's what I did until, of course, he attacked somebody. But so I know him very, very well. And he's got an ex-wife. He's got four kids who are now young adults. He's a wonderful guy. People love him when he's lovable. But there's, you know, I he's been hit by a car a couple of times. He was an athlete when he was young. So we survived one of the last car accidents. It was in a really bad it was in a really bad state. I had a guy who at the church who was also bipolar and even more stories with him. He wasn't homeless at that point, but very much had lived a similar life. And I was trying to run a class. And so I told my friend, I said, go and go see if you could talk to him and see what's going on. And a friend comes back, like, he's crazy. I know he's crazy. That's what we're all doing here. So and at that point, he just went out to the street, decided he was going to, you know, do a headlong thing into a car coming 40 miles an hour, busted his neck, put him in the hospital for four months. But then when he got out right back here and. I've just got I've just got I've got hours of stories like this. And. Are there ways so, you know, when when when a lot of people. A lot of people drive by and we'll see him or see others and they'll give money. It's very interesting. Panhandling has really. Picked up in the last number of years here in California, but. Almost all of the people I see panhandling outside of church here are not homeless right here, which is very interesting, and so I've done a little bit of research on that because I just go up and ask people questions. Say, where are you from? Where do you live? And often it's a little security guard trick I learned when I was in college. If you often ask someone before they have time to think about the question, they'll usually give you a truthful answer, even if it's against their own self-interest. So you just you just you just hit them with a surprise question almost right away and they'll blurt out an answer. And so I don't know who's panhandling around here, but they're not the people living in the bushes in this neighborhood because I know these people. And so I. Very seldom in North America give to panhandlers. I will sometimes give money to people I know. And if I do, I usually try to be generous, I mean, not a dollar or two, give him 10 or 20 bucks because that'll help him or sometimes. You know, by, you know, give him some food or something like that, but. People, you know, so I remember once with this one individual, it was his birthday. I know his Social Security number, I know his birthday, because for years I tried to help him, you know, with customer service people on the phone. You always have to give a Social Security number, his date of birth, all these things. So. He so one year I thought, well, it's his birthday, let's do something special. One of the places you can take. People to. Our buffets, all you can eat buffets, if you go to all you can eat buffets, you recognize that I learned this from a family who had an autistic kid that you could take your autistic kid to all you can eat buffets, you almost can't take him to any other restaurant because all you can eat buffets sort of tolerate a lot that other restaurants don't. So I go to buffets with these individuals. So I took him to a buffet and all you can eat buffet right down the road. And I thought this would be something special. You can get whatever he wants, you know, and. I was at this was years ago already now, I was quite shocked how little he ate, and I just simply didn't appreciate how. Destroyed his digestive system had been from all the years of alcohol. One of my first sit down conversations with him was on a bench. We had a bench kind of overlooking the street here and he was sitting, he was cutting. I don't know what it was cutting some liquor with whole milk just to be able to get the liquor down. And and often he'll drink half and half because that's even that even, you know, that'll cut it even more because the fat content is so high. So, you know, it's I'm sorry. I mean, it's I'm the I'm a combination of two things, because one of the things is you you go find old missionaries and you ask them questions and they'll tell you stories until you're really sick of hearing their stories. And same thing with. Urban pastors, my father finally, you know, when he retired, he he wrote a book and just I think part of the reason he wrote the book was just because he wanted to tell all those stories. And he couldn't even tell the good ones in the book because the really. The really extreme stories are ones you can't tell because. At least not until the people are dead or their family members are gone, because to tell to tell stories of such degradation. But it's not it's not polite and it's not loving and caring. But. As a pastor. Especially in a place like this and where my father pastored, you see degradation and it is. It leaves. It leaves an impact and and you know, for someone like myself, who. I grew up with wonderful parents. You know, godly Christian life together, love their kids. And, you know, I. You know, I my my wife and I have managed to keep our marriage together for 33 years. Food is on the table and in the fridge. You know, I haven't since I've been working at this church, they haven't failed to pay me. They haven't missed a paycheck. That's a that's a good thing in a church. And so, on one hand. I've lived a tremendously blessed life. And at the same time, I've seen. And regularly see people who. Have very difficult lives and. Sometimes make their even more even difficult lives worse sometimes by bad decisions. Sometimes it's just because. If you've got mental illness. If you come from a broken home if you're living in an area where. Things are already a little bit jungle like in terms of. But one of the interesting things that you learn is that there's sort of two levels to society, there are the civilians of people who pay taxes and follow the laws and in many ways, the police sort of look out for those people and then there's the there's the you know. There's the you know. there's the back row America, some might call, but there's the underside where there's the drug dealers and the prostitutes and the junkies and the alcoholics and so there's always sort of two levels going on on the street and these two layers bump up against each other and in many ways. People living on the street are the intersection of those two worlds because those people living on the street. Unlike the people who are doing better sort of in that underclass they're not able to hide and camouflage and cover. And so. They're sort of that they're sort of the the visible layer of this shadow world that in a neighborhood like this right here is is a big part of the Community and many people in this Community. are in touch with that shadow world, they might have a son or a daughter who is. Living on the street. They might have someone who's struggling with mental illness, someone who's struggling with a drug habit or a gambling, I mean it's not just always substances, it can be gambling, it can be sex, all these different addictions and. All these different addictions and, but you know, even a very affluent Community will also have the underside. And so that's that's but. that's that's just part of life here and so that often people they'll go down the street we'll see a homeless person and they'll feel bad. And a way to deal with feeling bad is give them something because then it's like well I I feel good about myself because I gave them something. i've watched so when he was living right here, people would stop the car all the time and give him things and he was very, he was very gracious Thank you that's so helpful and. You know, and he was he was very people loved giving to him because he could be very friendly and very appreciative. But after they drove down the street and throw the thing away because why are they always given me shoes I said that's because you're not wearing any shoes I hate shoes I don't like shoes. And so, but everyone would give him shoes and he'd always say thank you and they all felt good about it they go down the street need throw it away and then it was my problem to deal with because. The place would be filled with the junk that people would give him. I want to interrupt you do you think that they felt good or they just felt less bad I think this is a useful distinction between perhaps ways people approach this kind of thing like i'd feel less bad I don't think i'd feel good about it, but there may be people who would. Well, let me ask you this, why do you feel bad when you see it. Because everything about them is. screaming out something wrong do something they are often asking for something and and and it seems like my options to either engage with who knows what or to completely disregard someone who's in need. yeah so it's like it's the extreme case either you do you get too involved or not appropriately involved. And my advice to people is usually now there are extreme cases, and I will I have guidelines basically I don't have rules for myself, because I will break them often, but my advice for people is if you want to try to help someone first of all you're limited you can't help everyone. Begin to develop a relationship with someone and that's far more costly than. You know, five or $10 or a McDonald's sandwich or something like that, because it's costing your time, but what that affords you then in the process is understanding. And then you begin to relate to the person as a person and and what you'll find pretty quickly is that some people are willing to have a relationship with you a lot of people aren't they want the money and okay but now. Now, now, at least there's a little bit more light shining on the the situation here, I remember there was a woman, a long time over at the grocery store where we were talking about. And she would always come with the same story, and it was a BS story, and the reason I know it was a BS story is because she told it all the time, and it wasn't the kind of story that was. The situation here, I remember there was a woman, a long time over at the grocery store where where I shop. She would work the parking lot and she would always come with the same story, and it was a BS story, and the reason I know it was a BS story is because she told it all the time. And it wasn't the kind of story that was an everyday story, it was a one off story, there was a guy who would call the church and our our deaconate here has always been very generous. Which meant that we get a lot of calls, because we got a reputation for helping people, and so this guy would call and he'd say. You know me and my mother were in this hotel and my disability is just about to come through. And we just got into town and he'd have this whole story which basically makes it sound like this is basically a you know if I would pay a few hundred dollars. To for their hotel bill for the next few days, then they would get over the hump and be okay and that's the kind of giving most of us would like to do a little a little help up and they'll be okay. And that's and that's a really good kind of giving we all wind up in in a problem every now and then, and but this guy had been working this line for years. And he was very organized he kept a book about all the churches that he would call and so you know, eventually I confronted him on it. And I said you know you've been telling me this story for years, and then he got upset and cussed me out. And then you know I guess he had gotten through to a deacon at one point they'd helped him and then he had learned that the deacons finally made a rule that. They were only going to help someone maybe once a year with us, so then he calls me again and I said you know hey. You know I've had you and I have had this conversation before said yeah but your policy is and i'm like. No we're not going to play these games, you know if you're you know either be honest with me. And you know, maybe we can work on something together, so that you and your mother can maybe you know I don't mind putting more money into a person. But. don't lie to me about it. And and have an honest relationship with me and and so that's part of how I deal with the homeless in this area in that i'm willing to help you, but we're going to have a relationship and I can deal with 10 years of frustration. As long as I know that the relationship between us is honest I understand you're mentally ill, I understand you have a serious drug and alcohol problem, I understand. You have some real patterns in your life that destroy your capacity. To build good relationships, but and i'm going to continue to walk alongside of you and where I can. Try to make your life at least a little bit better and where there is a possibility. of building on something and getting you to a better place or in a better way, giving you more agency i'm going to work with you at that i'm going to work with you towards that and I don't care. If it takes a very long time and I don't care if it costs me a lot of money because that's the goal, but what i'm not going to be into these is these cheap little transactions that basically enable you to continue to be stuck and a lot of people are like fuck you okay. There we go that now we now we at least know where we're both at and you can come back to me and talk to me again, I am willing to do that, I mean you can I mean this guy has threatened my life he's. I mean he's done all manner of thing against me and he understands, though, that there's there's almost nothing he can do to me that's going to force me to divorce him, but our relationship does have boundaries. And I will enforce those boundaries and. that's that's how we can that's how I can live with him and that's how he has to live with me or without me because those are my terms. And I think they're I think they're generous terms, I think they're the terms, I should have, but those are the terms and the thing is in any relationship people have terms that's the nature of a relationship so. So that's why I encourage people. panhandling. You know, giving to somebody on the corner. You know nothing about this person. And I don't know why you would do it you're probably better off saving your money if, in fact, you begin seeing someone regularly maybe at some point park the car go over to where their panhandling sit down. Maybe share a coffee with them or something and just start talking to them build a relationship and then. Over time. You will get an eye if you don't have any if you don't have any windows into the underworld, you will begin to you will have an ambassador who will you know walk you through the underworld and a lot of what I know on the street here is because. The people who are living in the living above ground they don't know what's happening underneath here. People under here know everything I mean I know the drug dealer I know the drugs of choice, I have an idea of the background now a lot of times they don't know a lot of history and so that's where I kind of come in as a pastor. And if I can sit down and start to have a conversation and many of the people. Who have burned through their relationships if they still have a capacity for relationship they're lonely because a lot of the relationships in the underworld. aren't worth much. Yeah it's it's so hard to generalize because in the underworld i've seen enormous generosity. But at the same time, so many of the individuals are. So sold out to their habits that they'll betray you in a minute. And yeah we had a. We had a little jar in the deacons room once which had, I think, a couple bucks in from the children's church offering and. I left him in there and I came back and the money was gone, I said hey. kids gave that money to God, are you going to take it. i'm a junkie what do you expect. Kids gave that money to God, are you going to take it. i'm a junkie what do you expect fair point. But you know we had a conversation about it and. Because part of. At least for for this individual again who's who's deeply religious I know almost nobody in the underworld who who is an atheist i'm not saying they're not there, but they all are religious one way or another. And okay okay hang on yeah I gotta ask you about that for a second yep do you mean that in part of what we discussed last time was what it even means to be religious but i'm trusting you do you mean that in like a. Casual way like as believing in a religion or a God, or do you mean more like. Some they treat something as if it's most important or like more in a philosophical you mean I mean it, I mean it in the way. A secularist would define it, they believe in God. They do not. Okay, do you know if this ridiculously general question, but do you know if it's they start out that way, or they end up that way or a mix obviously most likely but. Well, part of the difficult part of the difficulty here is the sampling. And they are at the church or in connection with you, I guess. yeah and this neighborhood African Americans Hispanics, so I mean white folks are the most secular part of the population. And so, a lot of that, but this individual is talking about his Mormon he's white. But I. You know, and if they don't believe in. They either have a very thick folk religion or they believe in karma what goes around comes around they believe in heaven and hell they they believe they believe. They believe even prisoners that i've known have codes that they hold that. You know you know you go to it, you go you talk to a murderer and they say, at least i'm not a pedophile you know it's the it's the people who have abused children. they're really at the bottom of the pecking order and and that and they know it, but the people on the street. You know so so so my friend here, my father told me to not lie and to not steal. This individual lies to be all that he doesn't actually lie to me much anymore, because he knows he can tell me the truth and it won't break our relationship. So he doesn't lie to me that much anymore, but and he doesn't steal from me. very much anymore, and he actually always plays his bills, I mean I when he asked me for money, I was giving him money because he's always good for it. he's always good for it, he always pays his debt even even when he's forgetting now he'll say. Do I owe you any money, I could tell him and he would pay, but if I could make it up, but i'm not I just say yeah you owe me 40 bucks okay okay me 40 bucks. or sometimes it'll be the end of the month, I'll say why don't you wait until next couple of weeks when you have it again, and you can pay them but. They all have codes of conduct. And those codes of conduct are connected to God and to demons and to angels and to heaven and hell, that is almost uniformly the case, even though they know, and this is part of their burden. That they are they are failing the code. Why a lot because I mean everyone is probably failing to meet their own expectations as a general rule, but i'm assuming what significant here is. These people have. These people have stolen. money from mothers and fathers, they have betrayed loved ones, I mean they have I mean impulse control. Obviously, for almost all of these people is not very much there. You know, one day i'm i'm sitting in my office working on something and I hear. i've always got noise going on outside my door, but I hear something it's like this is not the usual sound. And you got to understand we're elevated about 10 feet above the roadway there's some bushes give a little bit of color. I open the door and here's the guy having sex with another this woman tends to be semi homeless, I mean it's broad daylight they're doing it right outside my door. And it's like um. You know come on and okay pastor and. You know another day I opened the door and here's my friend and his drug dealer and they're sitting there having a joint. And I opened the door and the drug dealers got more scruples oh sorry pastor we probably shouldn't be. broad daylight we probably shouldn't be smoking pot out here on your outside your door it's not a good look for your church you think. So you know. And you know I don't again if you build a relationship, you can actually. You can actually make you can help the people in some ways, you can lend them some of your agency, you know that's what accountability does. And, and if you lend them a little bit of your agency, they can have a little bit more, and if they have a little bit more. Maybe just maybe they'll steal a little less because this individual has been banned by almost all the stores in the neighborhood because they're not going to be able to sell their stuff. And, you know, they'll let them walk out the door and of course the minimum wage clerk is looking like. Is this really worth my minimum wage job and you know they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door. And you know they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door and they'll let them walk out the door. And you know they'll let them walk out the door and then the owner will hear about this and they'll tell them you're banned from the store and. they'll test the ban every now and then, but the cops will come and you know anybody who's currently on the street has learned how to stay out of jail, by definition. A lot of our people are in jail or they bet and they go to jail semi regularly sometimes but. jail many of these people on the street don't do well in jail because there's tougher guys in jail, and so you know they might look like a big deal on the street, but the truth is they're fairly far down the pecking order. Because if they had more status had more capacity, you know that maybe they could have a girlfriend who would. give them a roof over their head and you know I mean. it's just a lot. yeah no there's no there's interesting it's a good thing I didn't prepare any questions, because all I need to do is just let you start and then go. I just a couple practical what questions you I we said an hour, so is that a hard thing like 230. Now we can go a little longer we can go to we can go to noon my time. All right, so i'm telling you my time is complete yeah or whatever I was actually don't know what I say okay so okay that's my three okay good. Okay, I think there are a lot of things I could ask, or I could just let you tell me more stories, it should be kind of fun i'm thinking the one there's a few things you've said that really interested me and from the making it more. Generally useful what i'm. What i'm learning from you is. Oh everything you said about how to help these people you hinted at this is also what you would do in your regular life with your regular relationships right and so you things such as. The walking that line of being helpful but. Right or you know volunteering your time and so on, without it just being either you didn't say draining you but obviously it would be if it's not if it's if it's counterproductive for them, then it's a waste of your time to. Right some worse it's kind of productive and as far as being i'm wondering whether it's easier for you to be honest with them, then with. More civilized people, so to speak, because it's an asset like I find necessity will sometimes be helpful for that sort of thing. A lot of lying is sort of social lubrication. yeah I also don't mean lying, I mean more just where you don't say things at least that would be where. yeah where that's where I get in trouble I. If I had a better memory, I think I could count the number of times i've lied in my life it's not that many but there's still lots of things I don't say that perhaps I should and that's something where. It would be just that much more dangerous and counterproductive to do that in those relationships, because the more extreme so. Or do you think that that's something you're think has this trained you or do you think you already were naturally okay at that. I can anybody who watches my YouTube knows I can be blunt sometimes but it's in some ways in a relationship, you have to earn the right to tell the truth certain truths, instead of looking over them. You know, because you know just the other day. You know, often and people are. I will tell people I'll say look because they because the spot right outside my office is just prime it's a it's a semi quiet street. it's overlooking the main thoroughfare there's lots of stores here and again it's sort of hidden, so if you're in this spot, you can see and not be seen, you have shelter I mean it's just prime spot if you're homelessness it's also right outside my door. Maybe maybe you could rent it out and then put the money towards a fun to help the people. Collecting rent from these people. But then use it to help them right, but. The whole point is they don't want to pay rent. But so. But then, but then I will tell people say look, this is no place for human being to live. There's no toilet facilities here, you know the shelter is marginal at best, this is not a place to live and so then there's of course there's defecation there's maybe toilet paper and so i'll just say you know, is this yours. that's. Who would ask someone if the turd is theirs, but I do and but but in some ways, certain things you you gain certain things you gain. But you earn the right to ask and again that's why I say if someone knocks on my door and they're asking me for money. Part of what they're purchasing. Is part of what i'm purchasing with giving them my time is. Being able to answer ask some questions now I know full well I can get lied to, and if I don't have a relationship with the person, even if I do, I can you know I can be lied to and fooled. But again, if you if you build a relationship that affords. That affords truth telling it affords you know often, and this is just this is just a general ministry point of wisdom to. You have to earn the right to tell some truths in people's lives and what you mean what I mean by that is. Well, there are things we don't want to hear. And we're not going to hear them. And and someone someone needs to have. The relational platform to enable that truth to come across and sink into us, and that is only built with trust and time and the the giving. And receiving of human relationship, that is how you stitch it together. And for almost all of these people again by virtue of the fact that they are some people are short term homeless that go in and out of shelter those these are not the people I see. Those people they're dealing with government egg organizations there, you know the systems are sort of working to one degree for another for them by the time. By the time you have a relationship with me, you have really destroyed your life, you are hardcore there's all this lingo they're service resistant, we have such a nice way of you know. All these people are service resistant oh we've sort of medicalized everything haven't we so but okay so now you're living on my property, I can call the cops on you. i'm just plugging in my camera. Okay. I can call the cops on you, I might even be able to put you into jail. i'm in most cases again a lot of these guys are smaller they're not the ones in jail, I can throw away your stuff I can I can make your life miserable if you want to be on good terms with me. you're going to have to enter into a relationship with me and it's going to cost you something i'm willing to have it cost me something to. And there again, but this basic giving and receiving this is the circulatory system of any human relationship. So. There are a few elements that you mentioned back there about the nature of the relationships you have. The nature of the relationships you have. Lending agency is an interesting way to put it, I mean I guess, to some degree, it might be the case in any relationship, but it seems particularly striking there. Because I do have a feel for it of the degree of to which you're describing people who are trapped in their own in cycles and trapped in. And you know I mean when you when you're talking about this cycle of I don't remember the exact period of time, it was a few weeks in the hospital and then was it only one week or a couple weeks. yeah he's sort of three to one right now hospital time to street time. Like that's sort of like someone trying to go on a diet right and you know people often who are always trying out diets or exercising you know so it's it's it's it's I certainly feel like I have a sense of it, and so the idea of specifically trying to help someone in an area where they're where they're stuck going round and round. It's interesting that that's the way it is. So I'm wondering I was trying to think earlier if there was a word instead of homeless that would have more to do with a lack of connections. Or just a lack of. Internal freedom it's a combination of internal and external. I can't think of a one word that would. Well addiction gets at some of it, especially with sort of the John Vervecki reciprocal narrowing that John Vervecki has a friend who has done a lot of work on addiction and I forget his friend's name, but you know, basically he notes, and this is this is this is fortunately becoming more and more. Well known now that addiction is not just a certain substance let's say that it's like it's a biochemical thing merely but that people who have a lot of good things in their life are far less likely to fall into addiction. And and that and you're right, I wish we had a better a better word for it, but you know teachers lend agency to students parents land agency to children. Children lend agency to parents when their parents get old, I mean a lot of what. True helping is is sort of lending agency and maybe let's say in fact it's investing agency because i'm willing to invest in this person, but I expect to see a return in investment and I think there's something. You know, as a Christian minister, I see that's that's deep that's something deep in the Christian religion, because. The narrative of Christianity is while we were yet sinners, in other words, while we had no agency to beat off sin using us Christ died for us, in other words, he invests in us and. And that's actually many parables in the New Testament talk this way expects a return that i'm investing in you and but now, for me. You know the return of investment, I want to see in the people I work with I mean it's not that i'm going. not going to get money from them or something like it's exactly what the apostle Paul says in the New Testament, he says, you are my letters of recommendation. What I want for the people that I work with is you know I so for a long time, I would talk to this one individual and he'd say don't try to help me. Well that's coming that's a little bit ironic for someone who's you know sleeping outside my door and then once i'm driving them to the hospital he's like why is it always you driving me to the hospital and me not driving you. Well, I don't know how about the fact that you don't have a car and you lost your license with. I don't know you know way over a dozen DUI decades ago and you don't have a job and you're sleeping outside and you're eating like crap and you know, and you know I added the kind of relationship where. Why are you even asking me this question and I don't i'm not saying any of it, we have enough of a relationship for him to know i'm not saying any of these things to harm him. But we can say the truth here and sometimes he'll tell me some things which is really hilarious. But that's that's investing in someone else, because my joy is, I want to see you thrive and so for years, he would say don't try to help me. All right, I won't now we're to the point, you know a few months ago. I could tell he was at a point and we sat on the steps outside our office and we we had a really good conversation, I said. You know you can't afford to live this way anymore your body isn't taking it and. This isn't working for you what what so let's let's work on a plan, so we came up with a plan, of course, the plan failed. But we at least got to the point where we could talk about a plan that took five years to get there, and so now we're you know we're inching our way towards a plan. Plans are hard, I have a terrible time with plants. That they are hard. For that like getting to that point, we have the plan yeah. Getting to that point, we have the plan yeah. You're supposed to fail the plan, then you know a better idea how to make a plan yeah. Yes, I do find the idea of. Well, I put it this way I do other, can you think of any other general guidelines. For how to approach helping i'm i'm going to say helping people who I would find on the street, but within mind that part of my interest isn't necessarily that i'll do this, but that it sounds like. There are a lot of principles of work that would apply to other relationships just in different degrees and it's it's interesting because I you know I don't it's almost like. Because I you know I don't it's almost like when there's a movie or a story where there's some relate weird relationship between characters where it's it's ridiculously honest and it's almost never nasty and it makes it very fun and refreshing. But in real life those just almost never seem to happen, at least in my experience and and it's weird does it take weird circumstances to make that happen, or is it just that it's more of a thing in the movies or that it's harder to actually set that up. Anyway, so i'm just are there any further guidelines it's like I imagine it's partly a state of mind like to have that simultaneously you're obviously trying to help you don't know what helping actually means so you're curious and then you're also. Not over committing or giving them things it'll be unhelpful so. There's there's a way I can do this with the homeless people that I couldn't do with my wife. If my wife were an alcoholic if my wife was a drug addict if my wife, you know I at some point I would that's a different relationship and you know I might have to put her out or divorce her or something like that. So there's there is a question of where, how do these, how do you to relate, I am not dependent on these homeless people for much of anything. And so I can in some ways that that is an aspect of the relationship. But the I mean the basic dynamics of it aren't that foreign to any of us and in order to build this kind of relationship. Well, I can tell you how it won't be built if you on your side of it can't maintain it and what that means is you're going to have to not get triggered too easily not lose your temper too quickly. Have a degree of self confidence and internal security that. That this isn't going to start because a lot of these people can be really good at manipulation and unless you're. Unless you've sort of got a handle on your own neediness or your need to be a savior. You know these these people can these people can run you around a long time because they are experts at this thing so in terms of who you are. there's going to have to be some things that are true of you and then maybe it will happen because there's going to have to also be some things on their side of it, you know it's not unlike again of having a. Productive romantic relationship or productive parent child relationship or even just a productive friendship, if you have a friend who's just. Very needy all the time or overly sensitive or I mean there's a lot of ways that people destroy friendships and what that means is that most of their friendships are very shallow around them. Because what if you have an asymmetry in terms of let's call it relational capacity. What happens is those who are stronger relationally are again going to have to lend or invest in the weaker party and but but those who are stronger relationally or in the driver's seat. Because they can decide i'm no longer going to invest in this relationship anymore, and they can walk away, but part of that relational security and strength is a durability, which is basically love that says this person needs me, but and. I don't need to need them too much, because if you need to need them too much, then then you're going to get hit a really nasty codependent messed up relationship so it's very subtle. It's sounding like that's a big part of it is that, and this I could imagine being able to manage is that i'm not relying on them for anything. And so much and it's already an unusual circumstance to which actually helps means i'm not it's easy to for people on purpose or just as a way to. I don't know if I can express this on the fly well enough, but if you've already got more conventions about how you behave, which is more the case in more normal circumstances. Then, if you somehow get on the that you can get on the wrong end of those if someone uses them on purpose or not. And then you actually have to make more of a push to go against that whereas in these circumstances, you can get on the wrong end of those if someone uses them on purpose or not. And then you actually have to make more of a push to go against that whereas in these circumstances it's kind of more in the wild. And so, in that sense, I could see you're both maybe more free to just be honest, and if you can go in not looking for anything back, which I think is something you wouldn't be too hard and it would get beaten out of you if it was there because you. Could you come up with this isn't a nice question, but there's some examples, you could give of of helping when it was. Was a mistake and you can see that it was retrospectively together that was a mistake that actually what is being I forget the word you use I don't know if it was a phrase I don't know if it was too kind. But something I think of often with all sorts of practical things is that if you're just talking about them, it can seem easy to think of being. Taking a particular approach, but in reality, you can't be. Not thinking. Yeah, I think probably I don't know a lot of those stories because I didn't first build the relationship. And I just was and usually it was because of expedience on my part because here's a situation I. I don't have time to invest in this person, I don't have time to get them know them so then then money just becomes easy here's here's 1020 50 bucks there done bye good i'll never see you again and. And it's just then it's just simple. It's it's really hard to know and even if with many of the relationships, I have now I always I often have that fear that. Am I helping this person, and you know I you know I do a lot of stuff with Freddie and I have that thought with the Freddie and Paul show often you know, is this. Is this a healthy thing. I don't know I don't know is this a good idea. I don't know and and I have that I have that regularly with a lot of the homeless people, because you know other people. This is this this church isn't my private property it doesn't belong to me, I work for the church, I am the church's employee and I work for the church. This belongs to the community of people and often I I am far more tolerant of chaos than. 95% of the population, and so. You know we'll often. It's probably true that you know I I joke about there not being any you know young families in my church, but part of the reason for that is probably because. I allow scary people to be here, and if you're a if you're a mother in her 30s with young children, and there are unmedicated schizophrenics and drug addicts around. You're nervous for your children and rightfully so. Now. I grew up with my parents taking that wager and so. When I was growing up heroin was a big deal where I lived, and so I just grew up and a lot of the. They were. Trying to recover. They were sort of living in a halfway house, but I didn't know anything about you know. The rest of their lives, a number of these people died of AIDS. So. It's so hard to know. There are there are times when you do something and you just think i've just i've just perpetuated i've just perpetuated their stuckness, but I don't care enough about them to let this bother me i'm also a part of the. I've just perpetuated i've just perpetuated their stuckness, but I don't care enough about them to let this bother me i'm also a person who's really low and negative emotions so. yeah see i'm pretty neurotic. So things don't bother me a lot which drives my wife crazy I wish things bothered you more. I just kind of wired this way honey sorry you picked me to. yeah. I guess they're probably are, but it's not a great idea I wish there was a way you could you know just take a pill or do something and to alter various. personality attributes for a little while, just to be. isn't that what drugs do. I know. I was thinking, as I said that a little bit, but I mean in a very precise way like okay for this day this one i'm thinking of like you know Jordan Pearson goes on with the big five so like. You can just adjust okay i'm going to turn down the neuroticism and yeah. Anyway, yeah it is. yeah and there's not there's not a lot fair about this because. You know it's I before I before I you know found found any Jordan Peterson stuff I read Jonathan height and he has this great phrase in his book that happiness hypothesis about the cortical lottery. You know, and it just I I won the cortical lottery in some ways and but the truth is that helps me now, so my son, one of my sons has two cats and their sisters and one cat is enormously neurotic. And the other is very friendly and my son jokes if these cats were in the wild, the friendly one would have long been dead and the neurotic one she's a good hunter and. I mean I came over to his apartment he lives in la right now and here's the cat, so I kind of put my hand out to see if the cat cat hissed at me as a little friendly cat. And he's like yeah but she you're just in the way she wants to run under the bed you won't see her for the rest of your visit but. But she's a great mouse catcher and she's you know, so your neuroticism has its upsides to it's just you're not living in a context where it's that's probably not the case. Yeah, well, if you figure out what one is like for sort of agreeable somewhat open and neurotic let me know you'd survive on the streets. Why because people would like me. Well, yeah and your neuroticism would probably keep you out of jail and not getting into stupid fights. And yeah I mean because and that's so in terms of the underclass that's a lot of it, these people are surviving and so that that big five personality profile that cuts different ways, depending on what world you're living in. Right okay so in fact having gone through a summer trying to figure out what to do with the rest of my life, you may have suggested a career path I hadn't thought of. Having gone through a summer trying to figure out what to do with the rest of my life, you may have suggested a career path I hadn't thought of I should explain for being homeless. Right you'll learn a ton. Well, yeah and then I'd know how to help. You'd you'd certainly know more about how to help yeah. Right yeah. People have done that you know people have done that I guess the first. Yeah i'm going to. First pastor here used to do that. Yeah I bet he wasn't neurotic either. That sounds like a very. Because if you're neurotic you don't do it. Yeah. Because you have a brain. Yeah yeah no but that kind of thing appeals to me like the idea of really going somewhere to learn how to understand a situation to live in it but yeah. Before we're done I had a question I meant to ask you at the beginning I have seen your last name written as one word and two and I have written it I think both ways on our first YouTube I changed it so for the record. Is it two. Yes, okay but sometimes I push it together as one because. Because for it so it was always two and that was fine, especially if you live in a place like West Michigan where there's a lot of Dutch names. And, but then when computers came out computers didn't recognize spaces and last names and so the space has been a mess and my poor children and my wife they're like. Every time you every time you're trying to think about okay what was the account I had with this company did I put the space in or not, and I mean it's just it's just a mess but. yeah so but but to two word last names are more and more common in America and computers are more sophisticated so it's not the problem that used to be so either way is fine. Okay, okay I do try to get that kind of thing right but yeah it was just it was funny when I first ran into it, I think. I possibly have done oh I know I didn't even I didn't even capitalize the K like I had it all one together, but the K wasn't capitalized and that seemed to me like a fairly major error so I thought it was funny my first. Video of my new podcast and then I don't even get the person's name right but anyway. Well, Ellis island started all the confusion when my great grandfather came over and and and the name see part of what's nice about this name is I always know if someone is related to me. In the US or Canada, because only via my great grandfather is the name actually this way because that's not even the way it was in the Netherlands, but in the Netherlands, too, it was. A bunch of when when when the Dutchman had to take on last names the Jews just kind of made some stuff up and that's how we got our name. Okay. Okay, last really important question which I try to ask everybody now does it sound to you as if I have an accent. Sound a little Canadian. Okay, okay. Because I just realized that just because I don't hear people's having an accent doesn't mean that they don't hear me as having one and that just seems intriguing and since my show is primarily about perspectives I thought in a way what's one of the most fundamental things is whether you've perceived someone is speaking with an accent or speaking funny or so yeah well that's I was told that essentially by another guest so. Everybody's got an accent. Everybody's got an accent. That someone commented that yeah I know that's not the point but the point is relatively speaking, whether it sounds to you like I do because to me you don't sound like I don't hear an accent so it could be the same as mine. But that way, I don't know how I. I don't know why I don't have a North Jersey accent. Every now and then someone will listen to me and they'll say, you grew up outside of New York City didn't you, I'll say yeah and there's a few key words that I'll say and they'll hear it but my mother, my mother is from Massachusetts. And so for years, we would go on vacation up there, and the closer we got to her hometown. The more her accent would come out and I always thought that was amazing because she wasn't doing it intentionally. We're really mysterious creatures. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. The other thing I'm thinking too is it's also more the. I'm not even sure what the right word is intonation or cadence or something, because I've heard a few people lately who really sound Canadian to me and I wasn't even sure I would know what Canadian sounded like. And I think they're both from British Columbia and I thought well maybe that's, but that's more the, it's not the actual pronunciation of something else. Anyway, one of my sons now has a girlfriend who's from Louisiana, and it's just it's just so much fun her she got that southern accent and it's it's just a delight so accents are fun. It's amazing how much fun they are. I don't understand why it seems so often like it's more attractive for someone to have a different accent there's almost no accent that I would dislike. In general, I don't quite understand why that would be. But anyway, that's okay. This has been good. I could I think this is something it's hard to keep it short like it's either short or really long. If you're interested, I'd love to have you on in the future just to talk more. Otherwise, I will look for other people I haven't looked at all I'm pretty sure there's got to be a whole bunch of stuff on YouTube YouTubers I'm pretty sure they're one or two homeless people who are on YouTube. Yeah, I've often tried to. I've wanted to get more video of some of these individuals, part of the problem is for some of them. It's it's sort of unfair because they have no idea what the implication of being on YouTube. Yeah, I ran into that once I had the opportunity to interview someone who appeared to have amnesia. Long term amnesia so he had no idea about his previous life other than what people had told him or he had very small glimmers. And so for him it was the way it had worked it was I forget the period of time it was like he lost 30 years. Wow, it was a marriage. There was, I started to wonder whether he made it up. But anyways, but the point is so the internet basically he went from no micro electronics to now. It worked. So I thought this would be neat but I said, I don't think he can consent properly doesn't know what's happening and it might be fine but it just doesn't feel right. It was interesting too because it seemed like this is what he thought it actually had changed his personality so that he'd been this miserable, you know, almost like a Scrooge sort of character like just oddly miserable and and then somehow when he'd lost all his memory. He just sort of was more in the moment and so he was much more pleasant so he thought it improved him. It was neat. It was a neat story but wow. Yeah. Well I just you know I, there's people are amazing. And one of the one of the, if you can find a way to shine a light and help everyone see the different ways that individuals are amazing. There's, there's no end to desire to, to see that glory so really cool. So, Yeah, let me know what you want to do with this. You know I'd be happy to post this on my channel at some point but if you want to put it on your channel for a while first that's fine too. It's totally up to you. Oh, yeah, that's that's a good. That's a good strategic point if I could put, assuming I can assemble mine properly from the different video sources and my new fancy camera ran out of juice part way through, it's supposed to have a battery I thought that lasted forever I could have plugged it in, I didn't. Anyways, so we'll see how that goes. I think at this point, it'll either be go back to the normal split screen, or I'll just have I'll be in the dark and we'll just show you I don't know at this point well end up doing with the video but I'll wait to hear from you and if I could put it up. Yeah, first for a while because what happened last time was I got an amazing number of views on your channel, which was exciting and gave me for made me think I was going to be famous in no time. And then, almost not very much on my channel at all which was fine because it just started but then I thought yeah if I done this first because you're, you know, moderately famous on YouTube. If I put you up, yeah on mine first maybe it'll get more draw. So yeah, give it a couple weeks or something. Okay, that sounds good. That'd be great. Yeah, unless I've just wrecked on my foot. But yeah, I'm really happy we did this and I wasn't sure how it would turn out but I feel improved by it and hopefully other people do too. So, alright, thanks a lot. Maybe see you later. Okay, take care. Bye bye.