https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5ttiscmDsEU

 Hi, this is Paul. This is going to be a book review of this book, A Secret History of Christianity, Jesus, the Last Inkling, and the Evolution of Consciousness by Mark Vernon. Now, if you've been watching my channel, you know I've had a conversation with Mark Vernon. I think Mark and I are going to talk again. I was not paid for this review, but I did receive this advanced copy for free for my review, and I'll let you know what I think about the book. I'm also looking at a book by Peter Boghossian and James Lindsay about having to have difficult conversations, and I'm hoping that I'll be able to talk to one or both of them in the future about that book. I received a PDF advanced copy of that book as well, so I'll probably be doing some more of these book review type things. And as I mentioned Peter Boghossian's book because Peter and James's book because in that book it talks about feeling like you should give a favorable review to a book for someone that you're at least an acquaintance with or have a budding friendship with, and that's always a complicated thing. Now, I'm not saying we can give it a bad review, and I'm not saying I'm going to give it an easy review. I'm going to give it an honest review, and let's do this thing. So the book is entitled A Review of the Secret History of Christianity by Mark Vernon. Now, I'm still having trouble with my software. Let's see, here we go. Okay. Before I do this, I want to talk about tribes, triggers, and relevance realization. Now, part of this review is going to be me doing it, and if I were just writing a standard review for some other publication, I wouldn't include all of the lingo that I've been picking up and all the issues that I've been working through. But this book is very much a part of the overall conversation that I've been having and the things that I've been working on. So this book fits really right in, and those of you who have been interested in my work will probably be interested in this view, in this book. However, there's the title and the subtitle, and I remember when Mark told me about the title of the book and I saw the title of the book, I thought, huh, that's not going to go over too well in some communities. And if you look at the back, I need reading glasses. If you look at the back, it's by an imprint that's www.ChristianAlternative.com. And so right when you go to that, then you've got Malcolm Guy, Rupert Sheldrake, and Nick Spencer. Nick Spencer, I don't know who he is, senior fellow, theos, and author of The Evolution of the West. So, you know, the difficulty we have in an established community is that there are tribes and there are certain code words and trigger trigger words that will catch people. And the title of this book, A Secret History of Christianity, right away I'm starting to think Elaine Pagels, this whole raft of every Easter, a new Gnostic gospel comes out, all of this sort of type of thing where people want to have a different Christianity. Now, I'm a different Christianity for some folks. So let's talk a little bit about tribes and let's talk a little bit again about Jordan Peterson. One of the big takeaways I've gotten from Jordan Peterson is that people see threats and opportunities. So people see threats and opportunities and the title is going to trigger some people and it's going to make some people want to read the book and it's going to make some people not want to read the book. Now, I wish it didn't have the title it had. I like the subtitle. I think the subtitle tells you exactly what the book's about. And I wish the subtitle, that's kind of a crappy title, back two, three hundred years ago they'd have long titles for books, read some of the titles for books that Jonathan Edwards would have. For his own books. But Jesus, the Last Inkling and the Evolution of Consciousness, I think is a title that tells you exactly what the book is about. The secret history stuff, well, like I said, some people are going to be like, ooh, you mean that there's a new Christianity that will overthrow the present Christianity and then there's conspiracy theories that goes, well Christianity has been orchestrated by the winners of history and on and on these things go. Now tribes are important for people and we need our tribes. In fact, in some ways tribes are the secret of our success as human beings. And tribes enable this very binary trigger between threats and opportunities to really come to the fore. So some people when they read Secret History of Christianity, they're going to be drawn to it. Some people when they read Secret Christianity, they're going to be repulsed by it. Because secret is again this sort of this trigger word. We're into now Gnostic Gospels and the church has it wrong. But the problem is this isn't a binary thing. Whichever church you're sideways with you think has it wrong. It's just the definition of being a human being and having an opinion. Once you have an opinion, you're probably going to stand against everybody else who has a different opinion or have to figure out what to do with that. And so in the, as we've been going through the Discord server, one of the things that I'm trying to figure out too is what's going on in terms of people who listen to my videos and this little community that I'm going to be a part of. And so in the, as we've been going through the Discord server, one of the things that I'm trying to figure out too is what's going on in terms of people who listen to my videos and this little community that is formed in the Discord server and formed around me. A lot of people talk about my openness. Well part of this is that I made a decision a long time ago not to talk about my openness. And that if something triggers me, well that's probably more about me. And I should probably shut up and listen and learn and I'm probably going to learn something useful. So it's these threats and opportunities that I'm going to be a part of. And so in the, in the Discord server, I'm going to be a part of. And so I'm going to be a part of that. And so I'm going to be a part of that. And so in terms of that binary, keep a leash on the threat watchdog and be open to the opportunities and engage in that conversation because part of the truth about these tribes is that they actually are always flipping all over the place. You know an example of this was my conversation with Sam. And he said, well, I'm going to be a part of that. And so he said, well, I'm going to be a part of that. And so part of the truth about these tribes is that they actually are always flipping all over the place. You know an example of this was my conversation with Sam about his non-Trinitarian belief in God. That really triggered some very committed Christians in some very predictable ways. And, no, okay, we get triggered and then we get upset and then we say some things that maybe we want to take back and then we have to walk them back and then we have the conversation because here's the thing. We will be more triggered by a non-Trinitarian than triggered by an atheist. So this guy has an idea that the arrangement of God is different from ours. So we're more hostile to him, again, because in a sense he's a traitor to the cause, than necessarily an atheist. But then you have other religions. In other words, the world is a very big complicated place. And so we should actually be a little careful with our triggers. So the word secret, if you're reading the New Testament in English in a modern contemporary version, this word secret will come up in, for example, the NIV in many places. And it's a complicated word. Mysterion is usually the Greek term that gets translated as secret in the New Testament. And Paul talks about the, you know, this secret which was revealed in Jesus Christ. Well, what kind of secret? And in fact, you can, if you dig back into Sunday School lessons of mine, I've done a variety of Sunday School lessons on this word. But again, part of the difficulty that tends to trigger me with this word is that, oh, here in the year 2019, we've overturned some rock and Christianity will never be the same. We haven't found that. You know, when they found an ossuary that had Jesus' name in it, around Easter, of course, everyone went crazy and it was all over the news. Oh, we found the bones of Jesus. And then, of course, anybody who knew anything about the period would say, you know how many Jesus, son of Josephs there were? If you want to have an introduction into this, try and figure out who wrote the Gospel of John. And see, I just triggered a whole bunch of people in a whole bunch of different ways now. So the thing I like least about this book is the title. I'll say that, all right? Because I think the title points us in the wrong direction. And I think the better description of the book is Jesus, the last inkling and the evolution of consciousness. That tells you exactly what the book is about. I wish I were going to say that's enough on the title, but it'll probably come up again. Okay, my software isn't working like it used to. I'm still annoyed by that. Come on. There we go. This book is in some ways for many people a reintroduction or an introduction to Owen Barfield. And I think the time has come for Owen Barfield. Owen was, C.S. Lewis called Owen Barfield his second friend. Now what C.S. Lewis meant by that is C.S. Lewis had all kinds of ideas about all kinds of things. And C.S. Lewis said your first friend is the friend that you discover likes everything that you like. And this is something I often say about men and women that men, I don't know if this looks dark to you or what's going on with my software, but I'm going to persist in this. If it does look dark, then I can send it into the developer and say, hey, there's another bug in your program. You've got to get this thing ironed out. Okay. And those of you listening on audio won't notice a thing. Okay. So one of the differences between men and women generally speaking is that women have friendships face to face. Men tend to have friendships side to side. So Arthur Greaves was C.S. Lewis's first friend because if you know anything about C.S. Lewis's story, if you've read any decent biography of C.S. Lewis, he, there was a little boy down the road who, he was a great guy. You know, you know, Clive, you should go visit Arthur because he's sick and he needs a friend. And Lewis didn't really want to do that, but he went down there and he discovered that Arthur Greaves loved Norse mythology and all of the same kinds of things that young C.S. Lewis loved too. And they became fast friends. They became first friends for all of Lewis's life. Now Lewis calls Barfield his second friend. Well, what's a second friend? Again, Lewis is so obscure sometimes and has all these weird little things. Your second friend, Lewis says, is the person that is in a sense your match in that he believes the wrong things on all sorts of things, but you can't get away from him. And so this is what launched what Lewis called the Great War between Lewis and Barfield. It was a friendly war. They were friends with this, but they argued and argued and argued. Barfield became a devotee of Rudolf Steiner, joined the church a little bit later in life, also considered himself a Christian. He was an Anglican, just like Lewis was. And Barfield's thought is complicated with respect to that. And you can listen to Malcolm Guy talk about that a little bit. But now Lewis and Barfield were great friends. And so when the inklings sort of got going, Barfield was right there. And so the reason Barfield is called the last inkling is Owen Barfield lived to the ripe old age of 99. He was about the same age as Lewis and lived through many of the same experiences as Lewis. He was a lawyer for a while. And again, another book on the inklings, the fellowship, is a good source of Barfield and Lewis and also Tolkien and Charles Williams. My book's over there, so I'm thinking over there. So Barfield is definitely a bona fide inkling. And Barfield's influence on Lewis is very important. Now, I hadn't read any Owen Barfield until the last year or so when I've really gotten into him. And now that I'm reading Barfield, when I go back and reread Lewis, you can see the influence. If you read, for example, the Discarded Image, there's Barfield all over that book. It's fascinating to notice once you know Barfield. So one of the things that Barfield did was force Lewis to appreciate the imagination and the intuitive, not just for, let's call ornamentation or embroidering facts and reason, but in fact for the content of knowledge. And so this is something that Barfield really brought to the table and deeply influenced Lewis, because again, Lewis had the Great War with him and argued with him, and Lewis had to concede. Now, this is a big thing because, of course, Lewis, when he was at the Socratic Club, the comment was no one could put down Jack. Lewis was such an incredible debater that he ran the show in the Socratic Club. But he and Barfield early on went toe to toe, and in many ways they had to call it a stalemate. Neither of them could win. Barfield is that smart. Now, he doesn't have the same literary gifts as Tolkien and Lewis, and especially as Tolkien. I think everyone would say Tolkien is in terms of the writer. He is the master of the bunch, especially in terms of what he had accomplished. But Barfield is a very, very smart man, and his observations along these lines are extremely astute, and I'm very happy to see a new book come out that is reintroducing Barfield to the world. Now, it's taken me a while to try to figure out what on earth Barfield's insight is, and I'll go into that in this video, and hopefully as I continue to understand it and be able to integrate it into my view of the world, maybe I can explain it. But it's not easy to understand. Barfield was a philologist, and he paid attention to the history of words. And as he paid close attention to it, he began to realize that, see again, consciousness is a very fudgy word, that people's, oh, how to talk about this. The manifest image of people's assumptions that they use words to express changes over time. Now, of course, anybody should know this. If you just open a really good dictionary, you'll see the etymology of words, how it changes, how one word becomes another word, and how they get used in different places. Barfield talked about the word ruin, and what does ruin mean? And you can read his first major book, History of English Words. You can see a bunch of things in that, and we'll talk about a couple of examples as we go in. But he paid very careful attention to this, and he began to notice, he said, you know, people are relating to the world in different way over time, and we can derive clues from this via their use of language, and even the definition and the usage of particular words. Now, this is a little tricky because in many ways, words themselves do not hold meaning. Words hold meaning in conjunction with their context and the other words around them. And this is part, I think, I think this part, I think this is part of the realization as we're getting out of modernity, I don't want to say post-modernity, unless I trigger some of you. When we get out of modernity, we have to realize that, well, modernity sort of had, well, facts are these discrete little things that are sort of like these Amazon boxes or Lego pieces that you can sort of build into things. And meaning and truth and reality is not quite so simple as that. And our understanding of the relationship between words and the world is not quite as simple as that. And our understanding of the relationship between words and meaning is similar to that. And it's similar to, let's say, you go from hieroglyphics, which had a little picture, then to alphabets. Now, few of us would say that these letters have meaning, but these letters in conjunction and in this exponential explosive way that language works with letters, again, I've been watching a lot of verveci, letters don't necessarily have a lot of meaning, but when put together, well, they can be pretty powerful. And the same thing goes with words. And so if you, if you're very attentive, if you're very sensitive to how words are being used, well, you can notice differences in usage. And you can begin to suppose that the minds behind them and the experiences behind them are different from what we may be experiencing today. And so, if you, if you're very attentive, if you're very sensitive to how words are being used, well, you can notice differences in usage. And so, if you, if you're very sensitive to how words are being used, well, you can notice differences in usage. So we get clues to consciousness and meaning in the past. So, paying attention to words and consciousness, you begin to learn things. Now, Mark didn't know, Mark got his PhD in Play-Doh. Mark had trained for, and he began a career as an Anglican priest. And then he had some, and now if you want to get a little bit of biography on Mark, you can watch my video, Conversation with Mark. Unbelievable just did an excellent conversation with Mark and Malcolm Geit. Another conversation to watch if you haven't seen it is Mark did a conversation with Michael Lady. Now, Michael has been on my channel a few times. He's been on the Rando's United channel a few times. He's been on the Meaning, the Meaning Code on Karen Wong's channel a few times. And all of those conversations, I think, are very helpful for getting a sense of the author behind the book. Because as I think is true of probably every book, there's a fair amount of Mark in this book. His story, his biases, his goals, what he loves. So that's very much in the book. And so for me, I haven't read a lot of book from authors that I've known very well. And so perhaps this is a new experience for me in the art of doing a book review. Because I've gotten to know the author a little while. And so now when I read the book, I can read some of him in this book. So he worked on a PhD with Play-Doh on Play-Doh. And actually it was after the PhD that he was really wrestling with the fact that Play-Doh was using words. And we tend to, boy, this is going to get complicated. There's going to be some triggering in here for some of you. I know. Go ahead and vent in the comments section if you must. But part of modernity and as a pastor, reading the Bible and being very sensitive as an exegete, one of the things that I'm called to do in terms of a duty to my God, you can't put it any highest, is to be a sensitive reader of the scriptures. Why? To try to understand the scriptures as they are and to submit to them. Okay. Now, what you begin to learn as you become a sensitive reader to this, especially the closer you read the scriptures, you begin to recognize these weren't moderns who wrote this book. And if these weren't moderns who wrote this book, we can assume that they didn't necessarily use language in the same way we use language. And in fact, even at a very conservative seminary, maybe not very conservative, moderately conservative seminary like Calvin Theological Seminary, we were introduced to this by our professors of exegesis because if you're going to work through the meaning of the text, you're going to have to deal with, for one thing, authorial intent. And now we're getting deep into the Enlightenment, into the Reformation, in terms of into the Renaissance, all of these things come into play because if there's, if authorial intent is important, well, what did, what was in the author's head? What was in the author's consciousness? Now, some of you may wait in and say, God wrote the Bible. Now, if you've listened to my videos going way back when I was talking a little bit more about the Bible than just doing some of the processing I've been doing lately, I'm very much a part of my own theological tradition. And I believe as, you know, coming down from the likes of Herman Boving in the organic inspiration of scripture. What does that mean? That means that God used the human authors of scripture in their culture and their day as they wrote what we believe is the inspired Bible, the inspired word of God. That's what we say in church. So, well, what does that mean when it comes to this conversation? Well, if authorial intent is just one piece, one layer of meaning in terms of the scripture, it's a very important one, especially reading it in a modernist setting like we have. But what were the authors intending to convey? And what was the world that the authors saw? And how did that impact their understanding of the scripture? Now, words aren't, again, just these little Lego pieces that we construct into an argument or into a building. Words have meaning. And one of the things that Mark noticed was that Plato didn't necessarily relate to the words, even in the same ways we relate to the words, even if you're reading Plato in the original language. What did Plato mean by these things? And this is what eventually brought Mark to study Barfield because you very quickly, when you're paying attention to Barfield, understand that there in fact might be a discernible matrix or pattern that could help us not only understand Owen Barfield or Plato, but for my sake and in my interest, understand the Bible. And Mark, he had a previous conversation on Unbelievable that I haven't looked up. He had some falling out with Christianity for a variety of reasons, and I haven't looked up the conversation that he had done with Justin Briarley. But Mark, part of this book is Mark also working out his relationship with Christianity and trying to figure out, OK, how does all of this work? Now, I didn't unplug the phone, so that's why it's ringing over there. Let's get into sort of the chief way into this pattern that Owen Barfield discerned in terms of very much the history of civilization as we know it. And the pattern is very relevant to a lot of the videos that I've been doing, especially the last video I did, Mind, Matter, and Humanity. I said man instead of humanity. I couldn't resist the alliteration. Any of you women who were triggered because I said man as the generic human instead of humanity, please forgive me. But man, mind, and matter has just such alliterations and we pastors, we can't resist alliteration. That's one of our flaws. Anyway, this idea of participation. Now, someone commented to myself and to Mark Vernon on Twitter, could you please explain this participation thing because I just don't get it. I understand because this is sort of hard. And like with there's this great, there's a couple of great things. I heard it first from Tim Keller, which was a Martin Luther illustration. Some people look at participation as a cow looks at a new gate. And it's just such a lovely word picture. Just imagine the cow sitting there looking at this new gate. But do we really have any idea what it's like to be a cow and what's going through that cow's mind? Probably not. There's another great quote that if anybody could find this in the comment section, I would be indebted to you. Because a friend of mine once referenced it. Apparently it was from the from a scientist who worked in Bell Labs. And basically the point of the quote was if you actually have a new idea, don't worry about anyone stealing it. Because if it's actually a new idea, you're going to have to pound people over the head with it for them to understand it. And this is true. And that's why figuring out something like what Owen Barfield means by participation is not a small thing. He basically sees three movements of what he calls participation. Now, this participation is our experience. I call it, let's say, a lack of differentiation between ourselves and community and ourselves and the world. Now, pay attention. We today live in a universe of all these so much stuff. A human being, especially if you're an American or a wealthy Westerner, you have so much stuff in your life. Ancient people had a whole lot less stuff. And the vast majority of their stuff wasn't stuff that they produced or engineered or made. They might have made a chair. They might have lived in a house that they made. They had some of these things, but they didn't have all of the stuff like we have around us today. And so this original participation is Barfield's idea that ancient people had a very deep sense of oneness with the rest of the world. Now, how did he know this? Well, he paid very careful attention to words. And you notice that certain words like ruach or panuma, panuma is Greek for wind and spirit. In the New Testament, in fact, wind and spirit mean the same thing. And if you read the Book of Acts, there's a panuma. Well, it's the coming of the wind. And if you read Genesis 1, depending on what translation of the Bible you read, there's a spirit hovering over the waters. Now, when we hear that in English, it conjures up a whole bunch of things. If you read like in Tanakh, the Hebrew translation, there's a wind over the waters. Now, that's not going to trigger ideas in Christians, Trinitarian Christians that believe in, well, Elohim. Well, that's kind of God the Father. Then there's this spirit hovering over the waters. Well, that kind of sounds like a dove or a bird and the Holy Spirit. And it's ruach. So it's the same name. And it's panuma. And the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament. So ancient peoples lived, in a sense, with quite a bit more oneness with the world. Okay. Now, the movement between these layers of participation are not things like the turning of the calendar from 2018 to 2019. It's much more nuanced, mysterious. It's much more, oh, how shall we say it? We go back and forth over these lines. Sometimes in one aspect, we're sort of in a different layer. And with another aspect, we're in the original. And then we kind of flip back and forth or when we get to the final two, because in some ways, these three moves of participation are fairly circular rather than linear in terms of how they go. So there's a circularity to it, but there's also a linearity to it because final participation is distinct from original participation because of the withdrawal from participation, which has achieved some new things. And so very quickly, some of you listening are going to hear some Hegel in this. And well, maybe rightly so. Some of you are going to hear some Ken Wilber in this. Well, maybe rightly so. But I'm just trying to lay out this understanding and a sense of the dynamics. So those of you who like this integral stuff, which I knew nothing about before a year or so ago, some spiral dynamics. So final participation or reciprocal participation will be different from original participation. But original participation, I think I would best categorize it as a lack of differentiation between community and context, that we are fully absorbed in our context. And in a sense, wind and spirit are the same thing. They're both blowing me. Now, what happens is the next movement is this withdrawal from participation. And there's a separation from what we call nature. Now, I've been paying a lot of attention to the word nature for the last couple of years, listening very carefully to what people mean when they say the word nature. In fact, this is so deeply embedded into our culture. Doctor, I don't want any of that medicine that you're trying to give me. I want a natural treatment. Well, what on earth do you mean by natural? In a sense, what you mean is something that is less polluted by human intervention. Almost every use of the word nature that we have has embedded within it this withdrawal from participation. Once you, in fact, use the word nature in the way that we most commonly use it, you are fully embedded in a withdrawal from participation world. Now, this gets into axial age conversations. This gets into my group A and my group B conversations from my previous two videos. But if you use the word nature, well, I'm going out into nature. Once you use the word that way, you have excluded yourself from nature. Now, let's mix up the political conversations right now. Even the entire discussion about climate change is about nature. In fact, you cannot assert human-induced climate change as being unnatural without evoking the withdrawal from participation by distinguishing us from nature, by understanding. Now, in my previous videos, I'll lay this out a little bit for those of you who are only watching the review. In reading C.S. Lewis's book Miracles, which I, in fact, will talk about a little bit later in this video, I talk about group A and group B. We sort of implicitly, in this withdrawal from participation universe, categorize everything into these two groups. Group A are things like my cell phone holder that I can colonize. In fact, this cell phone holder itself is an example of iron ore and various metals and processes that have been colonized by human beings. I imagine there's a factory someplace just pumping these things out in a highly predictable way, deeply engineering. The iron ore, the metal, this is all part of group A. We believe that these things do not have consciousness, that it is perfectly moral for us to pull the metal out of the ground, burn it, pulverize it, reshape it, and bend it to our will. We do not imagine that iron ore or coal is experiencing any kind of pain or suffering in this process. All of this is group A. It has no consciousness. It has no will. It cannot employ reason. Then we imagine there's group B, and human beings are very much in group B. We have will. We have consciousness. We can take coal and iron and various other things and employ them and create other things in group A like this. About the only way we really know how to make other things in group B is procreation or perhaps a little bit of animal husbandry. It's getting into that strange world of consciousness. But when we're talking like this, we are very much in the second movement, this withdrawal from participation. We have a separation from nature. Now you'll notice in original participation, I define that as lack of differentiation between community or other members of group B and context. That's what we would call the natural world. We're talking to it out of the context of our withdrawal from participation. What also arises in this, and I think Christianity is key in the rise of the individual, is that I now am also separated from my family and my ancestors and my neighbors. That my value as an individual is very much a result of this withdrawal from participation. We no longer see ourselves as one with the entire world in a natural order, no matter what John Lannan sings, and all the world will be as one. And one of the, so some of you out there in the comments section have been really arguing hard for non-duality, and a bunch of people got real excited when Jonathan Pageau talked about non-duality. Well, I will talk about dualities with you, but I'm going to be careful because I hear a lot of people talk about non-duality, and I say, sign over to me the deed to your house. We'll see how non-dual you really are. Sign over to me. Give me your car keys, and let me keep it for the next 10 years. We'll see how non-dual you are. When it comes to, let's say, your bank account, you get very dual. There's me, and there's everyone else. Or there's me and my family, and there's everyone else. Duality is in fact a very useful thing that is built into. We all act as if we are not one. And no matter how much John Lennon wants to sing, and the world will be as one, he has a very particular idea about what he thinks that would be. I would imagine, well, he's dead now, of course, but I would imagine that it didn't mean just giving away all of his money to the first person who asked because they're very much not as one. And he preferred Yoko Ono to some of the other Beatles. That wasn't a lot of oneness. And I'm sure he left his inheritance to his children. That wasn't a lot of oneness. There's a withdrawal of participation, and we can differentiate ourselves, and this is built into the world as we relate to it. Okay? So there's a separation from nature, and there's the rise of the individual. Now, the final moment in this dance, Barfield calls reciprocal participation or final participation, and Mark will say it both ways in the book. Now, this gets very complicated, and this is where I think a bunch of Christians might be sort of triggered by this book because language gets complicated. In fact, there's some very old church conversations. Deosis has come up quite a bit in my conversations. Well, we will be like God. Well, the first person in the Bible to offer that wasn't someone that really gets a lot of esteem. Happens in the garden, says, did God really say you shouldn't eat that fruit? Ah, God's holding out on you. If you eat of the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil, you will be like God. So is offering theosis something that the devil does? Well, if you're having a church fight, you might be tempted to reach for that, to battle against your orthodox adversaries. So it's very important when we talk about, well, finally, reciprocal participation, which is a little better than final participation. Well, what will our union with God be like? So upping the resolution on that is actually a pretty important thing. So there's differentiated by unity or by being united with, I don't think I finished the sentence in that slide, by being united with God. Now, this is union with God. Well, what kind of union is it? Now, anybody who's paying attention to us and them, there's a nice duality. Well, John Lennon, when he dies, leaves money to his children. Didn't leave any money to me or my children, and the world will live as one. Go ahead, John, be the change. The world will live as one. Not when it came to his money. There was money for his kids, money for whatever things he had in the will. In fact, leaving the will at all meant it didn't go up probably into the most oneness thing many of us participate in, which is the government taking our money. I've just triggered a whole bunch others of you. But, okay, so what is final participation? Well, it's got to not only have the lack of differentiation, and I would say that goes of original participation because the differentiation comes in the second movement. And so the third movement, this is where we get, it sort of has a Hegelian feel. It keeps the differentiation from the second movement, but affords a union. Okay? And perhaps a good example of this is marriage. So in Genesis, there's the man and the man, now this gets a little complicated, and it's Jonathan Pujol with his symbolic world, with his little, with his little arms. With his little icon that he presents on the screen on his little introduction has that nicely because ever since the King James talked about the rib, most of the imagination of the West sort of went on the wrong track. And if you read John Walton, I know I just triggered Esther because every time I talk about John Walton, Esther gets triggered. John Walton deals with this in some of his lost world books. But in some senses, the story in Genesis, Genesis 2 is God splitting Hadam, the man in half, and then you have the man and the woman. And that makes perfect sense in the story because then when they come together, they will be one. All right? And the fruit of their oneness is actually more life. All right? So if you understand the way the story flows, it makes perfect sense. Now, if you're married, you have an understanding about, well, there's one and then there's me and you because there's actually till death do us part in most cases. And one of the things that you very quickly learn in marriage is if one person is sort of reabsorbed into the other, that's not a good thing. And Mark Vernon actually makes his living now as a counselor. And I'm sure if he's counseling married couples, that's something that he's going to say that actually what you're looking for in marriage is that the two will become one. But it'll be a different kind of one than one before there was two. And so reciprocal participation is, in a sense, much more of a dance. This is these are the three movements, original participation, withdrawal from participation, reciprocal participation. But now pay attention. I said that this has to do with man, mind and matter or humanity, mind and manner. For those of you who are triggered, we can sort of understand this more easily when we're talking about people. And well, I feel a part of my tribe and I feel a part of my family and I feel a part of this marriage and I feel a part of this group. OK. But what about the natural order? And in fact, there's plenty of nice songs like John Lennon who, well, we should be one with the earth. Well, I'll tell you, when you're one with the earth, it usually means that you're expired. They put you in a pine box and the worms are going to eat you. Now you're one with the earth. But it's not that kind of oneness we're really looking for. We're looking for us being one with the earth more in this reciprocal participation or final participation. OK. Where in fact we will be. Well, what are we trying to get at by that language of being one with the earth? Where we will in fact have the kind of relationship with nature where you can find this actually again in the beginning of the book of Genesis, where we and nature will flourish together. In a sense, perhaps, nature is better because we have colonized it and we've improved it. And the movie The Sunshine State, one of my favorite movie lines, they're out on a golf course and one of them remarks, nature on a leash. My dog, I think in some ways, is perfected by me. Lions in a zoo live longer. But we also understand, and I've talked about this in other videos, there's a lot of give and take with our colonization. We're not good colonists. We don't really, haven't really, we've been given dominion over the earth, but we haven't really brought it to flourishing. And the vision from the book of Genesis is very much that we've been given dominion over the earth and we're supposed to increase the glory of the earth. Now, some of you have been listening to my stuff know that I talk about cakes and wheat and milk. And in a sense, a cake is full of glory because we have fulfilled, we've shown domination, wheat and milk and sugar are all parts of group A. And we in group B have taken those things and voila, baked goods. And baked goods is in a sense, glory. A more biblical illustration would be wine in Isaiah chapter 7, the great parable of the vineyard that you can find in the book of Isaiah where there are these grapes and we learn to cultivate the grapes. We're gardeners and we find which grapes have certain qualities and characteristics and we plant them in certain areas and we cultivate them and then we mix them in certain ways and out comes wine. And there's a glory in wine that grapes does not have. And it also requires a group B viewer, a group B seer to see the glory in grapes, that, see the glory in wine that grapes don't have. I'm going to silence that phone. I'm going to take dominion over that phone and I'm going to silence it. My software won't let me out. I don't know what's going on with this software. I might jump ship. Anyway, the phone is annoying me. So, there's a group B plus group A makes glory. And this is in a sense, the reciprocal participation where we now are fully involved. This is the vision that I think you find in Genesis 1. It's sometimes when I was a little kid going through Christian school in our Dutch Calvinist community, this was called the cultural mandate. We are to have dominion over the earth and bring it to flourishing. That's our role in this great story. Okay. And I think all of this actually lines up quite well with what Barfield is saying and doing. And this is why I really appreciate Barfield's contribution. Now, I think this does, in fact, map quite well onto the meaning crisis conversation, where you go from, as Charles Taylor called it, continuous cosmos to axial age. I talked about penuma and ruach and spirit and wind. And as I said before, this is a very long, very complex, and it's mostly back and forth. It's back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. The spirit affords the group. I got into trouble last video saying this and and Stuart said someone in our Discord server should do a bridges of meming meme on group anus. But I'm going to keep using it. I'm not going to give in to my junior high mentality that snickers. Everybody mentions one of those planets up in the solar system that has the funny name. So the spirit affords the group anus of nature. Okay. And our differentiation from nature has given us some very powerful things. Division allows for the scientific revolution and technology that even the likes of an atheist like Yuval Harari will celebrate. And Stephen Pinker will celebrate. Sam Harris will celebrate. They all love celebrating the Enlightenment. And there's good things there. I will celebrate it. I think this was a worthwhile contribution. I'm not going to be, as John Vervecky would say, I'm not going to be overly nostalgic about, oh, everything went wrong in the Enlightenment. Well, you're going to have to go find a little place, a little cabin in the woods, far from everything else if you want to get away from it because it's pretty much taken over us. It's colonized us pretty thoroughly. So the spirit affords the group anus of nature. But now there's the downside to it because we keep colonizing nature and nature keeps having its revenge on us. Oh, look, we can take this petroleum out of the ground. We can turn it into gasoline. We can create the internal combustion engine. And it's just wonderful being able to drive 200 miles for a day trip and enjoying the beauty of Lake Tahoe and the Sierra and all of that natural glory. Well, there's downsides to a lot of this technology. So the split also makes us group B alone. And this is what the meaning crisis has really brought out. The think big animations where now everything else is math. I've been watching this video about quantum field theory. And what as I watch this video now having done all of these conversations and all of these videos, I can't help but think the group B-ness of these physicists who are now they're dabbling with these fields which are enormously powerful. And these in a sense give us a leap out of space time into a whole new view of reality. But here we are as group B tinkering with it all, not really having any idea what we're doing. That doesn't always end well. So the split also makes us group B alone. And we're sort of alone in a dead universe where everything else is governed by the spirit of geometry. And well, we're just fighting with each other over the scraps. It erodes our participation in God and the universe. Now you notice I put God in quotes there. Well, this is as I move forward, as I continue to process Jordan Peterson and Verbeke and my own Christianity and Owen Barfield and C.S. Lewis and all the conversations that are going on in the Discord server and all over the place. Well, we're going to be dealing with this question of what on earth do you mean by God? Because everybody's using that word and assuming we're all got the same definition. I think the Enlightenment in a deep way monkeyed with our assumptions of what we mean by that little three letter word. So and in a sense, that's what this book is about, because Mark is telling us a secret history. And so what he does and it's not a huge book, but he goes through some of the salient points of the conversation, understanding the Greeks and Greek philosophy, seeing this in the history of Israel in the Bible, the continuous cosmic gods and their proxy during the time of Hezekiah, some important movements then. The revolution, you know, the revolution defeated Jerusalem. Revolution? What was I thinking when I made this slide? It wasn't a revolution. The Babylonians defeat Jerusalem and what happens, it is sort of a revolution. I talked about this in my Sunday school class on Ezekiel. You know, as I was processing the book of Ezekiel with my Sunday school class, I began to realize this quantum leap that the Hebrew scholars made with respect to this withdrawal of participation. Now, again, Barfield puts this into a sort of a three movements, which is nice for us because we like simple things. But this is no simple process. And the thousands of years of conversation that we've been having about our experience between ourselves as elements of Group B and the rest of the world as also some things maybe of Group B, gods and people and nations and principalities and powers and also lots of Group A that we colonize and the better we colonize Group A, the more we fight with Group B because, well, the stakes are high and we can destroy the planet. But what happens with the Hebrew scriptures is that these prophets, basically when Jerusalem was destroyed and the temple was destroyed by Babylon, this should have been the integration of the Yahwist religion into the Babylonian cosmology, into their polytheistic pantheon. OK, but they don't. And Ezekiel is out there in the refugee camp, let's call it, outside of Babylon. He was raised as a priest and he was supposed to be a priest in the temple. Actually, the temple isn't yet destroyed. It will be destroyed while Ezekiel is there. But Ezekiel has all these visions. Maybe Ezekiel was schizophrenic. We don't know. That's something that some biblical scholars postulate. It's a very interesting idea. But who shows up in Babylon but the Lord on his glory chariot, the wheels within wheels and the seraphim show up and they start talking to Ezekiel. And Ezekiel is sort of like, you're not supposed to be here. We thought gods were sort of, no, he's the god over all gods. He destroyed his own temple. Pshhh. Gods don't destroy their own temple. He transcended the situation. And in fact, the gods of Babylon and the king of Babylon, who has no gods at all or lesser gods, whether you're a henotheist or a monotheist and whatever movement and all that movement, you can see, you can understand it through this filter as well. Well, when you see that, you begin to say something happened because here's the thing. I don't go down the road to find the first church of Nebuchadnezzar, but somehow this movement in time revolutionized the world and the Jews didn't go away. Well, what's with that? How does this work? And so Mark gives his telling of this. Now, that's probably the part of the book I would have some really interesting conversation with him in because as I've been sort of trying to get my head around Barfield or at least Barfield's schema, I've been integrating it myself into my reading of the Bible and finding this is actually really helpful. The role the Deuteronomist plays, and if you're not familiar with who the Deuteronomist is, don't worry too much about it. That's some biblical fighting that we do in terms of these movements and the law and the Lord alone and Jerusalem alter exclusivity as opposed to high places around it. So what you begin to discover, there's all these conversations going on in scripture. And again, with a modernist approach to scripture, which tends to be fairly flat, these things get problematic. But when you begin to understand that, well, there's a lot of back and forth going on in the Bible in all sorts of ways. On one hand, those hot Moabite women are just temptations to the poor sons of Israel. And, you know, Phineas puts a spear through the couple in the act of in the conjugal act in a tent in the Book of Numbers. But then there's the woman Ruth, who, my goodness, she outshines everyone, certainly Naomi. But she then makes a match with Boaz and they become the ancestors of David and Christ and on and on and on. So the Bible has all of this nuance. And so what you begin to find is that this conversation is going through again and again and again and again. All right. And Jesus as a pivotal figure in the story. Now, this is probably where some people are going to be most triggered by Mark's book. I'll talk about that in a minute. But then you get then you'll get into the Protestant Reformation and the Enlightenment and the secularism and the meaning crisis. And so this is this is Mark's first attempt, I think, at telling the story all the way through. And yeah, and like I said, this is probably some of the places that Mark and I will will have more conversation. Now, like I said, when I began this, some people are going to be triggered by this book. Some people are going to love it. Some people are going to hate it. And some of it goes all the way back to the title of the book. A lot of Christians, those of us who are pretty conservative, we're pretty trigger-y about our language. OK. And we have prescribed language that you'd better use. And if you don't use that language, you're outside of our tribe. That's how we keep the tribes bounded. Now, that's not a bad way to mark tribes. We do it all the time. In fact, if you make anti-Semitic statements, well, you kind of get put outside the tribe. What's going on with progressive liberationism? Well, if you make, if you don't say the right things on cue, well, you get put out of the tribe. In fact, when people point at conservative Christians and say, oh, you tribalists with your language games and propositional truth, I don't think they're much different from anybody else. We got lots of propositional truth around that. Propositional truth around race, propositional truth around gender, propositional truths about all sorts of things. It's a very handy framework. But as we're learning from John Verbeke, there's propositional, there's participatory, there's perspectival, and there's procedural. And these aren't four modes, and there might even be more. But truth is a very complicated thing, more complicated than just here it is, right here in this little Lego block that we piece together to build our church. So this language matters, but don't let it trigger you. So people will come to this book and their primary question will be, will Mark affirm our propositional signals? One thing we already know about Mark is that Mark is working through these things. He's been on the Justin Breyerly Show twice to talk about it. And, you know, some of you who love my channel, I would say that a predecessor of my channel is Justin Breyerly. I was colonized by Justin Breyerly. There you go, Eric, you can make a meme of that. Talking about our bridges of memeing in our Discord server again. Am I pushing the Discord server too much? Not really mentioning the meaning to push it. It sort of colonized me because it's, in a sense, become a place where this online community can get together and connect a little bit more and better. Anyway, their big terms are very much at play. God, divine, Jesus divinity, trinity? Now Jesus has a pivotal figure because, well, okay. And this is why Barfield and now helped by Mark bring it to the fore is really very helpful because one of the things that I've been wrestling with as I've been doing all of this work and Jordan Peterson and John Verveke and I'm actually going to do a debate on the 18th with Think Club with Adam about is God real? And those of you who are following my channel, one person made a comment saying, if you're going to debate Paul, you're going to have to watch a lot of video. Yeah, a lot of truth to that. What do we mean by God? And I think, now again, I know some people out there are going to be worried for the state of my soul because of this entire process. And, well, maybe that's right. Who knows? But then again, I'm a Calvinist, so I believe in perseverance of the saints. But when it comes to this stuff, I'm not. I'm hopeful that in fact, we can communicate better what we mean by God. Because when I was three or four years old, raised by Stan and Barb, I knew the word God and we prayed to God and I had images of God in my mind. How could I not? And then when I was 15 or 20, I had other images of God. And then when I was 40, I had other images of God. We ought not to make an image of God. And so we're not to make a graven one, not to put a little head on my cell phone holder and say, this is my God. No, we're not going to do that. Third commandment. But we can't help but draw, make images of God in our mind. And I think part of the lesson of that commandment is we ought to be careful with those images. And actually, if anything, all of this wandering around with Jordan Peterson and John Verveke and all the other strange cats that I've now made as my friends, I am in some ways more affirmed in my faith and in fact, in the my understanding of the faith than I have ever been. What does it mean that Jesus is united with God? Well, he's there right there in the Trinity. That's pretty tight. What does it mean when when that Jesus is the son of God? What does it mean that Jesus is the son of man? I think actually, if you have the courage to dive deeper into that nomenclature, into that terminology, in fact, it holds. Those who put that terminology together weren't dumb or primitive or stupid. They were from another culture. And so actually part of the job of a pastor, which is what my day job is, is to help bridge the gulf between these cultures and maybe understand not only what the Bible has to say about it, but also what the church councils have to say about it. And for that, I think a good companion book is actually C.S. Lewis's Miracle. Surprise! Paul loves that book. Of course, Paul would find that book useful in this. And Paul read Mark's book in the middle of Paul working through his group B and his group A-ness. OK. I can't help but chuckle every time I say it. Suffering and death and participation has very much to do with each other. I mean, the whole idea behind the axial age theory and the Bronze Age collapse is one way to manage suffering and the collapse of civilization is in fact meaning. And axial age mythologies afforded tremendous meaning because we have hope and a life beyond this world of suffering. And there are a thousand ways to say it in Christianity and a bunch of ways in other religions where they're tinkering with some of the same ideas. But there's a differentiation of wills also, and that comes with the withdrawal from participation, that my will is not that of my wife's will or my children's will or the community's will or my church's will or my nation's will or my neighbor's will. And that differentiation is important because if you're going and seeing a shrink about your marriage or about your relationship with your mom or your dad or your kids, you're going to be dealing with differentiation. And what that differentiation affords is that there's two of you. It's very dual. There's two of you and you're going to have to use words to talk to one another and you're not going to hit each other and you're going to try and negotiate. Look at what Jordan Peterson talks about. Well, most couples have to learn to negotiate. What does that mean? It's face-to-face communication. Well, I thought men like to be side-by-side. Yep. So they're going to be side-by-sideness. There's going to be face-to-faceness. Yeah, most men, when we get face-to-face with a woman, we are out of our league. And we smart men know it. It's just true. So there's differentiation of wills and there's conflict of wills. And you see that in the rebellion in the garden in Genesis 3. There's union of wills. You see that clearly in Jesus in the Gospel of John. And there's the consummation of the union that the Bible uses various forms of imagery and symbolism to communicate all throughout the Bible, not just in the book of Revelation. It's very much along the lines of participation that Barfield is putting together. Now, why I think Lewis is important here is what we find in the latter chapters of the book, which I have not treated, I think very much engages with Barfieldian participation. And Lewis's insights into the miracles of Jesus, I think, are a fruit of his contact with Barfield. Because what Lewis does in miracles in the latter chapters is deal with the relationship of withdrawal from participation and reciprocal participation. One of the things that I'm dealing with, as you can see in my last video struggling with, is the question of brain and mind, individual mind and communal mind. And those of you who are studying Jung, I've got a great appreciation for it. What was Jung struggling with in terms of all of these issues? Okay. So my mind and other minds, my mind and my brain, my mind and my body, when... Memory's going, baby. When John Wilkes Booth put a bullet through the brain of Abraham Lincoln, history changed. Well, does that mean that the materialists are right? That the mind of Lincoln was completely generated by his brain? Well, we know that because we know that the mind of Lincoln was also generated by his parents and his teachers and his country and his reading and his wife and his kids and the trauma of the Civil War and all of those things. The mind of Lincoln is a much better, bigger thing than the brain of Lincoln. Well, what about the identity of Lincoln? Does that last beyond the grave? Well, certainly as impact does, Lincoln becomes the Christ figure of the civil religious story that dominated American history, probably just until the end of the Cold War. So there's a lot going on here. But Lewis here points to the fact that every time I move my hand, every time I pick up the cell phone, every time we mine iron and coal and we have processes, mind is colonizing group A and the elements of group A. Okay. And happens when I move my hand. When I was a baby, in fact, I spent time learning to colonize my fingers. And when I learned to play the violin. Thank you, Tim. When I learned to play the violin, I was very much colonizing my fingers and music. Well, I was being colonized my music while I colonized my fingers and we colonized movement of air in order to produce lots of mind things that are not intelligible to non-mindness. Every time my son plays his French horn, my dog howls. What's going on? We don't really know. But Lewis makes the point that reciprocal participation or final participation has our relationship with nature finally resolved. The split that happens in Genesis 3, the split that is referenced in Romans 8. Lewis has a lot of barfield in him. And I think the book miracles has a lot of this integrated into Lewis's conception of nature and then who Jesus was and final participation. Now, there are incessant dualisms that come up in this book that I tend to chafe over. Mystical retreat, two-speed religion versus, let's say, something more Calvinist in terms of Geneva, pervasive restoration, one-speed religion. You're all going to go to church whether you like it or not, say the Puritans. Well, which way is better? Well, we keep hopping back and forth over this line. Oh, no, I want to just go out and be in nature and be with Jesus in my own way. All right. Now, I am not a critic of mysticism, but I think barfield helped show that the mystic alone in the cathedral can get a little, in the monastery, can get a little gnostic-y. And that gnosticism is sort of on a spectrum. And we're dealing with this all the time actually because what we're really dealing with is the relationship between mind and matter. And what we're looking for through final participation is finally the complete integration of both. To read Owen Barfield as a gnostic, well, maybe he was, I don't know, but my interpretation of Owen Barfield is in fact more along the line of Lewis and miracles that we're looking for. And we're looking for final participation where Jesus walks on water, where Jesus stills a storm, where you have miracles of the new creation, where what is matter for? Matter is for glory, where you have cakes, where wheat and sugar and milk have been colonized into cake-ish glory, where grapes have been colonized into wine glory. This is what we're dealing with. Okay. And I think Barfield is built into Lewis and tremendously helpful. But yet we're going to keep revolving around these dualisms. These dualisms are going to persist. And one of the ways to understand history, I think, a little not so linear, but we keep going round and round. And so, for example, in the Reformation, the Reformation in a sense gives and receives when it comes to these dualisms. Because with Luther, faith becomes a very psychological, very individual thing. But with Calvin, then you'll have Geneva, where you look for persistent restoration of the cosmos. And in fact, I think the framework that Barfield is offering and that Mark is sharing with us and giving his take on, I think is extremely helpful to avoid the pitfalls both of Gnosticism and materialism. And I think it's helpful in that way. And I think it's helpful within a Christian context to understand these things are constantly moving in the Bible back and forth. You have escape from suffering. Well, you can escape into computer games or psychedelic, not really psychedelics, into opioid addiction or maybe into suicide. Or you're motivated by meaning. You turn towards the world and you do something with your hands, as my conversation with John Maddeny. And, you know, on and on and on and on. These dualisms persist. But we shouldn't get too distracted by them, nor simply deny them and to say, oh, I'm non-dualistic. And again, please, if you're non-dualistic, send me the money. I'll be happy to have it. You and me are one, baby. My pocket is your pocket. I'm not so dualistic, so I'd prefer it be in mine. Jesus both prays on the mountain and he heals in the village trees. Now, I think this is a helpful book and I don't know, you know, we'll have to see in time how important the book is. I hope plenty of people read it. All right. I'll say that. Because I hope Barfield's time has come. I really do, because I think this insight into history and the dynamics, especially for us kind of on the horns of the mind matter problem, I think he's helpful. And I think he's helpful for the church to begin to understand a variety of texts in some different ways and perhaps maybe to give us help in overcoming some of the divisions of the Reformation that we can not be iconoclasts, but not slip into idolatries that some of the embedded embodiment can sometimes lead us towards. There's temptations on both sides and there are idolatries on both sides, okay? I don't want to be heard simplistically in that way. So I think Barfield is very helpful with the meaning crisis. I think he's helpful with biblical theology and exegesis. And if you've been following my Sunday school class in the Gospel of John, you're going to hear a lot of Barfield beneath it, even if I don't mention him, because mentioning Barfield to my Sunday school class wouldn't make any sense. They don't know or care who Owen Barfield is. They're just trying to learn something about the Bible. I think it's helpful for systematic theology that really was a product of modernism. This is a little bit inside theology, was a product of modernism, but I think Barfield's filter might help us revive some of what systematic theology was good for. I think Mark's book gives a nice historical overview and review. And again, I think the world is better for this book. I think a lot of people will be triggered by this book, and I think those triggers will distract people from the good that can be found in this book. And so I'm hoping that my conversations with Mark will help lessen the triggers and help us find and do what I think Mark does with this book, which is really help bring Barfield to the fore. Now with all history telling, there's plenty of discussion. There's nothing more conflictive than to try to tell history, because every telling of history has the subject built within it, as does Mark's. And some of his struggles that you hear told a bit via the Gite conversation and some of the other conversations, they're in this book. And if you know they're there or if you're used to hearing these tribal echoes, you'll hear them, and that's going to trigger some people. And that's the tribal reef of Western religion. Secret will trigger and attract. Tribes will take their old seats and bicker over their old points. The church needs more of this or the church needs less of that. Individuals should be free too, and on and on and on and on. Okay, let's be less triggered and more self-controlled. That is a fruit of the spirit after all, and be able to listen and to converse productively with one another. This is Mark's book, and there's always some of the author in it. Is that my last slide? It is, but I have more to say. I'm going to link to my Sunday school lesson, because, for example, you say, well, how does this actually help biblical exegesis? One of the issues that you have in the Bible, and I've talked quite a bit about this in my Sunday school class, is that there's this ongoing tension between, let's say, temple practice, which is deeply embedded in matter in original participation, and the withdrawal from participation where the prophets say, it's obedience, not sacrifice that I want. And in fact, I'm not going to go into it now, but if you want three hours of going into it, you can look at my Sunday school class on the Gospel of John's addressing Jesus cleansing the temple, because I think that is in fact shot through with it, and I think we can begin to see the signs of reciprocal participation and the critique of the withdrawal of participation while still using it within John's treatment of Jesus in the temple. All right? And it's for this reason that I think Barfield is actually very helpful for helping us make progress, not only with certain in-house Christian interpretive agendas we might have in terms of our biblical theology, but I think also of helping those outside the church understand what's in the Bible. Now again, many of us got here because Jordan Peterson sort of started that, and part of why I got into learning about Jordan Peterson, and Jordan Peterson brought me to Struon in South Africa, Struon brought me to Vervecky, Vervecky brought me to Barfield, and on and on and on and on I go, well, is because I think this will be useful, and I think this will be useful, well, for my own little tribal interests, which are that same as Bishop Barron, that people would find life in Christ within the church, that they would find union with God through Jesus Christ. I'm a Christian Reformed pastor, this is my agenda, it's right there in front of you, but not everybody, by no means is everybody going to become Christian Reformed, more seem to be coming orthodox, so God bless you, but even those who remain atheists, but are listening and are learning and are integrating, I want to be helpful for that, and I think this book is a really helpful part of the conversation, so should you buy it? Well, hey, Mark's my friend, buy the book, he gets a little chunk of change from it, or send him some money on PayPal, that's fine too if you want to support Mark. I'm grateful for Mark for reintroducing me to Owen Barfield, I've got some differences from Mark that are expressed in this book, Mark is Mark and Paul is Paul, but I think this book, at least for me, helped continue the process of upping the resolution on Owen Barfield, and gave me some new insights and some new resources, I think the first chapter, the beginning of the book, and the end of the book were my favorite parts, even though my conversations about mysticism are going to be nuanced by my Geneva Calvinism, which seeks not a beatific vision of people with bodies that are lying still in a monastery someplace, but in fact full participation, reciprocal participation, and I think that is in fact what the Bible points to as where we're going, and I think Barfield is right. So, in summary, I don't like the title, I do like the subtitle, I like the book, you may be triggered by the book if you're a conservative Christian, if you're high in openness, you might really like the book. So, Mark is doing important work, I hope he keeps working on Barfield, and I look forward to continuing my conversation with Mark, and especially with Barfield and Lewis, so there's my review. Now we'll see if with this software I can end the video. Not working right still.