https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=C08L4MQ0BB0

 Well, we've never met. I see names and emails pop up and I never quite know who it is. So, nice to meet you Lars. Yeah, same. I usually don't comment so much on YouTube, so probably you haven't seen my name either. But I followed you for a couple of years now. Wow. I enjoy it. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Yeah, okay. So, my name is Lars and I'm turning 40 this summer. And I'm a Christian. Okay, put that out there. On what side of the line are you? That's right. And what line? Yeah, exactly. So, I grew up in a small town in Sweden, in Northern Europe. So, it's not Switzerland. It's Sweden. Well, your name is Lars. So, it's a pretty good guess that you're Scandinavian. I have a nephew named Lars. Oh, really? Yes. Yeah. So, I grew up in a... My parents were Christian. They are Christian. And we are five children. And so, basically, the two oldest, they grew up in the church, kind of, and the three youngest, I'm number four. So, we kind of... When you turn like... When you're old enough not to go to church, I stayed at home, basically. I played football, soccer and basketball. I enjoyed computers and stuff like that, you know. Yeah. And then my older brother, so number three, he decided to get baptized. And then he went to Bible school for a year. And I always looked up to him. So, he was the guy with the good grades and so on. And he decided to become Christian. So, that's like, huh. Okay. So, then I thought that, okay, I need to look this up, basically. Look into this. You can just interrupt me whenever you want if I start rambling. No, I like rambling. That's why I do it so much. Oh, yeah. People say what's real. People reveal what's really on their minds when they're rambling. Oh, that's true. So, little bits of revelation. Yeah, yeah. That's true. And that's why I ramble because that way I get to have revealed myself to myself. Oh, yeah. So, did this happen years ago or is this recently? So, this was years ago. So, I was in my teens, I started to go to university. So, I was around 19, 20. Okay. So, I thought basically, okay, so I need to look into this. So, I looked at this, you know, Alpha Corsus. Yeah. Do you have them in America as well? Yeah. Alpha Corsus is like basic introduction to Christianity. So, like, why did Jesus have to die? Can we trust the Bible? What kind of all this stuff? So, I went to that. It's basically like a discussion group, like your meetups, kind of. You eat together first and somebody gives a short presentation and then you talk and discuss together in a group. So, it's usually mixed on Christians and Christians. Usually a mixed group. Okay. At least for me. Okay. Now, when you stopped going to church, did your parents continue to go to church without you? Yeah. Okay. Especially my mother. My father sometimes go. Now, they are quite old. But my mother has been very active and my father always watches the sermon on TV. Okay. Yeah. Is our churches still meeting in Sweden right now or have they stopped because of the virus? Yeah. So, basically, I think all churches have stopped meeting. So, in Sweden, it's like the government assess up to 50 people can gather. So, some countries criticize Sweden for being too, like, not firm and strict enough, but they are basically telling people not to meet each other. So, most churches don't have service, I think. At least not our church, but we go to. Okay. What did you study in university? I started out with computer science. But then after like two years, me and my friend of mine, a classmate, we thought that I wish we could take a break and study something else. So, there was this one year program in Japanese. Sure. Let's try that. So, we did that. And I noticed that that's a lot more fun than computer science. So, I continued to study Japanese. And then I went to Japan for like this kind of language school, like for a few months, just to practice your to speak and so on. Conversation. And over in Japan, I met my wife at a little church in Japan. Wow. That's so cool. That's such a cool story. What career path, did you finally settle on? So, I met my wife, Mina, in Japan. And then we had like long distance relationship for a couple of years. And so I thought that if I'm going to move to Japan, I have to be able to work, have a job in Japan. So, basically maybe English teacher, I don't know. Usually people go to Japan to become an English teacher. I'm from Sweden, so that's not, you cannot become a Swedish teacher. So, I started to study English at the university here instead. So, but now my Swedish dialect has gotten back. I'm amazed that all the Europeans I talked to, your English is just phenomenal. It's amazing to me. So, I started to study language basically. I became a language major. I've been working like in the subtitling business for TV and so on. Really? For maybe 12 or 13 years. So, you take English language programming and you subtitle it in Swedish or how does this work? Or the other way around? So, I translate like English shows or Japanese shows into Swedish. Usually translate into your own language because then you know the nuances and so on. Even if you don't understand the English or Japanese, but you know your own language much better because you have to find, especially in subtitling, it's not like translating. Because you have to fit within like 37 characters and you have to adjust the reading speed and so on. So, you cannot translate everything that people say. So, you have to try to make it as short as possible without people noticing that you're actually deleting quite a lot of the conversation. Wow! That's fascinating. People only notice your job when you make mistakes. That's true of a lot of jobs. Especially true of pasturing, come to think of it. That's what always gets the news when pastors mess up. It's just all over the news. Pastors do a good job, nobody cares. So, I assume you probably found me through Jordan Peterson. Yes. Internet connections. So, I'm really interested in mythology and those kind of things. Yes. That's what appealed to me about Peterson. His view on mythology and the way he reads the Bible and so on. I don't agree with all the things he says, but that's what I found most interesting about him. How did you find Peterson? Actually, I don't remember. I don't watch that much stuff about politics and so on. But somehow it showed up in my feed. It was around the time when he blew up with the C-16 and after that and so on. Yes. And then you got interested in the mythological aspect of what he was doing. Do you remember what videos first caught your imagination in terms of his stuff? I think it was his biblical series. But also overall his way of thinking. I've been digging into a little bit like Joseph Campbell and the hero's journey and so on. I mean, there's some interesting stuff there, I think. Some of it is applicable to Christianity. Some is a little bit problematic in my view. So, what kind of a church do you go to? So, the denomination is called in Swedish, it's like the evangelical free church. And maybe evangelical means a little bit different things in Sweden and America. Like this year they've been talking at the denominational meetings. Should we skip the evangelical description of our denomination or not and so on? Because it gets mixed up with politics and all that. It's basically between liberal theology and we're not completely liberal theology and we're not completely fundamentalist. We're not reading the Bible seriously, but we have to read it with historical context and all that. So, in that way we are evangelical. So, in the United States we usually call it the EV free. So, all these European denominations came over. And in many ways the evangelical free church is very parallel to the Christian reformed church. In that the Christian reformed church broke away from the state church. And usually the free, when it appears in these European denominations, mean it's the alternative to the state church. So, Abraham Kuyper in the Netherlands established the free university. And I remember growing up hearing about the free university and thinking, well, people don't have to pay to go there. But I didn't understand that it was the alternative to the state institutions. So, I think it grew out of like, we are Lutherans usually in Sweden. The Lutheran state church is still like, we are extremely secular in Sweden, but it's still like more than 60% of every Swedish member of the state church. Really? Even if they don't attend? Yeah, exactly. Do you, if, does the government collect church support for the churches voluntarily, I assume? Sorry, they separated like maybe 15 years ago. So, now it's not the state church. People, they don't, most people, if you don't leave, you're still. Okay, so it's an opt out. Yeah. So, it diminishes by time. Yeah. So, what's on your mind? What would you like to do with this conversation? So, actually, I don't have like a grand plan for the conversation, but I looked at your schedule and I noticed that, whoa, there's a free slot here. I'm thinking really much about it. I just signed up. Well, I can pepper you with some preparation. I can pepper you with questions for the whole hour. I'm not concerned about that, but I'm concerned about, I mean, this is fundamentally your time and your opportunity, and I don't necessarily want to hog it with all the things I'm curious about you and your life and what's around you. So, I've just been terminably curious. Yeah, I did some. I wrote down a few things. Okay. Forget, yeah. Like some stuff about mythology, story, C.S. Lewis told, and then Rene Girard. I have some thoughts about trolls and giants. Oh, coming back. Let's hear about that. I'd like to, I'd like, I'm curious. The next actually today, this morning is Scandinavia morning because the next conversation on the next hour is with a Finn, and he wants to talk about the, how do you say it, the Kavala, the Kavala, that great Norse epic, that Tolkien. Yeah, the Finnish, yeah. Yeah, so I'm going to talk to him about that we've we've had email conversations before about it so I'm really curious about, about the, the Scandinavian take on all this stuff. Oh, did I lose you. Sorry. That's okay. Okay, good. You hear me. Yep, yep, yep. So yeah, why don't you start with giants and trolls. That sounds like a great topic. Yeah, so basically I think that I just, I'm just, I'm no expert in this field but as I grew up I watched a lot of this children's show about Greek mythology, and I watched it like all over and over again so when I grew up I kind of realized how much those kind of things shape you and your interests and so on. So, I'm very interested in those kind of things. So I think that, like my take on it is that, like, in the Enlightenment, they kind of, you remove all the superstitious stuff, like to mythology, you put it in this box, mythology. You don't have to care about it and so on. But the thing is, like trolls come back. They reemerge. So, so this is what, what's happening. A lot right now on the internet. And it's made with the fishing term trolling and so on. But quite quickly turned into a mythological creature, as it was in the past and those kind of things they blend together and create a new creature so to speak. And just as like the trolls in the past they live in hole in the ground. Now people talk about trolls living in the basement of their mothers and so on and they're hiding beside the roads around the bridge and so on in the past and now they're in the digital highways, like jumping. And so on. And so, I don't know where I heard it if it's what. Is it Owen Barfield that talked about Odin. He sacrificed his one of his eyes or maybe it was somebody else. But quote me on that. Somebody talked about Odin, and he's, he's, he wanted to have the rune runes, like the power magic power, and the wisdom, the wanted to drink from the well of the wisdom and so on. So he had to sacrifice himself to himself or for himself. In another version, he sacrificed, he hangs himself on the well tree and so on. And then he gets to this power, but he sacrifices one of his eyes. So, this is, I think it was Owen Barfield that said it. It's straight from the mythology. So, when modernity comes in. I mean, you remove one of your eyes, you remove the participation, and then you get the power and that's like technology so magic and technology. A lot of people have talked about it has similarities, like you manipulate to control your environment. And so this in Swedish magic is called troll craft. So you have witchcraft in English, but it's troll doom, troll craft. So it's what trolls do. That's fascinating. Yeah, I think so. So, for example, you have usually a troll mother exchanging a human baby for their own troll baby. And so when the changeling like bread and meat or human food, the troll mother feeds the human baby like snakes and worms. So they are kind of inverting, they are mimicking the human behavior, but in an inverted way. And it's like that with the magic, the new magic of the trolls as well. It's usually like sarcasm and irony. So you invert the truth or twist it in ways. So you usually imitate people, but twist it like to manipulate them. And you had this guy Nick on your channel, like a year ago. So, yeah, I really like what he said about because he was into trolling, right? Yeah, yeah. I'm not into this kind of things, but I found it very interesting that you said that they used irony and sarcasm to manipulate people because it gets you power to manipulate people. If you're always ironic and sarcastic every day all the time. He said that one day you wake up and realize that you're not ironic anymore. So you sacrifice yourself to gain this power. But in doing that, you're twisting yourself. That's really helpful. And as a Christian, I connect this to the Bible stories. So human beings are created in the image of God and in the likeness of God. But we twist ourselves and distort ourselves so we don't resemble God anymore. We lose the image of God or at least we lose the likeness. It's like, you know, these mirrors at laughing mirrors. You call it laughing mirrors. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Funhouse mirrors. Funhouse mirrors. Yeah. So we kind of become like that. We get twisted. And so I think that the Christian way of thinking about this is we are actually the trolls. So, and to realize that. It's common that you say that remember that there is a person behind the screen and so on. A person behind those words. But you also have to realize that I am also one of the trolls, basically. So fallen. It's like another way of speaking about fallen humanity. But in different words, so to speak. That's really good stuff. That's really good. You do watch Jonathan Peugeot's channel too, right? Yeah. Yeah. Because this, of course, is all this stuff is right up Peugeot's alley. And that's really helpful. I've been waiting for him to talk about trolls and giants. I'm going to put a bug in his ear. Whether or not we save this, whether or not we share this publicly, I'm going to want to send this to him because this is, that's really helpful stuff. Because you know, I never, you know, why do these things? So the trolling, I mean, and in English that kind of trolling is spelled differently. Why did that trolling of kind of luring people, why does that then, you know, morph into, and that whole thing about the troll mother exchanging the babies and the inversion. That's really good. You can actually, I'm not so sure if you can see it now because Google has like kind of cleaned up their algorithms probably. But at least before, when I did this a few years ago, I searched for trolls on like the image search on Google. And then you can sort it by year. So you can see what the popular image of a troll is by year and how it has changed. So it goes from the first earliest years. I don't remember when Google started to do this, like 2005 or whatever. Then it was still kind of this kind of like troll from Lord of the Rings. That kind of like the usual troll. But it slowly turned into this little guy sitting by his computer. But he turns green and he's like they are mixing, blending these two together. So it creates something new. But it's still the same. But in a new era, so to speak. But it's just something about human beings, I think. Yeah. Yeah. Now, what are, how are giants and trolls related or different? So this is just my theory. I haven't seen it anywhere else. But when I did my, when I did my, what do you call it, like major thesis or when I graduated university, like the final thesis, I wrote about, I compared the translation of mythological creatures in Lord of the Rings. I compared the Swedish translation and the Japanese translation. Because the English and the Swedish mythological worlds, so to speak, are very related. And also the actual stories borrowing most of the stuff from German Scandinavian lore and so on. And the Japanese mythology is very different. So how does this compare when you translate? If you have to translate a troll, are you going to make a loan word and create a new word in Japanese or are you going to use some pre-existent creature and bring in a new kind of aspect to it? But it creates a dissonance if it's too different and so on. So how do you basically translate something that doesn't exist in the target language? Yeah. Yeah. And that's especially difficult because there's so much in, I mean, how much Japanese mythology do you need to know in order to do something like that? I mean, that's really challenging. Yeah. But the person doing it is Japanese. Okay. But they've, I mean, translation, you've always, I mean, a translator always has to stand astride two worlds in a sense and bridge them. Yeah. And you have to decide, am I going to be loyal to the target language or to the source language? And you have to make a decision basically. So yeah, lots of stuff going into that and like Bible translations. Yes. I have a question about that later if you want. Okay. Well, but that's so interesting to me too because, you know, people, when they talk to me, they'll say, well, you know, they try to figure out what category I fit into. And I always say, well, I'm a pastor. And part of being a pastor is a preacher and part of being a preacher is that bridging because you have the Bible and then you have your zip code, as we say in the United States, your contemporary local context. And you're always trying to bridge these two. So there's a lot of that same type of thing that you have to do. And I'd never thought about the details of subtitling in the demands of translating that that puts on because, of course, you can't pause the movie and have this whole paragraph delineating the nuances between the two worlds. And I can do that as a preacher. As a subtitler, it's like the lips are moving. You better have something down there. And also it's different from translation because if you read a book, you can like create the world like in text, but in movies, you watch something. And if it doesn't match with what you read, you get like a dissonance like that. So if you translate it directly or use it as a loan word. So share with me some of what you learned in your thesis because that fascinates me. You know, it fascinates me that when we think of the ancient world and we think of sort of the ancient world in a Balkanized way that you've got all these tiny, you know, you get the Angles and the Saxons and the I mean all of these tiny little tribes. But as you noticed and as Tolkien and you know, there was a lot of passing things around between these worlds. And so even though it is Balkanized, it's also connected. But of course, when you get to Japan, wow, now you've got a big separation. So share with me some of your thesis that fascinates me. So I don't remember. It was like 15 years ago. You remember some of it. Yeah, some of the stuff. So there's one difference. Usually if you translate from English into Swedish, it's very similar, both the language and and mythology, the mythological concepts and so on, and the imaginations and so on. But usually you kind of translated directly. There are lots of you do it or use if you say elves in English, you say Alber in Swedish and it's kind of the same. We have a little bit different views on what it is, maybe. And so on. But if you translate to a totally different culture like Japan or Japanese language, you have to decide if you want to basically I called it. If you want to enrich the mythology or not with new concepts, or do you want to protect Japanese mythology. So as a translator, you have to decide who are you going to be loyal to? And this gets into like postmodern theories about using translation and which is the powerful, so to speak, which culture use lots of theories about that. And that's a rabbit hole. Wow. I had no idea, but it makes sense. Yeah. So a lot of the when I went to. I started, I started English in maybe 2003 and 2005 or something like that. At that time, I didn't reflect upon it very much. But now. I we talked a lot about the death of the author. I think it was our test or somebody who came up with that. And that the text is everything. That you cannot actually. Communicate from the author to the reader, because the text is in between all this stuff. Right. Lately, I've not so much. Peterson talks a lot about postmodernism, but I think he's using it like some kind of evil category that he puts everything into. Bloody, bloody postmodernism. I think it it it asks a lot of good questions. That's how I see it. But I want to be careful, especially as a Christian who believes in a believe in a great narrative. Yes, that there is a risk in deconstructing. Yes, he constructing everything because you lose foundation and so on. Yeah. And that gets into giants. So giants are the foundational part of mythology. Really? You were going to. Well, I was going to mention this little book here. That's actually not. Not the book I was thinking about. See if I have it. Well, Brevard Brevard Childs. So, you know, all these issues have been roiling around in biblical interpretation for a lot of years. And and Brevard Brevard Childs decided this is a major movement in in at least English language hermeneutics because began because the the fashion before him was the deconstruction of the text. We're going to split the Old Testament up into the the Yahwist and the priestly and, you know, and all of that source criticism. And he basically said, you know, reading the text as canon. So you read the text as the text and you in a sense, you worry not so much about the sources and the authors, but the text. Right. And that and that sort of brought on the, you know, the Robert Alter, you know, I want to read that I've heard about. Yeah, Robert Alter is a Jewish scholar. And this book that he wrote, let's see, I read this in seminary. So it was, I was in the seminary in the 80s. Let's see when this book was written. This book was written in 81. This book came out the art of biblical narrative. And, and he basically the modernist deconstruction destroyed the Bible, or at least made it inaccessible to the church. And this method of the Bible as literature, as narrative, the art of biblical narrative and the art of biblical poetry, suddenly, biblical scholarship was useful again, because it connected to life. And so it's, it's fascinating how these, how these things have been, have been roiling through lots of different areas, but also in my area in terms of biblical studies and the church and and all of that. So, it's, and all of these questions, you know, authority, authorial intent, you know, sometimes you look for solid ground and you say, well, authorial intent is solid ground. And because you look for something that you can actually gain access to, but then, especially with Christianity, which, unlike Islam or Judaism, Christianity is done in translation. The Bible of the church, the early church is a translation of the text. And so this sort of sets Christianity on this path to be, you know, ever. It's kind of a shape changing religion in some ways because it keeps infiltrating other cultures. It transforms everything that it touches. Right, but then the question is how can it keep its own narrative thread and not lose itself in translation. So, I mean, all of these, all of these issues, issues abound. And so it doesn't surprise me that someone's work like Jonathan Peugeot's work would come back into fashion, because in some ways, symbolism is a proto language, and it's a universal language and that's sort of, you know, where Peterson with, you know, young and psychology tries to get at, you know, what's the layer beneath the symbolism. And so Peterson and his early biblical, you know, we act it out, and then we represent the acting out symbolically and so, you know, just sort of building the steps that go into this. So, Giants are foundational. I'm really curious about that statement. Okay, back to Giants. I have a question about translation. Well, do that first, so we can get to Giants in a minute. Yeah, yeah, yeah, let's leave the Giants for a while. So, where did, I think, what was it, yeah, about the glory of God. I think you talk quite a lot about the glory of God lately in your videos. I found it. I wrote. Did you read my email? I'm studying theology right now. So, since two years, so I'm changing. I'm starting to become a pastor. Really? Well, congratulations. Let's see, maybe it didn't, Google has not been kind to me lately. I didn't write the question in the email. Oh, okay. Okay. But I thought about the glory of God, a little bit lately. I wrote, we have to write like essays about different things. So in biblical theology, I wrote about the temple in the historical books. Oh. So, I looked at how, like, it says in, I looked it up here, just like in Exodus, with the tabernacle. It's just like this, I wrote it down here. When they kind of, after they complete the tabernacle, and then the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle. And so, and in First Kings, the same thing happens with when they build the temple. So they use the same language, and the priest couldn't perform the service because of the cloud. It was Moses couldn't enter the tent, and the priest can't perform the service for the glory of the Lord filled his temple. And this doesn't happen when they build the second temple, very interesting. Something is missing. So they're waiting for something. And then in the New Testament, like, the glory of God, like in the first John, the glory of God comes into work there. And in Romans, it says like this, Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father. But then two chapters later, in Romans 8, and if the spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead is living in you, and so on. So it's the spirit raising God in chapter 8, but it was the glory of God raising him in chapter 6. And this God comes dwelling, his glory is filling the temple, the dwelling. But Jesus is the temple and then the church and so on. Jesus is dwelling in us, so to speak, when we are in Christ, when we're given the Spirit. So there are very similar themes about the glory of God and the Spirit of God. And I looked up what the glory of God means. So like in Hebrew, it has something to do with weight, like the heavy or weight. Yeah, worthiness, something like that. And then at least Latin, I think it's the same in Greek. I don't know Greek. Like Gloria is glory is something brilliant, something visual, basically. It's shining. Shining. Yep. And in Swedish, I think it's the same in German. Swedish is härlighet, so lordliness, if you translate it directly. So it has to do with lordship. Interesting. And a classmate of mine, she's from Myanmar, Burma, from the Karen people. And in her language, they translated it more something to do with honor or honorfulness or something. So it's like we have this translation issue again. How do you translate something divine into human? And that's Christ is the bridge that he's translating the divine into human language and human body. But from language to language as well. And then we have this blend between the spirit of God and the glory of God that is kind of mixing sometimes in some Bible verses. Could you, I would like to hear your opinion about the glory of God. Well, I'm happy. How would you describe it? Well, so in English, glory. So one of the things that if, you know, so I was actually in a video that I hope to make this afternoon. I'm going to be talking a little bit about Isaiah 40 because I was thinking about the end of history. Do you want to know the sermon songs? No, no, it was it's not going to be a rough draft for a sermon because I've been thinking about, you know, my last few videos, I've been talking about the Weinsteins and really their end of history theme that they've been developing. And so in Isaiah 40, you get a very common Old Testament refrain that what is what is what is human? What is a human being? A human being is like the grass of the field. And then, and then in Isaiah 40, it says, and it's, and our beauty is like the flower of the field. Okay. And I noticed I was just reading an English translation and I noticed there was a little footnote by beauty and I thought, okay, because whenever you see a footnote from a translator, you know, there's an issue here. There's an issue here. So then, you know, flip over to the Hebrew. And I was really surprised because it's the hesed. Human beings are like the hesed of the flower of the field and hesed is a very important word because hesed is often in the King James translated loving kindness. It's a it's a loyalty now loyal and royal are very close in English the oil. And so hesed is this loving kindness. It's a generosity. And so now, now, so and I love how you laid this out because with glory so many things are connected. Because in English, if something, I went out and the sunset was glorious. And that's a kind of, you know, it takes your breath away when you walk into Yosemite Valley, which, you know, it's full of European and Asian tourists usually. Walk into Yosemite Valley and you see El Capitan and Half Dome and the Yosemite Valley. It's just it's glorious. And glory is this, this, this quality, this thing that I think is our expression of the numinous. If we look at Rudolph Otto and, you know, Lutheran pastor scholar, the, you know, the idea of the holy. We glory is sort of a sacramental function in that we find glory. We are. We find glory and we're attracted to it. I mean, people from all over the world go to Yosemite National Park. People, you know, why are the, why are the people on television so abnormally beautiful? Well, it's because the producers for these television shows understand something about beauty and glory and how we're attracted to it. And so I have found that this word glory is a really helpful way into talking about God that secular people can connect with because it's something it's common in that it's you can find it in many places, but it's also human experience. Yes, yes. And, and so this my God number one, God number two, I picked this, this passage out of Isaiah, you know, holy, holy, holy, which is the transcendent and the whole earth is full of his glory. Now, when you get to the. So a number of years ago I decided, okay, I'm gonna, I was so sick of preaching through series I'm just going to start in Genesis, I'm going to do what I can to try and preach the Bible as well as I can. So that of course you hit Leviticus. I was going to say that. And it's like, oh, now, now I've got to stop monkey and around in the easy parts of the Bible and get serious about a bunch of things, and nothing like Leviticus will force you into that. And so in Leviticus you have the story of the building of the tabernacle, and the dedication of the tabernacle. And so, you know, I had done these reading programs of reading the Bible through and blah blah blah you think you read the Bible through but you just, with that kind of process you just kind of make your way through and you don't notice enough. So, so there's a strange passage in Leviticus nine, where the temple is all constructed per the very detailed, very detailed instructions of God through Moses temple is all constructed. And it's time basically to, I liken it to turning on the nuclear reactor. Okay, because in some ways, that's what the tabernacle is, it's like the nuclear reactor in a, in a naval aircraft carrier it's the, it's the heart of it, but it's also radioactive because what the Old Testament is God breaks out of the tabernacle it's kind of the containment unit. Well, it's time to get it started and you've got the altar, and you've got the tabernacle, but you've got no fire. And just as God you know fire is an element in all of this it's an element on Sinai, it's on the burning bush, and of course it's the chief. It's the chief instrument on an altar which is fire. And so I did a video early on about altars it's on my church channel. And, and so, and so there they've got, they've built this stuff. And it's sort of like, well, you know, and so then Aaron sons to have Aaron sons decide, well, the obvious thing to do is to light a fire and start the altar. And so they take some fire from the camp. And they bring it. And they're going to light the altar. And God destroys them. And it's like, that sounds. That we we read that we think, you know, we don't know what to think about that you know God, you know, but we're not understanding the way around. That's right, that's right. I mean we don't we don't blame. We don't blame. We don't blame. We might blame the Russians and the Ukrainians for the accident that Chernobyl, but we don't blame the uranium. Well, and so then I had to think about this well why does God kill these guys for bringing and then the text talks about strange fire. And then what happens basically is the glory, the cloud of God comes out of the tabernacle, you know, lights the fire. And then the instruction is, keep the fire lit. Well, what is that fire. That fire is God. The presence of God, the presence of God. Of course it's not all of God, but that's, and then so then what is a sacrifice. So you take the animal, and then the head of the household laces hands on the animal. And in other words, the sin is transmitted from the family into the animal, and the animal goes into the fire into the presence of God, and the animal is consumed. And that's because I mean and again if you read all these Old Testament passages, it's all one symbolic, you know, symbolism again is sort of the language. That's right. And, and so then, so once I saw that it was like, oh, I didn't know what an altar was. And now suddenly because of how this all works. And then there's the altar. Well, and now suddenly glory is, you know, one another favorite passage of mine, Isaiah five, where you have this little parable about a vineyard. And you find these vineyards popping up all throughout the Bible. And wine, it's very clear that the goal of the grape is the glory of wine. But the glory of wine is really dicey for us. We long for it. But we can't handle it so then you get into Tolkien, and you see the dynamics of the ring. That's right. So, so for me, glory is a way into this. And, and it's a really transactional, you know, very a term that is really connective to lots of these other things and part of, you know, part of reality in the way consciousness works is we need a way into the world. So right now my consciousness is a way into the, the world that is this room which is my office. Yeah. And, and so then you get into these weird conversations that Jordan Peterson would get into about, you know, does this room exist if I'm not in it. And so, and glory is another way into that and it just connects all of this stuff. Yeah, we're not gonna have time about giants now but that's okay. No, no, no, no, that's okay. That's okay. That's interesting. Right now I'm reading. René Girard and so on so I'm writing an essay about sacrifice. So, in the Old Testament. That's interesting to hear. There's so many of these concepts. I mean, part of what we do with language and especially with action is we take a world, and we particularize it. And that has to happen. Because it's not real and particular. But it's also interconnected out to everything. And so, you know, again, you've got, you've got the one and the many that you're all that we're always dealing with a turning problem. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, and it, and it can't be you know it's it. It can't be helped in a sense consciousness is, you know, a connection into that because consciousness is is one. I can't really multitask I can just task switch. But it connects me to the many. And so it just, it's a perpetual thing. Shoot, we're out of time. This has been fun. Yeah, thank you very much. So do I have permission to share this or you want to see it first or because I would love to share this this has been a wonderful conversation. Yeah, sure. Okay, good. My, my ravine is about trolls and stuff. Yeah, don't worry about the troll. I don't. I've been I've been blessed in my in my YouTube channel that the trolling hasn't been too bad. Yeah, I really enjoyed that. Thank you so much Lars for reaching out and and you get a. I'll try to keep opening up slots and. And I always say you know you can have to so you know don't be afraid to sign up for another one. If I, if I find the time. All right. Thank you very much. Goodbye. Bye bye. Wonderful to talk to you.