https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=EtGjt05ETrk

 This guy doesn't need much introduction and and in some ways to do a randos conversation with so did you take that video down? Nate where you had I did not I did not take it down If it got taken down, I wasn't aware of it. So so okay. Well Where shall we begin? Shall we begin with your story because we've never done that now I want to free feel yeah, so if you start talking I'm gonna refill this thing. So okay. Oh, all right, so I I that video that you're talking about kind of came about by accident Sherry and James courtides and I were doing our our series on On the hierarchy of heaven and earth by Devils Harding and Sherry couldn't make it so it was just James and I and it's like well They want to just like reschedule or do you want to and James? So James was like I know I want to hear your story So I let James so James kind of like, you know asked me questions and got me started talking And so that's how that came about But to make a Let's I'll just kind of like start at the beginning. So I'm born to I am hearing you so keep talking. Yeah, no problem I'm born to parents who come out of the Jesus movement. So like if you imagine like Like the Nate's beginnings as being like very similar to Jesus Revolution. You'll you'll not be very far off In fact, I spent the first six months of my life in In a Jesus people commune And and then my parents like eventually like got their own place and When I was a very young child My parents kind of continued on that sort of like, you know Evangelical charismatic Path with hippie overtones for most of the early years of my life I don't remember like I think we did like a lot of house churches aren't that because I don't actually have any early childhood memories of church at all and Then my parents ended up getting divorced because my parents My dad was gay so It wasn't it, you know, the marriage was kind of like doomed to failure from the beginning because my dad was a closeted homosexual and I can remember actually I Remember actually do you have a memory of my dad telling me that he was gay? Because this the way he told we were actually so my mom kind of like had a kind of a breakdown This is really destroyed her so she was like she agreed to let like my she agreed to let my grandparents take me For a while and while she kind of like sorted herself out I thought though my younger sister Elizabeth stayed with her So it was just me that went to go stay with my grandparents. I was really close to my grandfather and so I think that's like part of part of that was part of the reason why and We're driving we're driving to Westport, Washington, which is where my grandparents lived at the time from Longview which is where we had been living and We I can remember like right next to the drugstore in Westport, I think it's a surfing shop now but at that time it was a drugstore and My dad says it says to me. He's like, yeah He's like do you understand like we by me and your mom are splitting up and I said no He's like, well, I like boys more than girls and I'm like, so do I? Like that doesn't how does that you know cuz I'm five And I didn't understand at all. And so I live with my grandparents for Mmm the next five years like I was so I split my childhood between my mom and my grandparents and so Really? I don't remember going to church until I live with my mom because my grandparents were very much Like let's see my grandmother Was there were neither of them were atheists like they're like just they were just nuns, right? They were just spiritual but not religious my grandmother like was Was raised Christian scientists, but like she loved to watch like what was the Michael Landon show where he was an angel? Oh Touched by an angel. No, that was later. She liked that one too, though Touched by an angel was later in heaven something heaven can wait or something like that. No, that was no that was a movie I was a movie it was but yeah highway to heaven was a highway to heaven Yeah, there it is. There's a highway to heaven So, yeah, she like like that and she also loved touched by an angel which came out later and so and she like she believed in God like I would I would hear her singing all fly away in the kitchen when she was cooking like all the time So like not atheist for sure. Yeah. Yeah But just not church people they were just like they yeah and my grandfather was like He didn't really talk about what he believed very much but he was also like he was clearly not an atheist and American Christian folk religion pretty much. Yeah, and he but he did have one thing about my grandfather that was interesting is that He did he did have a very negative opinion of church people because he thought you know judgmental blah blah blah kind of thing because he was this like blue and he was a chef and And like Being a chef in those days was still very much a blue-collar profession and he was very much a blue-collar guy and So he just kind of like I mean he was a blue-collar guy from Oklahoma who worked as a chef all of his life and he He the one exception to his negative talk about church people he has he had a very favorable view of Catholics and The reason he had a very favorable view of Catholics is because when he had was stricken with polio as a child and He was cared for in a Catholic hospital And he always had like positive things to say about that yeah, because of that experience he also really supported that like he get he would actually go to the Union Gospel Mission a lot and Like he would actually he would give money to the Union Gospel Mission So he was not anti-religious at all because he would give money to the Union Gospel Mission He would go to the Union Gospel Mission. He would find he would find guys at the Union Gospel Mission who work who had experience working as cooks and get them jobs as line cooks and Try to help them like he didn't bring these people into our house He would bring these people into our house like these guys and like met at the Union Gospel Mission He was trying to get them sober up and get a job as a line. Yeah. Yeah, so Um So it was not a it was certainly not an it was not an a religious upbringing even though it was a non church upbringing Like so we have to accelerate this because we're okay regular is that we're on right? You got it. You you asked me college College, okay. So I went to the Evergreen State College out of high school and I went to the I went to the Evergreen State College because I was a progressive young man and I wanted to study great books I Knew I wanted to study great books Even though I was progressive young man Actually the the book that I read that convinced me that I wanted to study great books was actually closing of the American mind so By Alan Blooming. Yeah, so I decided I wanted to study great books and so I was trying to decide between various great books colleges But then I found out that Evergreen had a great books program that they were offering the year that I was gonna be entering So it's like I can figure this out later in the long term And I can just go to Evergreen for the first year and that's sort of like it's inexpensive. It's close to home I can come and visit my grandparents on the weekends all that kind of thing So I went to the Evergreen State College ended up transferring to Thomas Aquinas College later on because I eventually became Not a progressive as soon as I as soon as I was as soon as I got to Evergreen Like I was like red-pilled you huh, I put up pictures of Richard Nixon on my dorm Yeah, I'm very contrarian in case you haven't noticed Right, right, right. Yeah. Well, I was no like I'm I was like it was very much like I was very I was super into The history of the civil rights movement when I was in high school and I was very much like Pacifist pro-civil disobedience like I really was like I had a lot of progressive views But but but my progressive views were more of a progressivism that was from an era before Like I was I was into a progressivism that was really like more the progressivism of the 60s and 70s and By the late 80s when I'm going into college it's starting to morph into something entirely different You know, I'm you know I'm in some ways part of the same thing because I was born out of the progressivism from the 60s and 70s and And once the woke turn started to happen it was like whoa This is this is not What the the 60s and 70s signed up for at all and woke started at places like Evergreen and UC Santa Cruz where my wife graduated from in the late 80s the mid to late 80s Like that's kind of like was ground zero of what became woke Now your brother-in-law who we very much would would have really I was hoping yeah, I should have lobbied harder I Don't know what he thinks the best part Where I met him so Do you want me to I could tell about I could talk about that. Yeah, let's let's like let's talk about slack I'm at slack. Okay, so I met slack because I I took a job as the sales manager for a computer store In the town that I still live in and You love to see you as a sales manager in a computer store because there was because that was the era of the computer store I mean right. Yeah. Yeah. Well, this was actually like 2007 okay It wasn't the golden age of the computer store But like there were enough people that like wanted custom builds and something better quality that we could do enough business and repair Repair was a big part of our so it was like my sales and repair. That's right, right Yeah, people who want some more handhold and who wanted more handholding than to just go to the big stock box store And that's who our clients always. Yeah, absolutely so oddly enough some college professors That were like really smart in their field but clueless about computers like I did I did computer support for a group of therapists for a while They were totally dumb with computers. It was amazing to watch. But anyway, go on. I'm sorry So anyway, he's one of our counter technicians He's one of our counter technicians and it's like I always like he I always thought he was really funny But it he ends up like we're playing World of Warcraft together. He ends up like talking to my sister in World like in game and World of Warcraft Well, they end up they they like this this is kind of like after he said he quit because he quit And without having another job lined up because he was like really frustrated with a bunch of stuff and so he ended up quitting but he ends up dating my sister and They end up getting married and now I now I have a niece Who was adorable and full of energy and yeah I've got bad news for you. I've met people are just Well, I know we know well we can out we can we can send it out to this forensic recovery service But it's gonna cost you like ten thousand dollars, you know, and it's like no one wants their data that much Okay, so that that's that's hugely helpful because slack has become a fixture in certain in the hive mind in certain channels like Grim Grizz there So, you know, so that makes sense, but we only have six more minutes. We there's got to be some more stuff What do you want to know? What do you want to know? Okay? Well, I know that you started watching me because of my conversation with Grim Grizz How did you first find that? Okay, so I found you through Like everybody else through your conversation with Jordan Peterson Okay, and then I watched like one of your like commentary videos and I didn't hate it But I wasn't like super excited about it. You hated it. I didn't though. I didn't hate it I mean, I'm just like I honest I didn't hate it, but I wasn't super excited to buy it either But then I I happened to get fed your conversation with the first Randall's conversation I was fed was the one that you have a grim and That like got my attention like that was like this is this is very interesting What what is he and then I started watching the Randall's conversations like pretty religiously and then everything else? Okay. Well, how did grail country start? Rail country started because I had a so I you you posted on your channel a conversation between Michael Leidy and What's the name of dr. Michael Defuscia Talking about his book on Owen Barfield. Yeah, and I had been reading Barfield for a while I made some comments that Michael thought was were very interesting we end up having conversations and Then we have a conversation about radical orthodoxy with Julian and Michael just keeps Michael keeps bugging me and saying like you always have such interesting things Interesting things to say you're always reading such interesting things You really should have a channel you really should have a channel and then finally after hearing this about 30 or 40 times at least I Say, okay, I'll do it, but you have to do it with me and I also want Sherry So that was that's that's how it came about So what have you So what is grail country about if you're going to explain it to someone who's never been there? grail country is about Trying to Work toward things together ultimately it's because it like it's the the grail is a quest right? It's a journey It's like you have to it. It's something that you have to seek and it's elusive so and it requires It's best sought with traveling companions although ultimately you have to make the final leg to the journey And now you have also gotten deep into estuary People might not know just how deep into there is there is developing behind estuary some some structure and So why what how did why did estuary capture your interest? Because I could see it as a natural evolution of what was already going on like to me that was evident like What TLC is to me is it's it's already a it's just gigantic asynchronous estuary and the idea of taking what was going on in the these online spaces and then Trying to have similar kinds of quality dialogue and conversations on the ground seemed to be a natural step So I immediately saw its potential and volunteered to My Ladies gentlemen, there is hello corner people So Finally He's looking like Emperor Palpatine So Interesting thing about slack especially given his his association with grim is that slack used to work not for but at the NSA It's an interesting distinction Very much at as in physically present As in directly employed by We want what's best for you My Opus just to check it on the list that it actually like happens But now you're gonna say but that was a speed randos that wasn't no I won't say that no I won't say that it's good enough, but well, I'll have to because I was looking on your channel I forgot that it was exactly the context of that talk but I remember watching that and that was super helpful for me because I mean part of the reason I do the randos conversation is because I do want to know the people and You have to learn their stories to get to know them if people want a longer version they can find it on like Karen talked to me on the meaning code too. Oh, yeah Okay And so like there's one with me and Karen on the meaning code and I'm pretty sure that James has that up on his James Quartez has our conversation up on his channel as well, which is the rooster screw. So, okay. Yeah. All right Well, wonderful. Yeah, and we I'm going to bring in this is it. This is a guy Nate that actually Has he ever been on your channel? No Another very interesting guy. So thank you Nate. Thanks for coming