https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uYYmYspROxA

 So I think so and I'm not like Yeah, I mean, maybe I shouldn't be as comfortable But I think it's something about my generation having grown up with the internet is that we don't have like, you know Like like the older generations and things are like, oh, you know, something's gonna be out there forever. And we're just kind of like oh, yes whatever Well, Esther O'Reilly had sent had sent your How I became a Christian video and I actually just rewatched that this morning it's quite a it's quite a moving story How are you doing and and you're continuing to post content on your on your channel, how are you doing now life life going? Okay Yeah, it's going okay. I mean, I think my position I think I was far too certain in terms of like maybe conservative evangelical Commitments over the past few months in terms of like my Christian walk And I've been challenged on a few things like, you know, like my theory of the in tow atonement my understanding of say biblical inerrancy things like that, which is actually good, I think and Because it mean it means that I'm constantly trying to get at the truth and I'm not kind of like gonna become dogmatic And which I think could be could be a bad thing. But um, yeah, it's it's interesting like and Obviously, I'm still a recent Christian so I think people say you go through what's called like a cage stage kind of you know, or maybe like a pride and puffed up or whatever but and I don't know. I think there's periods of time where it's all great periods of time of terrible Sin and backsliding it's interesting, you know because but I've definitely there's a change in my conscience now as a Christian than what there was before Yeah, so maybe for for if anybody if we share this and anybody watches it and to refresh my memory add a little Clarification to the video you did and how I became a Christian you did in May now when how old are you? I was 23 like two weeks ago three weeks ago. Okay. Okay. So When when did you when did you have your surgery? So it sounded like you know your surgery? Basically took you off your feet and then you start watching all of these videos and you start getting into stuff How long ago was that? Okay, so I think I was about I think it was 17 actually when I popped my first ACL so So yeah, it was like in a rugby game and I was getting maybe like four hours sleep a night Going to the gym very early in the morning And Not really paying attention in class and stuff at school and then I'd have like rugby training after school go to work And get home at like 12 something go to sleep And then I'd have like matches at the weekend And so it was kind of inevitable that was gonna get some kind of injury when that one happened then by Christmas when I turned 18 in October And I was waiting for surgery that was when because of my depression and kind of introspection at that point I started kind of looking into adoption and at this point, I think actually I had taken and quite a heavy dose of psychedelics like trying to self figure, you know, like figure out what was going on and That was the conclusion I came to I was like, wow, I'm like really messed up because of adoption primarily but like other things as well and so then I got in touch with my mum and when I did and Meeting her for the first time You know, like her boyfriend was kind of weird the first time we met anyway and I remember we like we sat down in a cafe and he kind of came in and then he Look, he was like looking at his phone and they like threw it on the table and walked off and I was like What is that all about? Like where's he gone? And she was like, oh I love gone home and I was like, hang on That's like what? you know And I I was only 17 18 at the time not that I've got all this wisdom now, but I It's a big difference between 17 and 23, yeah, yeah Yeah, there was it like I didn't understand that there were kind of like people like that in the world really So then I think the next time pretty much I went over to where where she lived and they did like Thai boxing and I ended up snapping the other well kind of he snapped the other ACL in it And then I remember when I was down on the floor He actually stood over me so they're not not so tough now big lad kind of thing and I was like what like Yeah, I assume. Yeah. Yeah, he's a grown man, right and you're yeah 17 18. Yeah with one snap TCL already Yeah, it was kind of it was kind of weird but my like my reaction to that because the whole like The the whole adoption thing anyway, like was messing with me emotionally the whole what am I doing with my future? I don't know and that and then all that kind of everything was thrown out of whack and so I decided to run away from here where living with parents now back and I was living in a house that my brother was gonna move into like it was like a building site kind of thing while I was waiting for surgery, but I wasn't going to I wasn't really going to school or anything. I was just basically and smoking a lot of weed and suicidal and watching a lot of porn as well and stuff like that to try and do it like that There was nothing that good about where I was and no Basically felt awful and wanted to die really. Yeah. Yeah, but yet not a in my experience not a terribly uncommon Right situation for a young man, especially someone who had had all of the things in your past that you would have Yeah, yeah, maybe so and maybe a little more extreme, but it's not a story It's not unusual in terms of what I hear from young men. Okay, right Yeah, and then I think I think just when I had my when I had my surgery and stuff I was motivated by anger to like build myself up like go back and fight this guy something, you know Like I was like, okay And that and that's when I got into training MMA and stuff and and that added structure into my life Which was good in a sense I mean like not good in the sense that I didn't pay any attention to like what I was doing academically Yeah, I got through and passed and stuff But I you know if I if I'd like got my if I'd had my head screwed on I would have like focused on that and set goals and But instead and I guess I focused on like training MMA and I was really angry and that that helped with the anger gave me Structure, but then I kind of changed over that time and I wanted to find more of a purpose for like like everything that had been Through I was like that there's meaning in this suffering that shaped me in a particular way And that's when I kind of came across Jordan Peterson say through the Joe Rogan experience and started listening to his lectures and I was like psychologically piecing myself back together but also looking for it not just to be like subjective like maybe like kind of like solipsistic or whatever the psychedelic experience was like like oh what I Consciously experience like reality could be very different to that, but I wanted some like grounding in reality for And Purpose meaning suffering that I you know to orient myself I suppose and then that was my inroad into Christianity eventually when I'm I was actually you know, um his Psychological whatever of the biblical story. Yeah The one on that started that started in May of 2017 Right. Okay, and I kind of followed him from about I think 2016 when there was that and Protesting the universe. Yeah, but there was a protest at the university I remember he kind of like gave a speech or something outside to the people were shouting at him and there was them Was it like smuggly puff or something? I can't Do it. I don't know. There was like a meme of this one girl who's really smug and did something. Yeah, that was a while ago and and Yeah, so so it was it wasn't necessarily what he was saying about God I mean the marduk stuff was all pretty cool and now that I'm a Christian I'm getting into like Figuring out near Eastern cultures and how that's in the text of the Old Testament as well That's actually come back But I think it was actually him like Genesis 50 20 what man intended for evil God intended for good And something about it just resonated with me. I was like, well, this is the God that's there is the God that heals like thousands of years ago put this story together with this Joseph guy in the terrible situation and Him through focusing on God like put it Mended all the brokenness between the family and stuff and it's like that's not the end of the story But it's like you just see that that's what's happening throughout time and I was like, well Maybe that is what God's working in my life. And that was my inroad like well find a Bible study and start exploring this Well, that's So then you found a Bible study and they were studying Ezekiel which is not an easy not an easy Introduction to the Bible by any means but it sounds like you funny thing as well because I think I think I probably turned up the first time and you know started coming out with all this kind of like Quoting Jordan Peterson in like the most conservative evangelical circle ever about archetypes and call But but you were new and you were a kid and so they wanted you there so now How did you a lot of people a lot of people when they talk to me they ask a question How do you go about finding a church how did you go about picking this this church or this pastor and what was that? Like for you. Yeah, so for me actually interestingly, it was the only church locally that does do a Bible study and now Now that I understand things a bit more I think like it would be very well I don't know. Do you know much about like the Church of England and what's going on in it and stuff? Yeah somewhat Yeah, it's a bit no expert so structurally it's a bit of a mess at the minute and It's very divided and between I'd say what you'd call like conservative circles and kind of liberal circles But you've got like the whole Like high Anglican Church Anglo-catholic down to like a low church and like you've got like feminist the theologians coming out of universities like no one's business while like So the whole thing's really difficult and I think there's a lot of that going on in local churches around where it's more about all of this kind of like and socially progressive kind of Christianity is a thing rather than Not that I can I can speak forever. You know, I can't speak for everyone who's at these churches and stuff but that's just what I've kind of experienced in and those kind of settings and So that this church had a Bible study on I started going along and the guy the vicar of the church he actually had come to and When I was like 14, he'd come to my high school and given a talk on something. I can't remember what it was about But I remember that it made me really angry Like I wanted to I was like as a 14 year old I was like I'll debate this guy and I'll tell him about how His god doesn't exist and how I know because I've got a GCSE in science like So so so that there's the only church doing a Bible study and you went to the Ezekiel and Is the church a large church a small church? and I think it's about 160 people in total that kind of like in membership and stuff and you probably get I don't know maybe like 32 60 depending on like so like Easter will be like 60 in church on a Sunday may it may be more sick and Like an average Sundays like 30 and but there's like evening services where you see other people who you've never seen before and all sorts But I don't know if that's like a typical size, but it's nothing like a mega church, right? Okay. Okay Do you live in a rural area the yet? Video you did how I became a Christian beautiful. Yeah, I know I loved watching the dog The fly The big moment is like I loved it. Well, I tell people almost every every videos made better by a dog. So it was yeah Yeah, Berkeley is awesome. And so yeah, it's kind of rural and it's more like Like a town so it's not it's not quite like a I mean where the church is it gets that's like the village end So that that's where like, you know, you've probably got you've got kind of like Farms and a golf course and stuff like that because there's more open space But the bit I'm in like a two or three miles up the road is more like townie and there's like a you know A little strip with some shops and cafes on and stuff. Yeah so so if you have you settled in as Regular church attendance been something that you've you're doing now or for you. I started going to church When was it like? April maybe last year. Okay And and again it was it was interesting from for me as someone who hadn't and had never done anything like that before and Because well, I think I think apart and I found this out talking to some family friends when I was younger I was interested in some family friends who were Catholic and I think I made them take me along to like a church service maybe for like a couple of weeks when I was about like five or something but and I got I got like turned off of God and religion and stuff. Basically, I think we were on holiday somewhere and I wanted to go in a cathedral and look around and it was like oh, you know it's all nonsense or something and I was like no and then from you know, and but I Yeah when it it was interesting because I was like the music and the because I was thinking of it phenomenologically Because that was where I was coming at like in terms of my worldview philosophy and stuff I wasn't thinking Metaphysically about is it does any of this have like an ontological truth to it? It was just about my experience and I was like well the harmony in the music the content of the lyrics is like really pure but there was like any even a further depth because I was like looking around and I was like well, there's Families here who yeah, I'm sure they've got their problems, but like they're they've got kids here with them So there's like the family unit all together around this one truth, which is really interesting And then I was like and then in the singing there's the harmony between a husband and his wife so like he's got the bass your tone she's got the higher tones, but the their Vocals in the singing like harmonizing together around this truth again Which was something that was kind of like beautiful and a different a different kind of level and I just remember I was like Looking at the stained glass stained glass window of You know like G of Jesus on the cross is these songs and I was thinking about the lyrics and I was going There was like a part of me that was like, oh no, I hate this don't join in and you know like and then there was a part of me that kind of like and that part kind of Changed over time is what it's really it was fascinating to kind of observe myself through that process I was like there's something going on here And I'm sure someone who's skeptical could say oh, yeah it's just a you know, just serotonin and that's what you know, put put you in the pleasure machine and you'd be a whatever religion but um Yeah, it was you know, it was it was really it was it was quite beautiful and and I Didn't care so much about the theology behind it I was just kind of like there's like a level of truth here that's really bizarre and being expressed in worship of Of God whatever that thing is that was my first thing. Yeah, did you did you find so you started going to church in April? Did you find? How did you find in terms of motivation going to church because I know a lot of people Now it doesn't sound like the your parents who raised you were churchgoers regular churchgoers. No, they weren't weren't at all. I Yeah, I mean I don't I think there was more of a cultural Christianity in the UK when they were young for sure like you know like in schools and stuff doing prayer and and to an extent I Think maybe my generation in primary school was the last generation to have that so We didn't have it as fully but we'd still have like Christian type hymns alongside like Pluralistic assemblies so you'd have like a seek in the next week or you'd have you know, but but you still have that one hymn Like Jesus gives us water of life. There's water You know And Lord of the dance as well, and that was the best one But it but it's some level, you know And this was what was interesting was like when I was coming to pray and stuff for the first time I was like this is the same experience that I had as a kid like this is Identical in its fundamental nature To that like I'm going right back to that and whatever I was coming and I was like, yeah This is this is really bizarre like yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well and again the the habit of church attendance for Because it's one thing people say okay. Well, I've I've conferred I've become a Christian one of the things that has happened in So I grew up and yet my father was a pastor went to church every week went to church twice on Sunday You know and and when you grow up doing this, I'm very much a Routinized person. I really like my routines and so going to church every Sunday It's just just what you do every Sunday But for people who don't necessarily grow up with that this idea of church attendance You know, there's some people who are like well well I go to church when I go to church when I feel the spirit move and Others of us are like I go to church because I don't feel the spirit move and that's what I need to do So so how has that been for you? Yeah, I mean I think there's there's sometimes I mean what I Enjoy more because I'm kind of I'm actually kind of an introverted person is I enjoy the Friday morning group because it's smaller and it's more You know, you can get into things a bit more and talk about them and stuff But and so that's that's always been my favorite thing But there's some times where like I'm like, yeah I just really want to go and like sing hymns and worship God and stuff like that There's other times where you know, there's no consistency with me other times. I'll be like, I just I just don't want to go I'm angry at God today. I don't I'm tired of I'm tired of like this church thing. It's become too too pharisaical too legalistic to You've got this on Monday this on Wednesday this That it's it's a bit of a discipline sometimes and sometimes it's an expression of how I'm feeling Sometimes it's like, you know, I'm really sad and I need to be around that community and I need to Come to God in prayer as well. And and so yes, it's interesting. It's it's never the same Okay, but the Friday the Friday morning group, that's the Bible study. That's that group seems to really hit you where you're at yeah, I think so I don't I um it's just it's just because I Think being able to have a dialogue about what's going on as well And there's something I think there's something dip like preaching is obviously very important and but there's something different about it to and Talking about what do we think this bit means and what's your idea? What's my idea have a bit of a back-and-forth and stuff? Yeah, well, you're you're obviously I mean, you're obviously smart. You're intellectual you're articulate. I mean this type of verbal Philosophical, I mean you're clearly bent. I mean, that's that's that's very much who you are. You're a reflective person you watch yourself So it doesn't it doesn't surprise me that that sort of a Bible study would be a thing that you really find a lot of gratification with and reward with and probably are are good at and so Right. Yeah, and and a worship service is a worship service is a very different experience the worship services are Even even those that have a fair amount of liturgy. They're still fairly passive You know, you can't talk back to the sermon although some people do sometimes in a small church Or in a in a passive aggressive email Maybe that's speaking some truth as a pastor that's right My favorite my favorite emails are the ones that I get and people write me and and don't write back. It's like Really needed to get that off your chest Really needed to get that off your chest did you yes, I had someone once in my church who would Monday mornings he would he would write me these emails just accusing me of of Basically calling him out in my sermons, even though I never mentioned his name and it's like well, okay I didn't really know that much detail about your life. But in some ways, it's a terrifically high compliment that the Sermon landed so personally on you. Yeah. Yeah, there you go speaking to the heart so so so I mean you continue to make some eat some videos and what what has now a little bit into into Into your let's say your identification of a Christian what what has what has been surprising you in terms of what's going on? I mean what one of the things that struck me about watching your video was I mean you spoke a lot about the anger and That's you know again as we you know, as we started talking often when people become Christians, there's sort of a I Forget how you said it's kind of a cage phase Like yeah, but but a honeymoon phase I mean there's there's a certain this is a new thing This is this is totally cool and this is remaking my life and and then after a certain point You know maybe a year or two, you know or something happens and then there's sort of a letdown and then it's sort of like well You know all of my all of my temptations didn't just go away by you know, I still get angry I mean because it takes it actually it actually takes a while. I I should say that I do know some people for whom their Christian conversion healed something Like it might have been drinking or anger or porn or something like that that people after it they had a dramatic conversion experience and after after that point this particular thing had no had no hold on them, but that's the exception in my experience the more common is that there's a there's a there's a stage that there's a lot of euphoria there's a lot of Enthusiasm and there's a lot of energy and freedom that comes with that But once once life starts sort of settling down again, then suddenly it's I still have some anger about You know for maybe things in my life that I didn't know about and I still have temptation So so how's that been going for you? Yeah, it's it's interesting and I think Every time that I think I've got Christianity I realize I've not like, you know, like it's like right. I've got and I don't know I've got now I've got the ontological argument the cosmological argument and the fine-tuning argument. So I've got it I've got like, you know, my worldview is fixed. It's a and it's like hang on. That's not Christianity That's like some lit some bit of philosophy or and it's like well now I understand this parable in a certain way and that relates to me in this way today But then like you're reading, you know like some of the things that Jesus is saying or that being said in the God and you and it just it relates to you then in a different way and it's like You know that keeps going even on the same passages even on the same parables and Or even in terms of like looking at well, what is the Bible? And so at first it was like this thing that's psychologically true then it was like this thing These are events that actually happened and then it's like well we look at textual criticism and stuff and there's even more There's the cultures that are bringing their worldview in God's relating to them and where they're in their time And it's like so so this isn't just like a simple God this is like a God that's Translatable across cultures and then when you get that there's like even more depth that's going on and I'm sure there's other levels that I'm gonna like get into you know, and So I found Like yeah, I keep I reach points where I'm like, yeah, I've got I've got this and then it seems like it's um it seems less special maybe in a way or less and then it's like Maybe then I'll lapse into into sin or I'll back so I have like these real weird internal battles with things with what I suppose a secular person would identify maybe is like depression or Anxiety or Identify those as depression and anxiety. Well, yeah. Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. No, it's just it's thinking like in terms of I agree that these things exist but like we we think in like a 21st-century materialist like Whereas, you know, someone would have just written a novel about a character who went through these experiences and this would have been like this is a way human life can be and yeah, like and and Yeah, so I think I think I have what you know, these things go on and it kind of changes me my theology shit and then I'll come I'll come back to the God afterwards of making big terrible mistakes because I you know, I still do and Again my you know, maybe I'll be more tolerant that time It was getting a bit too intolerant and it teaches me or maybe it yes, it's fascinating and sometimes I'll be like, yeah, I'm like Talking to people about pain and suffering. I'll be like I'm angry at God I'm not sure do I want anything to do with this Christianity? do I want anything to do with the God that creates a world like this and then there's a part of me that gets deeply challenged by that and I and Sometimes I'll be like yeah, this is all getting a bit too much I want to take a step back or but it's yes It is fascinating what's going on and it's beyond me But I completely agree that it's not always like It's not like boom and the world's fixed and your Christian walk is like perfect it's this maybe that's what people mean by like the systematic doctrine of sanctification or whatever, you know, but it's it's certainly It's certainly like a ongoing daily battle. It's not it's not just like I mean Theologically, it's all over at the cross But it's not like it's not like then okay the kingdom of heaven boom now We're in heaven because you because that thing happened. It's still back to a broken world sin still permeates you know your own heart is deceitful and wicked and you've still got the generational issues that are all like it's like a spider's web of interconnectedness in the world you go to work and The the guy you sit next to you's got problems in his life and he's offloading them on you and you're like it's not just perfect Yeah, yeah, no sounds sounds very right and very real and and and it's in It's in the midst it's in the midst of this battle and in the midst of this Banality often that God, you know, I Often well the first job the first job we were given it was gardener and a lot of this is like gardening And that while there's soil and then there's little bugs that are eating your plants and there are seasons and You're dependent on the weather and you don't really make you don't really make the the crops grow that you want and there are always weeds which are crops you don't plan on and All you do is sort of continue to work on the conditions that you know And then the thing is well, then God brings God bring produce because it's his garden so, you know and And you've you've continued to you've continued to make videos. I mean what prompted you to to to do anything on YouTube What was yeah, I mean, I think There's a few things going on there. I think one of which is like I I'm part of a generation that like watches YouTube and So like when I was maybe teenage years I used to watch to say like fitness youtubers or and I'd watch like and Joe Rogan podcast on YouTube or I'd watch and Whatever. It always be like going to YouTube and that's like Christian apologetic YouTube YouTube videos and stuff So there's always been something in me that's like I guess it's kind of like a fun medium a tool to play with is I'm sure there's probably Negative things in there as well like oh it'd be great to make money doing something that's fun and not you know like those are it's certainly incentives that are mixed in there, but I'm trying to I think I'm trying to keep it as something like authentic and Like just what I want to do so I'm not just gonna like make wacky thumbnails like Or whatever and I'll do it, you know, I'll do it as a jet like you won't believe what's in this new phone Myself and I think I just want to make things and like if people want to watch or whatever Then that's great and and try and use it to be Productive authentic maybe help other other people out make people who are exploring Christianity And I've considered doing so like doing like a short kind of Bible readings and stuff like that and some shorter Philosophical answers and objections and things I don't know I'm still just figuring it out seeing what I enjoy doing and what and where it goes could because I'm not I don't want to like box it off or or do anything professional because Why you know put the time or effort into yeah making quality content? Yeah Well, did anybody who watches my channel knows that quality quality definitely comes second in terms of my videos I just got right. I just got an email from a sound guy a church sound guys Like you gotta do something about the sound. It's a mess. It's like yeah probably Yeah, I should probably do something about it But you just don't have that much time to put into the the niceties of it Well, so you're 23 years old. Tell me tell me what some of your dreams are for your life. What would what would you like? What would you like to see happen in your life? Okay, so I am It's a bit of a joke, but I actually on my on my YouTube channel the other week I changed my biography to something that so Number one keep my sock drawer tidy to turn up to work on time Three overcome depression for get PhDs in philosophy and theology. I've can convert Joe Rogan to Christianity And then six revive Christianity in the West Good goals, you need big goals. That's good So, um, yeah, I don't know exactly I mean I really do you know I I enjoy theology and philosophy a lot whether I think there's a bit of a sunk cost thing and actually Academically studying though is saving the money to do it And so I'm I probably rather spend the money on the books that I'd need for those courses and read them in my own spare time while saving money in a job and then I can contribute to the church or charities whatever rather than Like spending, you know getting into loads of debt or whatever I don't really want to do that and And I guess it's just gonna be an ongoing thing because The the amount I enjoy study as well as something that's challenged my pride and eat because I think you can um You know that that could turn into an idol or it could turn into that could turn into a God itself So it's it's finding the right place to mix that in with life And if all I can talk about is like big fancy words, then it's not useful to like 99% of Christians in the world As well, it has to be translatable and it has to be so I'm just figuring out how I can best serve God with my broken personality and My interests might like like where does he want me or where have I been given life experiences to use them and stuff? so I don't I don't know exactly maybe revived Christianity in the West is too big of a goal, but You know to do my part in Clearing some of the groundwork and making way for whatever is going on is enough I don't think we're expecting you to do the whole thing But yeah doing your part, that's a that's a that's a good way to look at it and convert your roguing to Christianity I love that goal But no, but these are these are good goals I often I Run in my in my in my in my regional church business I run a little education program for for lay preachers and people who want to learn a little bit of theology and And I do it online Haven't really opened that up to my I haven't really opened that up to my channel Following I've kept that as a church thing at this point. I'll probably have to keep thinking about that But um, but I I do I think you're right, I don't think you should go into a Number of years ago. I I was asking myself questions about my ongoing education so I got a yeah, I got a I got a BA in history and then I got an MDiv and And that was that's pretty much been the end of my formal education And then I looked at doctor of ministry or maybe a PhD. I looked at you know kind of the What that would you know the hardship that might pose on my family and the cost and you really have to weigh those things carefully But at the same time you're are are you are you still single? Um, so I was with someone before I became a christian We actually bought a house together and she's living there. I didn't move in when she did she's Become a christian and we're kind of working things out as we go Okay, okay, but but my my point in that is the uh formal education it's It's really nice to get your formal education done before you have children Right, because once you have children, I mean they're expensive they they're a priority and so it's important so but I would say that if you if you can if you can find ways before your you know before you have children to to get To get some formal education and philosophy or theology I would encourage you to do it because it it seems to me you're interested you're gifted getting That the formal education what the formal education affords is usually open doors, you know if I If I had gotten a phd in In anything, you know, I might be teaching at a christian college or seminary university I don't know that that's necessarily my giftedness I think I am much more of a pastor rather than a scholar and and those really are two different domains scholars spend most of their time Doing scholarship their reading their writing their they're doing that some scholars like jordan peterson and and nt right also sort of have a public intellectual thing that they do pastors Pastors are sort of generalists. They have different Pastors have a wide variety of different interests and specialties Of course, i've taken this strange tour onto youtube over the last couple of years, right? but it's um, but it's it's varied and so again depending on What's feasible for you again? I I wouldn't go into debt You know a lot of debt trying to do this because that then would actually hamper your ministry Possibilities then suddenly you have to find a ministry job that affords a certain income and all of that but to the degree that you can continue to You know and I would you know to the degree that you can maybe find programs to learn some greek and some hebrew And do some of those foundational things that are harder to do You know, so a lot of my ministry has been ongoing education. I can read books. I can watch youtube I can write I can do all of that. I probably would have been better served if I had had um, you know perhaps some some more formality in some of my varied Um my varied grazing in these areas, but so I would I would just encourage you if a door opens You know don't be because it strikes me watching some of your videos and listening to you talk You're gifted you're interested any preparation you can get Yeah, would would probably do you well over the long term Yeah, I mean I kind of I the problem is so like what my schedule has been like for the past few months has been I'll wake up very early. I'll do like an hour of bible study then an hour of philosophy Then I go to work and i'm working full time But i'm also doing a part-time degree in software engineering that my company's sponsoring me to do And then in the evening at oh, yeah, and i'm running a bible study at work. So i've got to do like Prep for that and then in the evening it will be either like music group practice or i'm doing like the northwest partnership ministry training course part time which is like um a couple of hours on expository uh, whatever in the bible and stuff um Or it will be like a home group or something And then i've got this kind of messy broken relationship and i've been learning about how that's all then detracting from that and also like i'll become a crazy person and So and then i'm like, well, yeah I'd really love to go to uni and be able to spend those eight hours in work doing like that two hours in the morning all day but then i'd have to empty all of my savings into that and Would it be feasible for where i'm at with the so it's just too I think at least at the minute if it like you say if the if the opportunity was there i'd love to but there's There's stuff to go through and I can't just put myself and what I want like You know, I can't I can't just go for it without any consideration. I don't think where i'm at at the minute No, absolutely and I think you're one of the things one of the weaknesses of Say going through a traditional track like I did I don't have another skill set that I could work by vocationally in right and you do and that's a that's a blessing So yeah, no, I think it sounds like you're you're being a good steward of your time You're working hard to do that and and you'll you'll figure it out. I mean things things change stuff comes up opportunities arise doors close um, and and good for you for trying to be a A good steward of this stuff. So no, I I just you know, I want to encourage you it sounds like it sounds like you know, certainly your your conversion to christ has Clearly been an upgrade for your life, but not without its challenges. Yeah. Yeah, I think so And it's the fact the thing that struck me is that it's real as well, you know, yeah it's not just like You know and i've seen this this is the funny thing about some uh, So some of the kind of like um atheist channels and stuff you watch them and they go. Oh, yeah And this is so this this is the type of person that thinks the spiritual warfare is real or whatever, you know, like ha ha ha and it's like Because what they're doing is they're playing on like the caricature from the simpsons or something but you read something like Okay fiction cs lewis's screw tape letters, but you start watching your own psychology and how life is and if you say if you if you start slipping back away from church and away from your bible reading in christ and then You just start following what your heart wants and stuff. You watch where your life goes and then when you're in that pit, you're like Wow, that's uh, this is this is actually a real bad thing like like objectively bad And it's because of all that stuff Is it it's interesting that it is actually real the stuff that it's described even though Sometimes it's describing it in like weird two thousand year old cultural terms that you don't quite get or that have been you know like through two thousand years of weird catholic and medieval european culture have been changed or means something but It is like real one. Yeah, you know, that's been the that's just been the strangest thing overall. Yeah Well, you've been you've been gracious in my in my curiosity as I as I noodle around in your life and Just satisfying my own curiosity, but I don't know if you had anything you wanted to talk about or any Questions you had for me or um, yeah, I don't know. I um, I don't really know what it is that You you know other than being a pastor and stuff. What is what is it that you do then? You just got your own church and you kind of Well, I I wouldn't call it my church. Oh, yeah for me, but um It was no i'm a pastor in sacramento, california Okay, and it's uh, my father was a pastor and my grandfather was a pastor So i'm a third generation minister. I'm in a denomination called the christian reform church, which is a dutch calvinist denomination interesting and I it's a it's a very interesting little church extremely diverse ethnically culturally educationally Um It's in a distressed part of sacramento a lot of group homes a lot of homeless but my the the church I grew up in my father's church was In a very different place in paterson because paterson is quite different from sacramento, but I was in the larger new york metropolitan area So most of my life i've been involved in urban ministry. I was a foreign missionary for a while with haitians in the dominican republic About about two years ago two and a half years ago now I I too bumped into jordan peterson online and and I thought that I thought the pronoun thing that that just kind of surprised me because I thought why would a psychologist psychology professor at university of toronto be Be complaining about the the pronoun stuff and then I saw its biblical lectures and that really caught my interest Right. Yeah, what is going on here first? I thought well, maybe some evangelical that's sort of you know, there's always an odd one out there that kind of Lived at university of toronto and I listened to his biblical lectures and now he's not an evangelical. That's for sure and but he was he was addressing a bunch of deeper questions for me I was wrestling with I was basically wrestling with sort of this two worlds problems that a lot of evangelicals have you read You know, so if you read if you read genesis 1 you have this cosmology Which basically is sort of a flat earth and a bowl on the top, you know Affirmament and the clouds and so on within the firmament and sort of god's temple above the firmament And so there you've got a cosmology in genesis 1 but just about everybody in my church imagines Ourselves on this ball floating through space going around the sun. So I was I was just always wrestling with these two things and Yeah, and i've been Reading one of my favorite books is cs lewis's book miracles, which is a book that I read once or twice a year And and so I was and I was playing with youtube A member of my church named freddy. You can find the freddy and paul show on my channel a member of my church named freddy uh says to me one day because he's he's on permanent disability and and I take him out to lunch maybe once a month or so and He and maybe a buddy or two and and he says to me one day he says pastor paul You and me should do a tv show. It's like yeah freddy. I don't know how this is gonna happen I said i'll tell you what freddy i'll uh, I'll use my cell phone i'll make little videos and i'll post it on my youtube channel We'll call it the freddy and paul show so i've been doing that for a while Okay, interesting and then I was and then I saw jordan peterson was kind of interested in that and I was noticing You know a lot of people like yourself who became very interested in christianity but I thought Where are they gonna go after listening to jordan peterson? How are they gonna? And and so then I decided to make a video and I had 15 subscribers on my youtube channel and within a couple of weeks I had a few hundred and then a Then a thousand and I thought Well, I wasn't looking for this but people kept writing me and showing up at my church and wanting to talk to me and so then I thought well I if i'm a pastor, I guess I should be a pastor to These people too and not just the people at the zip code of my church, so yeah Yeah, so so that whole thing has that whole thing has gone for the last couple of years and it's been it's been great fun and so that's how I met esther o'reilly and and then she she sent me to your channel and There's I don't know if you've been to the discord server yet. You probably don't have time No, I I don't I yeah, I don't really use discord and there's um, there's a guy who's What like three or four years younger than me in the church and it's interesting because he's like more conservative than me So that generation kind of perplexes me what is going on there? Um, but yeah, he uses like discord and stuff a lot So he's invited me to like the jordan peterson book reading club or something from the subreddit And he's like, yeah There's like this many of us so we can get a voting majority of christians and then we'll make these non-christians read christian books every week And yeah, right that'll work Um Now there's a little discord server associated with my channel and there's your you know, if i'll check it out If either of us just post this video then you'll get a you'll get a bunch of the people Commenting and saying oh you got to come to the discord server because it's sort of become a little a little community right So yeah esther has esther has posted your videos there and Uh, okay. Yeah, I thought like when I was looking at the analytics on my channel occasionally Like there'll be a random day where I get like 60 or something views on my uh on that video and i'll be like Well something's happened there Well, if I if I post if if we decide if you give me permission to post this on oh, yeah Like i'm happy to yeah happy happy. Yeah. All right. Well, you'll get a you'll get a bump. You'll get a bump That's usually what happens and then and then some others so then what I did was people started Contacting me and talking to me and it started having conversations and then I thought I other people i'm talking to would probably benefit from this conversation So I asked permission to record and permission to share and I started sharing conversations like these and then more people are like Well, can we do a conversation online? It's like okay, and they would tell me their story and and then I had all these people and they kept I kept having Conversations multiple times and there wasn't enough time for new people. So I told them. Okay, if we've talked twice I'm going to put a pause on y'all And and so then they started making their own youtube channels a bunch of them and so it's been a it's been a fun Yeah, yeah, it's been a cool thing. That's cool Yeah, that's interesting. I was gonna say um, I I was interviewed up by a catholic podcast the other day And I didn't give well, it wasn't like a it wasn't like an argument I just like was asking him questions and stuff I can so if protestants are going to come over that'll be the first thing they probably see if that's by then And then they'll be like, oh no Well, church of england is sort of nice because it's it sort of sits on the Sits on the hump between protestants and catholics and that's why I was kind of comfortable in that conversation to be like Well, what are your views on these things rather than be like, you know, sola fide sola granit Not that yeah, I don't know I think um from That like I was saying I I got too confident in those um What you know like a conservative evangelical kind of view of inspiration stuff like that And I recently read um, for example, peter enns book. I don't know if you've come across any I have read quite a bit of peter peter enns how the bible actually works and that was interesting because that kind of I mean like I think he's more liberal than I would be but it's interesting I'm enjoying like looking at how different people view inerrancy, for example, or how different people view these things because I don't want to be like um I don't want to have so much certainty in the wrong systematic theology That then I start pushing that into people's lives and it affects how I like do it and like what do I know? You know, I've like it's the bible. That's true. Not Not my um my specific interpretation. I like i'm trying to avoid um, like Post-modernism and there's no real truth, but it's like um, I i'm certainly fallible and it's like recognizing that and trying to be humble With the way that I I get at things I think yeah, I my my favorite well I I liked pete enns first book. So I don't know how much you know about peter enns and his story I only know that he was at westminster seminary and for some reason I thought he was at cambridge university You know, yeah, but he was at westminster seminary and got fired for something being like not in line with their doctrines and yeah So so there's there's in the united states. There's westminster east in philadelphia and westminster west in southern california Okay, he he was at westminster east which that seminary itself There's so much history and all that there was so back in the day. There was princeton seminary and And princeton when princeton seminary went liberal there was a split and the conservative faction of of princeton left princeton and actually joined some crc guys And and established westminster east and they've been they've been a conservative reformed Theological seminary in philadelphia also with um, also with some some real credibility in terms of doing urban ministry, so roger greenway who Is a is the father he was a professor of mine at seminary he taught there for a while Uh tim keller obviously was quite deeply formed by not only gordon conwell in the east but westminster east so pedenz was there yeah, pedenz was there and he He he wrote this book his first book which is Which is it's of his books. It's one I I really enjoyed Which which basically looks at jesus as the word of god and the bible is the word of god and and I thought it was I thought it was quite a good book inspiration and incarnation one. Yes. Yes. Yeah I thought it was quite a good book. Um, but Westminster east is a is a very interesting place harvey khan had been there for a number of years And I remember when I was a seminary student reading harvey khan's book and roger greenway was was a professor there and I I sort of challenged roger greenway about you know, i'm not quite sure how westminster Keeps both of these sides together. Well pedenz sort of got caught right in that Right in that issue and my and pete now teaches at um eastern Eastern college, I think it's now eastern university I think I think i've been i've been i haven't He dances, yeah I haven't been real happy with a lot of the stuff that he's been writing lately, but he's yeah but you've but if you're going to deal in these areas you have to You have to work through the issues that that the different sides are at play And I think pete will will very much show you a lot of those issues and concerns So have you seen his um? Yeah, I agree with that. Um, have you did you see his interview on? Uh t-jumps channel who's like a an up-and-coming kind of atheist or No No, it's that was that was quite interesting. It was uh last week and it was he basically said Um kind of like yeah, there's um, there's no good reasons to believe in god and I don't even know what the bible says Uh, but I believe in god. It was like it's really like kind of is that what peter ansel saying? Like to summarize i'm paraphrasing that I don't I mean it was it was interesting Maybe i'm being a bit too harsh there but um you know it was it was very different from um Any what I don't have the line I would have expected any other kind of christian to go down with her Well, and that's and that's sort of been my problem with pete ends for the last number of years is that's how he sounded to me and and he's sort of He's sort of taken on this so so part of what's happened in the united states is Is you have this progressive evangelical camp that has sort of taken off and he's sort of become a a um A landmark for that group and and and there you've got like the the political divide playing into the religious divide Yes, yeah. Yeah and and and that and that's also sort of what got me going in some of this stuff because I had always because my father pastored a church in paterson new jersey And so I grew up, you know in in a In a mostly a black church. My father's church was mostly a black church. And so politically I was always More left than most of the crc or evangelicals, right? um And I was I was for women in church office and all of those in terms of christian church kind of the left Things on the left side of that and then as the the same-sex marriage debate was was going on Well, I was you know, certainly interested in in looking at you know Kind of doing the biblical spade work in terms of how are we supposed to think about that? culture in the bible and all of that stuff and and I began to notice increasingly that the those who were Promoting it in the denomination Seemed to be using Arguments that Almost seemed of a different religion than yeah Than christianity and I began to call this progressive liberationism that this And then I watched progressive evangelicals kind of doing the same thing and as I saw this develop it was like I you know, i'm more than happy to have those conversations But I think it's important that we recognize Some of the decisions we're making in order to achieve some of these goals And think through those decisions and then in my denomination. I was rather publicly Suggesting that instead of just jumping to questions about same-sex marriage maybe we have some deeper confessional questions about how the bible works and what we what we believe we need to be saved from and and and that's where you know, I just sort of saw pdens as sort of the biblical division of progressive evangelicalism and the trajectory that they were taking and so I you know, i've read a number of his books since then but again my My favorite of his books is is his first one So I will definitely watch this video because i've sort of been keeping an eye on him But since I started the youtube thing I yeah had to keep my eye on youtube type things Yeah, I think you'll I think you'll find it interesting. Um that that whole thing's have you have you seen much of um, What the modern day debate channel's doing? I was just on it. Uh So that's a go that I see that as like a current cultural move kind of thing where Maybe my generation may be a bit younger Like that's the thing that's like the hype thing at the minute. I think you know, you'll have like inspiring philosophy versus It was like vegan gains or something the other day on yeah, like these um Almost like pop apologist or pop atheist Whatever Figures on youtube who are then coming to debate each other on a platform like that It's very I I find that really interesting over the past month the way that they're promoting themselves and doing things um and it is like um You can go back like three or four months and you can see a comment say by uh t-jump saying Oh, i'd love to debate on this channel and now he's on there like every week and he's got like a few thousand subscribers Like so people uh, yeah, it's very it's been interesting to watch that on what's going on there I'll have to i'll have to take a you know, so I I my first one on that channel. I talked to shannon and I noticed you've got a I think Yeah, yeah, i'm gonna have a conversation with her at some point. I think I think I think actually that that video didn't go well Just partly because we we couldn't all sort of find each other in that conversation within that hour But the second one the second one that I did I did with with vosh Okay, and and that conversation that debate went very very well, I was very pleased with it It didn't get antagonistic. I thought we were both able to to make our points and we were both able to not talk past each other and so I you know after the first one I was kind of like Oh, I don't know if I want to do any more of these and then james contacted me and I didn't really want to say no And yeah, but then I said yes and it went it went very very well. So I can't I can't do debates for the life of me. I just can't do that for like I just want to have relaxed conversations about like Ideas and like i'm happy to go back and forth about ideas, but I can't do the whole Psychology and rhetoric playing a role in how it's then perceived by people who are viewing and stuff. It has to be like You know, it has to be about the ideas themselves. I can't deal with the extra layer of uh, Um soft history basically, yeah, well, it's you know, give yourself some time. Um, I mean You're you're I mean it sounds weird, but you're only 23 and i've had uh, I've had 30 i've had 33 more years than you and so I was talking to a 25 year old And I I felt kind of bad because I thought that's not really fair Um, yeah, maybe I don't think he felt that but yeah. Yeah, you know When I was 18, you know, I could have I I used to be able to debate then when I knew When you knew so much Oh, that's funny well i'll i'll definitely take a look at that pdens t jump thing and i'll take a i'll maybe i'll take some more i'll look at some of these other um people that's been on james's channel and maybe if I find someone that i'd like to talk to because I I I Yeah, I i'm not afraid of i'm not afraid of contention and I I think i've got a gift for For helping connect for connecting with people even if they have very different um I mean as long as as long as you know if people have uh, Have got a particular game that they're playing and you don't walk straight into that lamp post with your head down Yeah, yeah, yeah, great epistemology and stuff. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's true. That's true. I'll take another look at that On a scale of zero to 100 how certain are you of that? Yeah. Yeah Well, I again again once you get older you A lot of these tricks aren't new Okay, and so if you've seen them if you've been around the block kind of things, it's kind of like Yeah, i've been around that block. I I can i'll meet you over at the other side because I know exactly where you're going it's just it's just a function of when I was in the dominican republic they they had a saying that i'll translate it into english that the um The devil the devil isn't smart because he's the devil. He's smart because he's old and That's interesting what you get in time. Yeah, so I'll definitely i'll definitely check that out. That's very interesting to me Well good any any other things you wanted to touch on or I don't know if you want to wrap this up now or Yeah, I don't mind. Um, i'm trying i've i've got um, have you ever watched any of greg sadler's videos on youtube? Yes Yeah philosophy guys philosophy So he's coming on my channel in a week. So i've been trying to read like all of anselm's works in a week to uh so i'm prepared to talk to him about anselm, which I won't be but uh Yeah, that's uh, that's what i'm doing at the minute. Um So I guess i'm gonna try and finish kurdeus tomo tonight and Oh my goodness. Oh my goodness now now, let me talk to you a little bit more about joe rogan Did you see joe rogan and richard darkens? Um, oh i've only seen clips from it. Yeah, I I saw the clip on the did jesus exist bit and I saw Oh, there was another clip on like like two 10 minute clips. So that's I don't know how much of a fraction of the thing that is but um Yeah, i'm sure that'll be interesting and I don't know because like so say from my jiu-jitsu days And these are still good friends, but i've got friends who are who have been in those mma circles who are also satanists, um also ex-freemasons uh, or current freemasons when I was becoming a christian and um, I was getting a like a like a I was using I don't want to be too specific here But I was using someone's uh private like they do like a private services thing And I was using that and they were like have you thought about becoming a freemason? Because I was talking about jordan peterson and the bible stories and stuff. That was in that was interesting I was like that's weird that that's come up and Yeah, so I I wonder about joe what is in that? I I know it like There's too many weird crazy conspiracy theories, but I do also know that there is like Real organized weird stuff that goes on and he holds far too many weird positions and has far too many connections You know when he comes out with some of these things, I think like Like what's really what is is there something? I don't know. Maybe maybe this is like, um, you know We're gonna get into black helicopters and is it? But I do what like, you know when I when I see some of the conversations he has It seems almost It maybe it can't it can't be it could just be um, but it seems like orchestrated misinformation sometimes Which is very interesting like that cut, you know, like that constantine invented the bible or that So some of the like some of the ideas I got about the bible From it various interviews he's done where he'd bring it up and I remember with him His stephen crowder interview in like maybe 2016 and his milo unopolis interview where they were like Milo was like you're not that stupid and this was while he was an atheist and I was like, you're not that stupid joe You know, there's more to the bible than that and he was getting very angry at this. It was really interesting And um, the same with stephen crowder when he pushed back on like christianity and stuff and stephen was like yeah I'm a christian in it like it got weird at that point. There was like a tension in the conversation and So I do wonder what's going on Wait, like he's you know, he's in deep in that psychedelics culture in the fighting culture in the big money culture in the And the comedy culture. Yeah. Yeah Yeah, so that's really interesting I i've i've I didn't even i'd never even heard of joe rogan until After someone had said oh you should watch jordan peterson on joe rogan. I'm like, who's joe rogan? I don't know who joe rogan is it's like the biggest podcast in the world or something. Yeah, and it's like holy cow And I wonder how much of an influence that's had up because like even at work there's like um You know like in in the uk and a weird kind of suburban part and like there's loads of people who are just listening to joe rogan's podcast while they're doing their work all day Yeah, that's like going into their consciousness forming their opinions on certain Political points and things like that now i'm not getting into like, uh, this is some big mk ultra scheme to control But i'm saying i'm saying like it's just interesting how this stuff works like um, if you're like like look at cany's new album or whatever how that's like influencing culture and people and stuff and this is like If christianity is true and there are like um Worldview influences that are either going to be more in line with god or more in line with like not god That's a world view influence more in line with not god. That's like permeating culture quite is to a big degree Yeah, very interesting. I I You know, I don't I i'll watch joe rogan if he has a guest on that's interesting to me Or if a bunch of people who watch my channel say, oh you have to watch this one. So then yeah, i've learned that Having a youtube channel of a certain size is about the best um It's about the about the best research filter I could have because people know my interests and they say oh you have to watch this Sure, and so then I know and that's how that's how I found you Yeah, yeah, that's interesting. That's interesting. Um, yeah, I think for me I find it actually difficult to deal with the because I get every so often random like, you know, like um, It's always called like satan satan face or something like commented on your video and you go to it and it's like some You know some really vitriolic thing. You're like, what is this not like I actually find Random comments from crazy people very difficult to deal with on youtube. So I i'm a Yeah, they're there I it was so funny because I did that modern day debate and in my i've got i've got about 12 000 subscribers now And my youtube section in my channel and the discord service the little corner of the internet that is sort of colonized around me Is just marvelous and so for the most part I haven't so it's actually my fault you see that i'm Attracted well, no because some of these people came early and and so what i'm saying is that i've only I've only banned three people from the comments section And you have to do you have to be pretty egregious for me to ban you because i'll i'll let people go a long ways if but um, but this one person this one person I did ban because She just I didn't know it was a woman until okay She got on the modern day thing. It's a paul vanderclay bans people from his comment section to say bad things about jordan peterson. It's like That's not why I banned you lots of people say bad things about jordan peterson, but um, but i've to me it's been I i've been completely blessed in terms of the people that have followed my channel and the level of the level of the level of the comments in terms of um intellectual engagement with my material in my channel, I I think part of it is that my videos are so Terribly bloated and meandering and long that I weed out Um a lot of people because they watch for a little while They're like i'm not gonna watch anymore this and then they just go away. And so it's just the uh, the durable ones that stay so Yeah, my experience has been good The longest thread i've got at the minute is um on So on the one where I made about why I became a christian There's this one guy who's always um He always watches um, like pine creek and t jump watches all all their stuff because I always see him in like the live chats And things if I if i'm ever on those and uh, so I got um Instead of growing up you embraced a feel-good cult and then I said I became a christian not an atheist like ha ha good joke nathan And then yeah, there's like just this ongoing thing I left it some other person came in and this person's like this person's a he's a piss-port human and all that And and then someone else comes in he's like like, uh, do you want to engage in reasonable dialogue? He's like, ah This is really weird. Like what's going on with this? Uh, Why would someone over a series of weeks be so vitriolic? to go on a stranger's YouTube channel and continue to just Spew hatred. Yeah, really weird bizarre. Yeah, but they're out there They are out there And you just have to wonder and sometimes i'll just leave a comment like Okay, so maybe all these terrible things about me that you've said are true Why are you bothering with me? You know, just yeah just There's nothing else on youtube to watch. Um So I need to start becoming uh, like, you know, like a more charismatic pentacostal and uh rebuking people in the name of june Cast out that spirit. Yeah So Anyway, nathan it's it's been a pleasure to talk. Yeah. Yeah, no problem. And um, yeah and I'll uh, i'll thank esther for for sending you my way. Yeah. No, thanks for having me on I really appreciate it and um, you know If there's anything future that comes up i'll i'll be in touch because there might be more profitable conversations to be had at some point Maybe super just you you have my email address just reach out anytime Great. Cheers. Thanks. Take care. Bye. Bye