https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wQ9iTtaNRbc

 That's good. All right. So, so, so those of you who've been around the channel a long time will remember this fella and he's actually got a playlist. So I'll put this in the playlist. So if you find the playlist, you can go back and see our, our first conversations. This is Nathan Jacobs and how, how should, how, how should, how do you want to introduce yourself? What, what exactly are you, Nathan? That's a good question. Let's say, let's, let's do this. I'll say I'm a, I'm an artist turned scholar of philosophy and religion, turned filmmaker. And so all of those things are still true of me, still create art. And you can see some of it behind me here. And I use that in a variety of ways, mostly these days, you know, commercial ways related to movie making, but you know, I have done stuff, private collectors or illustration, things like that. But I left art school to go on this long journey of exploring big questions, God, the afterlife and things like that. And we talked actually in one of the, one of my early appearances about how that was catalyzed. Yeah. That journey was catalyzed. And that journey was really driven, you know, not so much by any interest in a career in academics. I would have been the least likely candidate at the time to have a career. Any sort of scholarship, but the drive for, you know, behind those questions really sort of compelled me, propelled me forward in ways that led to, you know, all sorts of degrees in philosophy and church history, systematic theology, historical theology, art, all that. And culminated in the fact that I did become a professor of philosophy and religion. Had a very successful, you know, publishing career. I've got, you know, three books with a fourth on the way. I've got, you know, 30 plus refereed articles and things like that. And, you know, I'm pretty well known in certain circles like Kant's scholarship or even Eastern patristic metaphysics. And that ultimately led me into Eastern orthodoxy, right? So all of that, you know, that long multi-year journey is kind of an enemy of Christianity in many ways. And then eventually discovered the Easter church fathers that led me down the path of orthodoxy. But along the way, I was also dabbling in a variety of different things related to art, right? So while I was doing my grad work, I worked in the video game industry. And I did concept art and storyboarding and, you know, CGI cut scenes and things like that, which then all of that led me to interact with film people. So there are a number of folks moving around the country because of different tax incentives at the time where different states were trying to draw, you know, business out of, you know, California. And so I was bumping into them in Michigan and Chicago, you know, wherever it was. And so through that, I was fascinated at how many of them didn't care whether I went to film school, right? They only cared about my talent. So being able to do concept art story or pre-visualization, things like that, a lot of them were very willing to work with me. And so I started dabbling on the side with film, right? I did a little short film. I raised funds to do, you know, an independent feature film, you know, in the summers and all that, bootstrapping the whole thing. And then eventually I was approached about doing a documentary, which I think that was the first thing you ever saw for me before we met. Yep. Which was- Actually, I saw you with the, you did this talk for a group of clergy. That's right, right. The Midwest, yeah, the Midwest Clergy Convocation. I think that was in Chicago. Yep. And they put it up on YouTube. Yeah, so they ended up, yeah. So they ended up bringing me out because of that documentary. So I had done a documentary on the religiously unaffiliated or the nuns, the worst branding ever, since everybody thinks you're talking about Catholic nuns. Then they're like, Catholic nuns who don't believe in God? I don't understand. Sounds great. It sounds great, right? They're sociologists, not marketing people. You can give them a little slack on that. Anyway, my documentary was on the religiously unaffiliated and it was very sympathetic because that's where I came from, right? And I wanted to offer a different sort of perspective on the one hand to folks who maybe aren't, have never dissociated from religion and they're wondering what's going on with my kid or with this other person I know. And so I wanted to offer an insight into that world and what those folks are really like. And obviously there's a spectrum, but I wanted to offer that sort of sympathetic portrait. And at the same time for the religiously unaffiliated, I wanted to offer them a glimpse down the road that just because you've dissociated from religion doesn't mean you are forever without religion. Your journey might lead you back like it did for me. And so that was the documentary I did. And then you're right, the Midwest Clergy Convocation asked me to come and do a series of talks on the religiously unaffiliated, on the nuns, in order to talk about worldview, how do you engage them? What do they think? All that sort of stuff. Yeah, and that was the one you commented on. And then we popped on the phone and chatted and the rest is history, here we are. So anyway, but going back to my journey, right? Within in terms of artist to scholar, then to filmmaker, after doing that documentary, I was at a showing of it and it was a showing specifically for different philanthropists. And some of them were rather fascinated with what I was doing with film. The fact that I'm this Orthodox guy who's also a philosopher and an artist, but now I'm making movies and things like that. And so I was approached really sort of in tandem, on the one hand, the metropolitan, of the Antiochian Orthodox Church, had watched the screening of the documentary with me and he asked me to consider leaving film, right? Or I'm sorry, leaving my professorship, leaving scholarship, not scholarship, leaving teaching, in order to do film. I was sitting there with him, he's like, I am obsessed with what you've done here. You need to keep on. I need you to make films. And I said, will you pay me for that, your eminence? He said, no, but I will pray for you. And I said, all right. Well, and then I was in this gathering with these philanthropists and things like that who were intrigued. And so that started some conversations with prospective investors who were willing to take a bit of a gamble. I was in development on what seemed to be a very commercial project. I'm convinced it still is, but it's still in development all these years later. But I started to work on that one and that one opened up a lot of different doors for networking, got me into, you know, I ended up sitting down in Lions Gates headquarters. I was meeting different, I met the head of and worked with the head of Walden Media. I met this fellow, Sean Devereux, who is a big visual effects guru, who is now moving into producing and all that. And anyway, that ultimately opened up a host of different doors that led to an opportunity to actually, officially leave behind, you know, the entire sort of academic world, at least in terms of an employment, in an employment sense, and start to do films. And so basically for the past couple of years, I've had a first look deal with, essentially it was initially, it was initiated by Lions Gate and a couple of its subsidiaries moving forward. It's now basically, you know, moving forward in conjunction with Amazon Studios. And so my job, throughout that early evolution, I was one of the first hires that they made in terms of, you know, content creators. And I signed on to basically sit there and pitch ideas and work on projects and anything they like, they, you know, they contract for development and you see if it moves into creation and things like that. So the past couple of years, that's what I've been doing, at least on the film side. But as I said, I still do scholarship. I've got a forthcoming book on Live is on the problem of evil. I still, you know, do stuff with art sometimes in the film, but also sometimes outside of that. So I would say, you know, if anybody's played Dungeons and Dragons, I'm a triple class, right, artist, scholar, filmmaker, but, you know, which is, you know, it's a lot to juggle, but at least right now it seems like maybe it's converging into something coherent. Well, and then we met up again. I mean, we had a couple of conversations and you got busy with stuff and then life went on for both of us. And then we go to this art conference and, oh, we're gonna both be at this art conference. And neither of us, I think, quite understood exactly what we were doing there. But let's hang out a little bit and get reacquainted and catch up and see what's going on. So, and then a lot of thoughts during the conference. That seems like a long time ago now. It does, it seems like ages ago. It does. Any, well, we can talk about that a little bit. Then I wanna pick up where we were just kind of talking about because the, we seem to, well, maybe we'll jump into this. We seem to be at an inflection point in terms of film and public art. You know what? What Lord of the Rings got going and Marvel ran into the ground. As that arc has seemed to have sort of set. Now with Dune, there's a question, is Dune going to become a new Star Wars? I kinda doubt it. I think it's a little too dark for most people. And then we were talking about, we were talking about sort of direct to public art, which of course for me, I stumbled into this thing because I made some videos about Jordan Peterson and I'm still not exactly sure what I stumbled into because I don't really see myself as a content creator. I've been more of a conversation partner for people who want to do stuff. But now you've, yeah, you're sort of a triple class. When you look out at movies and of course now streaming is a big thing. And we seem to be at, I mean, it seems like every 30 or 40 years, the industry sort of hits a corner and a brick wall and doesn't know how to get out of it. And maybe the beginning of this current iteration was Lord of the Rings and the end of it was Rings of Power. It sort of book ended. They do book end, that's right. So when you look out at the, well, at the question of film, because there's of course popular and art and the interesting relationship between them. What are you seeing as sort of where the culture and art are sort of sitting? Right. Well, I'd say a couple of things. I do think you're correct that Hollywood goes through these cycles and then it all starts to converge in a certain place where everybody's doing the same thing. Everybody's out of ideas and it's in a rut. And the audience gets, audience starts to be disappointed, to put it mildly, discontent. And Hollywood is flailing to try to find the next big thing. But it's funny, I remember meeting a producer at the first film festival I ever went to. And we were talking through different pitches and ideas and things like that. And one of the things that he said is he said from the outside, Hollywood is innovative, the risk taking, right? They're, anyway, he gave a series of these descriptors and then said, but from the inside, they have no creativity, there's no innovation, they're risk averse, they wanna find something that worked once and they wanna duplicate it and just manufacture it. And so you start to see that, right? And I think one of the things that you saw was part that we're in right now is just IP, right? Everything is about find a book that worked and buy it, right? Find a show that worked in the 80s and remake it, right? Shoot, we'll find an action figure that didn't even have a show and we'll turn that into a show. A board game, sure, let's turn a nostalgic board game into a thing. So everything is about just recycling, finding some IP that has some nostalgic value or has some built-in audience and just manufacture something with a little bit of a fresh twist on it. So that's part of what's going on. I think you're also starting to see that in the manufacturing turn, we're hitting a point where we're at the end of an arms race. So with the streamers, streaming was a thing where people are like, really, you're gonna stream stuff? And if you've never watched the documentary, The Last Blockbuster, it's worth a watch because you'll see the way in which Netflix actually went and tried to strike a deal with Blockbuster and Blockbuster basically laughed him out of the room. That's absurd, right? And now we're all like, oh yeah, Blockbuster, I remember that, right? And Netflix is the big thing. Anyway, there's more twists and turns to that story. There's other reasons Blockbuster went under, but nonetheless. But the point is once streaming became obviously the new thing, and people's viewing habits were gonna change, there emerged this arms race of how do we, which one? Obviously people aren't gonna subscribe to five streamers. That would never happen, that's crazy. They're gonna subscribe to one or two. So let's just do this massive spend billions and billions and billions on content to see if we can outspend the other guys and they'll collapse and we'll be one of the last ones standing. And then we can sort of contract our spend and make up for it. And unfortunately that didn't really pan out. Most of the streamers that were in the arms race are there and the number only seems to be increasing. And so, and yet at the same time, that's creating a little bit of a crisis in a couple of ways. One's it's creating a financial crisis where all the streamers are having to contract because they need the business model to work and an arms race only works until the guys collapse. And so there's a bit of a financial crisis there going on in terms of content. It's also a bit of a crisis in terms of the amount of content that you need in order to keep viewers present. And then also with that, one of the things that's interesting, and I know this from talking to inside managers and things like that, I don't know how public any of this information is, but a lot of the streamers and people like that are starting to look to movies again. Because what they're realizing is that even if you spend gobs of cash, you're spending 5 million, 10 million an episode, whatever on a show, it really doesn't move the needle in terms of profit. It just keeps people present and subscribing. So you're still sort of just breaking even in terms of that spend. You're not making any profit. And what you really need is like a stranger things hit, right, in order to draw people in and increase your numbers. And so all of a sudden they're like, well, maybe movies weren't such a bad idea, right? You can go out and actually make a profit on those. So there's a lot of shift like that. So on the one hand, there's this sort of financial side of this need for content and the financial crisis. And the result is also that what you end up having is depleting returns, right? You're having to make it economic in order to make a show. And the economics for writers and people like that, those were front and center in the recent writer's strike because it used to be, there weren't that many television shows. So if you could get on one, you could not only make a decent living off of it, but you could also get your way onto set and become a showrunner. There was a way of climbing the ladder. Whereas now they'll just throw together writers in a room and the pay isn't always that great for the writer and they're always hunting for new shows and that sort of thing. So all of a sudden there's these depleting opportunities, depleting returns. And for that reason, you also have depleted incentive structures for a lot of the writers. And so you start to get formulaic, not so great stuff from these places that just need to keep up on content creation. Remember hearing a story about, this was, I'll hide the names, but there was one of these major streamers that was putting out an inordinate amount of content within a larger universe of content. And one of the producers checked in and said, how's that one movie going within the universe? And his response was, I don't even know, I'm on 12 shows. Right, it was that sort of thing, right? They started filming and they didn't even have a script, that sort of level of stuff. So there's this problem of being able to produce high quality art at that level. You're really sort of now in the manufacturing business with depleted quality. Now to take that, just that piece of it, put aside all this sort of ideological sort of stuff that's going on and all that stuff that folks complain about, just take that piece of it and contrast it with the making of The Lord of the Rings. If you've ever watched the behind the scenes, back when we bought Blu-rays and DVDs, they had all of that hours and hours and hours of behind the scene content. I watched all of it, I loved all of it. And it's amazing the level of care they took with that show. The fact that you would have, it wasn't just like Peter Jackson obviously approached in a way where he was a respecter of the source material. You can disagree with certain things he did with the source material, that's fine. But it's unquestionable that he cared about and respected the source material and considered it a privilege for him to be touching it in any way. And he wanted to pay respect to Tolkien and to the fans of Tolkien, right? And so you had that, but you also then he brought in people and he had a budget and permission and a timeline that is rarely ever granted in Hollywood anymore. And I don't know that it'll ever be granted again. But he had an opportunity there to hire artists and give them the room and the latitude to be artists. So you actually had people thinking about, well, what is the different sort of signature, calligraphy style of this group versus this group? How should this group, giving what we know of them, what should their armor be like versus this group over here, right? What is their architecture like? And there's minute detail to the point that you listen to costume designers and they're talking about, well, there's this embroidered thing in here where I imagine that Aragorn would have kept this sort of thing. Will anybody ever see this on camera? No, but it doesn't matter, right? It's part of actually building this world, right? In a real sort of way. And that level of care is part of the reason those movies felt so layered, right? Tolkien's world feels layered. Obviously, if you're familiar with Tolkien's work, I mean, the books themselves are obviously layered, but things like the Silmarillion and just looking at the way Tolkien built the languages and the culture and the backstory and things like that, it's in some ways, I mean, I'm not sure I can think of another piece of fiction that is so deeply layered in terms of world building and preparation. There may be such examples, but for myself, that's the one that comes to mind as one of the deepest forms of fictional world building. And Peter Jackson and all of the hundreds of artists around him were actually permitted to do the same level of world building, such that when you see it on the screen, doesn't look like some plastic CGI, let's pretend it's deep and rich. It genuinely looks like a built layered world reflective of Tolkien's world. And that's where I look at that and I'm like, that's a work of art, right? This is actually a work of art. This is not manufacturing, but you can't do that without a studio taking that kind of risk, giving that sort of timeline, giving that type of latitude. And like I said, when you're in an arms race, when you're in a manufacturing culture and things like that, that all goes away. And so then you get something like rings of power where the creators don't respect the source material, whatever they might say, they don't respect the source material, they don't respect the fans. And they're more concerned about using it as a vehicle for their own ideas and their own ends, Tolkien be damned. And in terms of building the world, even though they have 50 million in episode, they still have to manufacture it in an insane speed where it's not gonna allow the level of care. And why would it be given that level of care if you don't care about the source material or even understand the source material in the first place? So I do think that's a big part of what's going on there. And that's on the art versus manufacturing level. There's obviously other things that we could talk about in terms of depleting worldview and depth in terms of creators and writers too, but at least on the art versus manufacturing level. I think that's where I wanna go. So when we were sitting through ARC, at least until we got to the Bishop Baron speech and the Jonathan Peugeot speech, you're a little frustrated with some things. He's like, are we gonna talk about nominalism here? And of course I thought, I don't know that when they sat together and they're putting this thing together, they said, we really wanna address nominalism. I don't think that came up in the creative process of putting the conference together. Yeah, in fact, it did come up. Bishop Baron did bring it into the room. And when you have a civilizational crisis of art, partially because the, and I think you framed it well, because of the manufacturing interests, I mean, manufacturing in the modern is, we don't care who, in fact, economics talks about widgets. Widgets are the ultimate nominalist icon because they are nothing, they mean nothing. All we care about is the multiplication of them, whatever it may be. There is nothing there. And the crisis of art continues to, well, they want to manufacture it. And the difficulty of course is that, well, actually human beings create art and that a human being that can create art must be formed and nurtured. And we sort of think about formation as manufacturing, but it really isn't. It's much more of a, I don't even know what word to pick, but you know where I'm going. And that of course is, because right before this, the reason I wanted to turn the camera on is we were talking about, Hollywood is an industry. It is a content industry. And that language says everything you need to know. The difficulty that they of course are facing is that they want people, the more content gets created, the more cloying it all becomes. And the more people, I watch, so now I get a certain streaming service with my phone. Of course, there's a certain streaming service I have to keep paying for it because members of my family continue to use it. And then, so now I've got all these streaming services on my TV, most of which members of my family don't know how to find the other ones, even though they're all on the screen. And if we, they're like, oh, I want to watch that thing again, go find it for me. But when I just hand them the remote, I'm just watching them just cycle through content, content, content, content. And I'm thinking, wow, used to be, you just turn on the TV and you had, less channels like five of them and you watched whatever was on. And so there is a, the art crisis in the culture is deeply connected with this. And now part of what has been happening is that with technological innovation, such as Zoom, YouTube, we're even more awash in content. Yet every now and then something glimmers out of the pile. Right, and it is a large pile. It is a large pile. I cannot tell you how many times I've sat down and thought, boy, I'd like to watch something. And after an hour of going through thumbnails, I'm like, I'm not watching anything. Cause I use this entire hour just to see all the thumbnails. And I'm sure I haven't even finished them all. Anyway, no, I think this is actually an interesting dynamic, exactly what you're talking about. And one of the places where my mind goes right away with us is to the emergence of AI and the way in which AI was explicitly part of, the writer's strike. What was interesting is that one of the points of negotiation that the guild would not like, well, that the studios would not move on, that the guild wanted addressed, but the studios wouldn't move on. The guilds wanted guarantees. You're not going to just take writer's stuff and feed it through AI. You're not gonna use AI in order to do initial drafts cause they know that's just jobs for the writers disappearing. And the studios were like, no, of course we're gonna use AI. And I think I haven't looked over the final documents, but my recollection is that all the guild managed to get out of them was assurance that, it'll be a part of a, they'll be part of the conversation, right? You know, something like that. That's all they got? They need better lawyers. Any sort of guarantee on it. I could be wrong, but my recollection, at least the last I checked in on that, that's all they had was, we'll have meaningful conversations. That's right. That's like the American presidential election. I'm gonna be part of the conversation. Oh, okay. That's good. That's good. That does a lot of good. But, you know, I, so I have a Substack that, you know, I don't know if you want to link to it. You can, if you'd like to, you can throw it in your description. Oh, I'll give you that. We'll add it to the pile. Oh yeah, let's throw it in. It's just nathanajacobs.substack.com. And it's where I publish basically letters. People write to me with all sorts of questions, you know, and have over the years on philosophy and theology. And I'll just publish on there. I've started publishing those letters that I've written in reply. And so it covers all sorts of different topics and it's meant to be a little more accessible than, you know, my usual academic stuff. But anyway, I did one on AI and art and specifically the question of whether AI can create art. And my answer is no, it can create images. It can even create images that might be in some technical way superior to what is copying. So, I mean, I use in this one post where I talk about this, the example of H.R. Giger, right? So Giger is the one whose art is the sort of really weird, gnarly, quasi-demonic stuff that, you know, alien was based on, right? So, and he actually was, I don't know if he was in later, you know, movies, but in the first movie, he actually was one of the, you know, production designers. You know, he was actually there on set building stuff and things like that, because that's essentially what all of his art looks like anyway, right? And so this whole world that's so creepy and unnerving is based on his artwork, which is also creepy and unnerving. But I saw, you know, a series of images of AI generating, you know, Giger impersonations. Now, the interesting thing is Giger, he is not excellent at anatomy. So one of his weaknesses is that you can see if you're somebody who's very sort of technically, you know, gifted in anatomical art, which I am, you'll be able to see when somebody struggles with hands, for example. You're like, okay, yeah, yeah, yeah. They're really trying to hide these hands because they don't like drawing those. Those are tough. And Giger has some of those things where, you know, he's very good at what he does, but you can also see his weaknesses have to do with humanoid figures. If they're too close to actual human form, those weaknesses start to show. The more distorted they are, the more you can get away with it. But what was interesting is the AI impersonations did not struggle with that. So in some ways they were technically superior to Giger because they captured the ethos, but without the defects of Giger. So the question is, is that superior? Well, the answer is that these are really sort of two different things, right? The one is artwork and the other is not. And I go through in there some of the, you know, the basic ontology of art, you know, in my own philosophy of art, which is exactly what you're talking about. It's not manufacturing. So to use sort of realist Aristotelian, you know, language, right? You and I are beings who have potentiality within us, right? We have the potential within us to learn how to play the piano or learn how to make art or learn languages and whatever, or what Aristotle would call first order potentiality, which is that potential that is more than nothing, right? That potential is something, it's a real feature of reality, but it's distinct and less than the actualized, than the realization of that, that you move into being through repetition and habit and things like that. And when you're talking about what an artist is, right? You and I and everybody else who is a rational animal has the potential to be an artist, meaning art, you know, the original word just means skill. There are certain skills that you and I can cultivate. And through that repetition and cultivation, those things move from potential to actuality. They move into being. And once that is cultivated, right? You know, I've cultivated the art of drawing, for example. Once that art is cultivated and matured, now that art within me is actually that creative power, right, that capacity. What makes me an artist is that I am one who has cultivated that art, right? And then the expression or articulation of that art, right? That's what we call artwork, right? It's this outward articulation of this inward potency, or in this case, actuality. And so that's sort of a basic schematic for thinking about what art, artist, artwork is. And when you consider that, then, you know, you talk about AI, well, AI isn't a thing, right, that has that sort of potential. It hasn't cultivated through repetition, et cetera. So it can produce images, right, but it can't produce artwork. Now, the reason I think this is really important is because this goes to, as much as people are wigged out by AI and how it might affect jobs and things like this, this actually draws a really important distinction. If people can get clear on this, there actually are positive shifts that could take place because we too often in our own culture have manufacturing sensibilities where exactly, the very reason that people go, I don't know, can AI create art is because we tend to think of art as just like some sort of image, right? Something that's been, you know, whether it's manufactured or not. But the fact of the matter is, in terms of ontology, let's pretend we had a machine that could take it through, there probably is a machine like this, but you know, that could take a 3D scan of Michelangelo's Pieta and then go ahead and create a perfect, indistinguishable reproduction of it in marble, you know, lasers, whatever it is, whatever it's using in order to bring that about. Are those two statues just identical artwork of identical quality and so on? And the answer is no, because the machine is not expressing some sort of genius of creativity. It's not expressing some cultivated skill of sculpting. So Michelangelo's artwork is artwork, right? It is the outward expression, the articulation of Michelangelo's unique genius cultivated, you know, over time and so on. Whereas this is just a manufactured replica of it. And that's what it is. Now, and that's important because what that means is there is an ontological difference between those two things, even though all the material facts about them are identical, right? So the relational properties, which are not empirically identifiable unless you're sitting there watching it do it, are what actually make it, you know, the one thing artwork and the other thing not, right? The relational property to Michelangelo, to his expression as an artist, to his art within and all that. Now, the reason this is important is because I think there's room for manufacturing. You know, I actually don't have a problem with the idea that if I'm looking to create a billboard, that AI produces it because, you know, I'm not really, am I looking for artwork for my billboard or am I just looking for an image, right? And yet at the same time, we do recognize that if I want art to beautify my home, yeah, I can settle for a print, but we tend to value much more, you know, a real painting. Now, oftentimes those are out of the price range, so you settle for the prints, right? You settle for the reproduction because, you know, that other thing, it costs a lot, you know, I don't know. But I think actually there is a potential benefit in people through an issue like this becoming aware of what they're getting because you have to ask the question, what do you want? Do you want art or do you just want an image? When it comes to entertainment, do you just want, you know, are you okay with manufactured AI music that, you know, is just gonna make you feel something and lets you, you know, bop in your car? Or do you want the art, right? When you listen to Bach, is it Bach or is the genius in the artistry part of what you're there imbibing? Or is it just you want the notes, right? And that matters, right? Since there is a real ontological difference there. And so on the one hand, I think, you know, that sort of thing create, that sort of distinction and that sort of technological advance creates room for both and in some ways amplifies or creates the possibility of an alternative market, right? An alternative market that says, we're actually not here just for, you know, the noises. We're not here just for the image that fills up the space on the billboard. We're here because we actually want art, right? We want to encounter the genius of this sort of thing. So that's one of the places where I go and that's exactly what I see is happening. Now I think the strange and sad thing with Hollywood is, you know, people obviously love the art of the original Lord of the Rings, you know, trilogy. And a lot of people sneer at the manufacturing of this, you know, of a lot of the contemporary Hollywood stuff. And the big question is if Hollywood goes the full route, which it might, I mean, with AI, I know people who are leaving Hollywood right now in order to create companies to try to make one man band sort of movies using AI and a little bit of, you know, CGI on the top to see if they can make it accessible and, you know, direct the audience. But the big question is once people, once that illusion of art is broken and you take the full step to, yeah, this is just entertaining images and sounds and whatever it's manufactured in the truest sense, is that what you want or do you want art? And if you want art, then there emerges the possibility of a contracted market that says, you know, people are done with binge watching, not everybody, right? Some people will be fine with like, I'm fine with the AI music as long as it, you know, works in, you know, on the dance floor, which is all I'm looking forward for, right? I'm just looking for a beat, right? Give me a beat, right? And there'll be people who go that route, no doubt, but then what'll happen is hopefully there emerges a clarity in a market for the alternative of going ahead and saying, no, we actually want art. So we're gonna abandon the binge watching, right? We're going to abandon the sort of mindless intake. We actually wanna really engage with the material. And for that reason, we want real artists in the sense of writers, right? People who have depth like Tolkien, right? We want real artists in the sense of production designers and costume designers and things like that. And, you know, we want real art in terms of the direction and the care taken with the material and so on. And so my hope would be that one of the things that you'll see is exactly that, right? A sharp rift between manufacturing and artistry. Now that might be too optimistic because art gets more expensive in that sense. But, you know, I think there is a discontent with manufacturing. You know, we're a ways down this road already. Once our ability to reproduce, I mean, you can bring this all the way back to the printing press, the difference obviously between a copied manuscript and, you know, the production of the printing press. People will, people have long recognized the difference between a symphony that you attend and a recording as we've sort of leveled up our ability to, and it's been interesting, it's our ability to reproduce, but it's been interesting how sort of, you know, you have the analog digital war that goes back and forth. One of, so as I said before, probably something that you're not very aware of is that around my channel has been an analogous conversation with respect to this in that successive younger generations are increasingly, I'm gonna use the same word, they're increasingly cloyed by the reproduction, even of good art, let's say, and the desire to participate because there's a, on one hand, there's a million, it's funny when you talked about scrolling, I will sometimes hand my wife or one of my children the remote and they will start to scroll and then I will very quickly get fed up and I'll say, I don't care what you choose, what I will not watch is the scrolling, that I cannot do. So if you really want to choose, it's gonna take you a while, I'm gonna leave the room and when I come back, you had better have decided on something and I will settle in no matter how bad it is. But I think we are in a point with our relationship with these reproductive technologies that we, on one hand, we have a heightened sense of the hunger for value and even the word value was such a generic term for we know not what we're gonna do because of the prolific reproduction that has happened all around us and the fact that increasingly, you also mentioned video games. I mean, the same, I would imagine, even though I don't follow that world hardly at all, I would imagine the exact same dynamics are happening in that world as well. There's only so many calls of duty you can make. There's only so many of the, and so then people are always looking for the fresh idea and the fresh idea does something to us that we have a sense that it isn't the product of manufacturing, it is the product of a world behind the world. And a value hierarchy sets up immediately around the fact that some seem to be, some seem to connect with that world and bring it to us more reliably than others and the same goes with their art and their reproductions thereof. And so when it gets to, I mean, again, Hollywood is a business and they will be rewarded for having a movie that they didn't spend much on, but they got a big return. That's the definition of the thing. And then when people get tired of gatekeepers, now increasingly they will go to a place like YouTube or podcasting and podcasting is interesting because it's podcasting is now at the point that the manufacturing killed blogging because when someone says, I'm starting a podcast, everybody says, well, I've got my podcast up and I've subscribed to a few hundred podcasts, but which ones do I listen to? And how can I find the new one? And then you begin to discover that the most watched podcasts or listen to podcasts, the most watched YouTube channels sometimes are just schlock. It's just garbage. And you will continue to find treasures out there that are small and obscure and have real value, but are never discovered or rewarded. In other words, the existence of the fact that artists starve is not simply a function of algorithm or discovery. There's something else to it, which of course is the bane of every artist because most of them are starving or at least just getting by. So why is that, Nathan? I mean, you're- You want me to answer why, man? I want you to answer that question. Yeah, well, and you brought up gatekeepers and I do think this is one of the big challenges. So I'll just speak from my own experience, right? Before I talk about gatekeepers, because this is something I have experience with having lived in the realm of YouTube for five or six years. There are physical instantiations of gatekeepers who have skin around them that you can talk to them and they're in an industry. And then there are principalities and powers that are gatekeepers that only people who like religion and things like that begin to see, even have an appetite for talking about. And one of the things that once you are involved enough in a, you can call it a marketplace, but you get the sense that that's not even the right word that, again, artists starve for a reason. Right, yeah. So are you suggesting that when I launch my podcast it's not immediately gonna like blow up or maybe never blow up? Is that what you're telling me, Paul? How's that substack doing? Are you getting like huge piles of money from the substack? I'm not getting huge piles of money from the substack. No, you're right. And yet I'm talking to you. Maybe I should wait and find the number one substacker. I should talk to Barry Weiss. So, but this is because once you get neck deep into social media as your avenue for artistic expression and reproduction, boy, are you gonna be into this thinking because you're gonna pour your life into something and you're gonna have people that you value say, wow, that's like the best thing I've read in a long time. And I can't get anybody else. Else to read it. To read it. I've never heard such words muttered in my direction, Paul. So I would say, yes, we can talk about gatekeepers but let's talk about some of this phenomenon that you're talking about. I do think, of course, there are always factors outside of our control, such as, I mean, you mentioned principalities and powers. And I don't deny the invisible hand of both Providence and devilry. There are invisible powers at work in this game, right? Working in favor of certain movements or people or whatever it may be and also working against them at the same time. And so there's no denying that there are people who have gotten famous because it was the right time for that right event to happen at that moment that happened to catch everyone's attention. And from that point on, they were within the public discourse and it just sort of accelerated and compounded. Obviously, that's a big thing that happens. And so I wouldn't deny in any way any of those factors and I think they're very real. But one of the areas where I think, you know, where that I think really matters is there's an underappreciated feature of epistemology, right? How do we know that we know? And it's that basically the condition of the viewer affects their ability to see. And so this is something that I think a lot of people don't appreciate or consider. But you know, the fact of the matter is a lot of folks have the experience just to take a simple example of deciding because they like this one band that they're gonna learn to play the guitar, right? And so they get the guitar and the first thing they wanna learn is that three chords song that they think is the best thing ever written on the planet. And they learn to play that and you know, that's cool. They can, you know, grab a guitar at a party and try to impress people, whether they impress them or not. And then they start to get better and they start to work on it and their skills increase. And all of a sudden that band that they didn't understand why anybody would possibly like starts to appeal to them because they start to understand what's happening with that guitarist. And as they've grown, as they've cultivated that art and they've changed ontologically, they've also changed epistemologically. They can now actually see in the thing things that they couldn't see before, right? And the more they grow, the more that taste and appreciation changes. And so on the one hand, yes, there's a certain baseline underdeveloped, undeveloped capacity to see things. Nobody looks at Michelangelo and goes, I don't know, is he any good? Right, like it doesn't happen. You might not like it. And again, this is a confusion, another confusion that happens that I'll talk about in a second between taste, right? And the actual objective value of the thing. You could hate his sculptures. I don't know why you would, but you could hate them. But nobody's gonna say, I don't know if he's that good. Right, like he's obviously that good, right? And so he's a master, everybody can see it. But on the other hand, you'll hit other types of artists where people are like, I don't get it. And sometimes I think that's legitimate. Like I actually do think there is a legitimate judgment to the backwater hick who walks through and is like, this is art, I can do that, right? And it's like, yeah, he could. And he's right, it's not art, it's garbage. It's a con, right? And I really do think there's a whole sort of subculture in the art world that really is just that, right? It's about being a certain personality and being at the right parties and saying things that sound sophisticated and essentially conning rich people into believing that you're really an artist and selling your stuff at exorbitant fees. And I say stuff, not art, because that's all it is. And so like, yes, that's true. But then you'll hit certain artists who people don't quite get and they're like, I don't know, is it really that good? That doesn't strike me, I mean, it strikes me as fine. But then a painter comes in and goes, no, that's really hard to do. Like, I know you don't like the image, but you've got to understand on a technique level, if you knew anything about paint, that's hard to do. This guy is a master, right? And that's true, right? And then there's things that are in between, right? Like I actually think Picasso, for example, I don't terribly love his later stuff, right? But the stuff that he's really known for is Cubist stuff. I don't love it. But I've never denied that Picasso is truly an artist because I've seen his work when he was like 16. You look at his sketches when he's 16, he's basically a Renaissance master. He's a real artist. He has cultivated the art and whatever he's doing, he's not doing Cubism because he can't draw a person, right? Like he's doing this for other philosophical, artistic, experimentation reasons and things like that. And whether it's a good move or a bad move, that's a totally different conversation. But that is one of those things where the underlying ontology, the art, the artist, right? Is real, right? So that one's not a con. Anyway, I bring this up because on the one hand, when it comes to seeing art, like anybody trained, untrained can see that that's nonsense and they can see, you know, Duchamp's journal, right? I'm just gonna find an object and sign it. They can go, that's nonsense, you're conning me. And the answer is, yeah, you're right, he is conning me. And then they can see Michelangelo, that's amazing. And he's a master. But then when you get in that gray area, the epistemology, right? The ability to see and understand by the person who is not an artist, right? I don't mean in the cultural sense, but in the true ontological sense that I described before, it gets gray. You're like, oh, this is great. And this is great. And they don't see a difference. But then I'll look at it as somebody who is trained and has cultivated the art of drawing. I go, yeah, that guy has trouble, right? He has trouble with structure. He's fudging a lot. That guy's awesome, right? And there is a difference. I know you can't see the difference, but there is a difference that I can see there. This painter, I know these two paintings look similar to you, but this guy is muddy, right? He hasn't really mastered the painting. He's a little uncomfortable with it. This guy actually understands painting. And you start to see those sorts of differences. Now, the reason I think that's important is because this feature of ontology doesn't just apply to art. It applies to a lot of other things, including religion, including morality, right? So this was part of the entire principle of virtue ethics. The idea that your ability to see and understand good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and viciousness, it changes based on how much virtue you cultivate, right? The more virtuous you become, just like the more artistic you become, the more capable you are of recognizing good and evil in the moral structures of our world. And the same is true religiously, right? The more you tap into the spiritual world, the more clearly you see the fabric of the universe from the spiritual side. And the reason I think this is really important is because yes, every now and then, you'll have people who just hit with everybody, right? They're brilliant, they're recognized as brilliant, they're Michelangelo's, right? Yep. But there is a lot of people sitting in that gray, right? Where they sit there and they say, where people who aren't trained, right? Having cultivated, let's say, intellectual philosophy and theology, or they haven't delved into the realm of ethics and really sort of plumbed in the depths of this and cultivated those sorts of potentialities or your languages or classics or whatever it is, right? Literature. They sit in that sort of very vague, hazy-eyed window of like, I can see really good stuff, I can see really bad stuff, but the gray in the middle, I don't know. And so what happens there is you can have brilliant people who are misjudged as, you know, I don't know what the big whoop is, right? Kind of like the painter where I said, he's brilliant, but you can't tell because you don't know anything about painting, right? And they'll sit in that area. Or alternatively, taste takes over. And this is an interesting thing, is that I remember when I would teach on aesthetics, when I would start to talk to students about the underlying metaphysics of art, right? About ontology, about art, artist, artwork, and things like that. Students started to intuit, which I'd eventually talk about directly, but they'd begin to intuit if that's true, that there actually is ontology, objective, good and bad, better and worse, then that carries moral ramifications, and I don't want anybody to tell me what I ought to like, and what not to like, even if it's the cosmos telling me, right? I don't want any of that, you know, if I like bad pop music, I wanna just like my pop music and be left alone. I don't wanna be told that I have bad taste. And yet this is a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, that intuition is correct, right? You ought to like certain things more than you do, and there's certain things you probably like that you like too much and you shouldn't like. And incidentally, this is a feature of education that's been lost, because Aristotle, when he talks about education, says it's to teach children to like what they ought. Like that's one of the things that he talks about there, which people today are like, what does that mean, right? What does that mean? And it means exactly that, that there's an underlying ontology of values to this. And so I think, yes, there are these invisible powers and principalities and, you know, providence at work that are, you know, within a struggle that sit behind the scenes that we, you know, rarely appreciate in terms of who becomes famous and who doesn't and who crashes and burns and whose life falls apart. I mean, speaking from my own experience, just as an aside here, well, I'd mentioned that project that I thought was commercially viable. Well, it was largely related to demonology, right? So I was working with a priest who had worked with the Warrens, Ed and Lorraine Warrens, who, you know, whose movies, the Conjuring franchise, right? The biggest horror movie franchise ever. He had worked with the Warrens and ultimately saw enough things that led him to become an Orthodox priest. And so I was working with him and I had developed, you know, scripts and all this sort of stuff. And I will tell you that a lot of demonic stuff happened in my world, both the obvious stuff, you know, like people being pulled out of bed in the middle of the night by things you can't see and the not so obvious stuff, like just strife and things like that, that's sort of infecting a room. And I eventually bowed out of the project, specifically for that reason, because I realized it was such a detriment, not only to my family, but to my own life. And I hope somehow somebody who is better at navigating that than me will go ahead and make that film, because I think it's well worthwhile. But, you know, like there are obviously those forces at work. There was a good reason why that stuff happened. And it's not just because I was thinking about it, right? It's because something was threatened by it, right? So yes, those things are real, right? There is real sort of positive and negative spiritual energy, unless anybody thinks, oh, he's a new age guy, like energy, spiritual energies are a big thing in Eastern orthodoxy and in St. Paul. But, you know, anyway, so like, so, but so like those are definitely real, but then on the natural sort of level, I think the epistemology factor is a very real thing as well. And the fact that so many people sit in that gray between the extreme polarity means that there is a lot of just taste that takes over, because they can't really see the differential here. You know, it's like being colorblind, where it's like, I don't know, there's several colors I see too, right? And so you end up in this sort of this grayed out spectrum with people who are unformed in the areas that they're navigating through the podcast. They're not capable of really seeing the hierarchy of the content, what is excellent and what is not. And for that reason, and then it just sort of devolves into these other issues of taste. What do I like? What do I not like? And that of course always leads to all sorts of inverted wonky hierarchies that have nothing to do with the underlying reality of it all. So that, I mean, that's how I would begin to diagnose a couple of the main contributors. So talk to me about, so one of the things that we talked about when we were at the art conference together is you'd like to get more involved in, and I'd talked, I'd kind of nudged you in this direction and I talked to you a couple of years. It's been a while since before Arc that we talked. That was very early on in my- I'd say it was like three years ago. Yeah. So besides sort of the professional stuff that's out there, you also talked about a desire to get more into this popular realm without, with different kinds of gatekeepers, let's say. And, you know, I, so what kinds of things would you like to do? I mean, you've started a sub stack here, which I didn't know anything about. So I'm going to have to check this out because I see you're talking about predestination. For those of you who get kind of a whiff of this, part of how we know each other is he did, Calvin seminary decided to do a PhD program and he went there and then he became Orthodox. And you know, that's, that wasn't, that wasn't why the Christian Deformed Church decided to endorse Calvin seminary to do this kind of thing, Nathan. You know, the Christian Reformed Church is having a hard enough time as it is. And here you go and, you know, join the ortho bros. So- That's right. That's right. Well, you know, well, for what it's worth, you know, Paul, it's the fact of the matter is they were very clear that at the doctoral level, there are no doctrinal commitments whatsoever. It's just pure academic scholarship. So- You should not have said that in the current climate of the Christian Reformed Church. I don't think Calvin seminary will see that as a welcome. Maybe nobody else in the Christian Reformed Church will watch this. Oh shoot, they don't like that? I take it all back. They never said anything remotely like that when I was exploring that program. Yes, yes. Yeah. So the substacks, see that's how bad I am at promoting it. Even people like you who would be interested in my substack, I don't even bother to tell them, right? You know, that's anyway, yeah. So I've been interested and yes, you are correct. You actually nudged me about this, not only at Arc. I remember you nudging me about this, you know, the last time we talked before that, which was several years back, where you were telling me about certain conversations having on happening online and certain voices in that conversation, but we could really use somebody like you in this discussion who's trained in metaphysics and is actually able to articulate metaphysics in a way that people who aren't trained can understand and all the rest. I was like, yeah, that's good, Paul, but I'm drowning in, you know, movies about demons. And so anyway, I mean, yes, there was definitely that, but now I've come around to the point of saying like, I've seen enough stuff in terms of the popular intellectual world that even though there are people who, you know, I support and I'm very much in favor of and I even listen to, I just recognized at some point that you were exactly right, which is that my usual perspective of approaching this as a metaphysician, right? Like that's my area, I'm a metaphysician, isn't usually represented. So you'll have people who are representing the conclusion, right, they're sort of working around and through intuitions and, you know, sort of dialogue with others, they're articulating something that arrives in the same place as me, but they don't really understand that what, you know, what they're really sort of delving into underneath it. And as I talked to you at ARC, I talked about that one of the things that I'm absolutely convinced of is that that is part of the problem, is that right now we are, you know, having conversations in our culture and we're on different metaphysical planets, but nobody knows enough about metaphysics to even know it. So, you know, they're talking past each other because their first premises oftentimes, they're metaphysics and the other person doesn't recognize that that's what's happening and so on. So, I mean, I'll just say, you know, I told you at ARC, you know, that I'm convinced, well, actually let me back up here. When I would teach bioethics, I taught bioethics at Trinity grad school, you know, a little bit. And usually I had their physicians in the class, practicing physicians who were taking this, you know, just sort of to bone up on bioethics or because, you know, the hospital wanted them to study a little bioethics or something like that. And I could always tell, you know, these guys and gals would come in hoping, like, please just give me the magical gotcha on a topic that I can tell my patient or the administrator and they'll get off my back and everybody will be on the same page and life becomes easy for me. And day one, my speech to them was always, I've got bad news if that's what you're looking for. That doesn't exist, I can't do that for you and here's why. And I would talk about sort of four levels of conversation. So level one is the one where you're dealing in soundbites, you know, it's not a child, or it's not a choice, it's a child, right? You know, or my body, my choice, there's things like that, right? These are just sloganeering soundbites. And then level two, you get down to more long form conversations, which oftentimes long form conversations are dealing in just dialogue about applied ethics, right? So I'm already got my worldview, I've already got my moral intuitions or my ethical system or whatever. I'm not gonna talk about any of that, I'm just gonna talk about what I already believe, right? And then you're gonna counter with, oh, I don't believe that and I'm gonna say what I believe. And so you're not really talking about the underlying issues. Now down below that, you hit metaethics where now there's actually a structure to what I mean by the words good and evil, right and wrong. I have some sort of understanding not just of what those terms mean, but how we discern what things are good and evil and so on. And then beneath that is usually the level of metaphysics, which is how you see the world in general and man and God, if you believe in God, all that sort of stuff, which is what informs how you got to your metaethic in the first place. And I said, the bad news is, in order to really truly have a meaningful discussion, you've kinda gotta go all the way down to level four in order to really see where you two diverge. And I said, nobody does that. Well, not nobody, obviously there are metaphysicians, right, metaethicists, people like that. But the average person never does that. And so they live at levels one and two. They watch the news and they hear sound bites that they agree with or disagree with. And then they have longer conversations where they're just sort of hurling at each other, their applied ethics, and they never really get to the stuff underneath it. And I mean, just to use an example, one example was, I don't know, do I give his name? No, I won't. So it's not gonna cause any embarrassment. I won't name who was in this clip. But I saw a clip that went viral on Instagram and it was one of these gotcha moments, right? And it was this one conservative guy talking with this one sort of leftist girl. And the leftist girl is claiming that I think in order to be a moral, good person, morally good person, right, you need to use another person's preferred pronouns. And the conservative guy was like, well, in that case, my pronouns are the guy who is right in this conversation, right? And all the, everyone was like, oh! You know, gotcha, right? And my reaction was like, okay, I get why that works on the internet, but if you really wanna have a meaningful conversation, the response probably should have been, okay, well, you brought up morality and goodness. So maybe we should have a conversation about what you mean by the word good and bad person, what you mean by morality, how you discern those, what your underlying understanding not just of those are, but how we discern those, what the structures of morality are, your epistemology of morality, so on, so that we can actually figure out where we're really diverging. You know, I'm a natural law ethicist, I'm guessing you're not, so, you know, what are you and where do these come from? And the fact of the matter is, my guess is, if that was the response, the gal would probably be a deer in the headlights because she'd probably be like, well, I don't really know, right, like so many people in the culture, she just functions on vague moral sentiments, right? And so she just sort of feels like that's probably true. And you actually deepen the conversation if you start to have a conversation about, well, maybe we should actually examine those words and examine how you got there and how I got to the alternative place, you know, that I am. And so that's really what I wanted to do with, with, well, spoiler alert, right, with my podcast. So I wanted to move more into the space of speaking directly into the culture, like, you know, people like yourself and others are doing, where you're entering the public square, you're having the public conversation direct to the people in terms of, you know, YouTube and, you know, Spotify and whatever else, right, putting out the podcast, but really trying to engage these topics in a way that is sort of unique to how I navigate them, which is oftentimes a little different than the way other people do because I'm a metaphysician. So that's sort of like the broad issue is like, I actually thought about naming it Level 4 specifically because of that, but it's just gonna be the Nathan Jacobs podcast. I mean, like, I know that's really creative and when you think of me as a creative, as an artist, obviously you would expect something as far outside of the box as that as possible. But yeah, yeah, so the Nathan Jacobs podcast, that's really sort of the focus of it is that I want to examine topics, everything from, you know, things like AI and can it make art or, you know, whatever the public discourse is, you know, going on, you know, there are two things like, what's the right direction for the toilet paper? And let me examine this as a metaphysician, you know. So like, no, I mean, but there, it really is that sort of thing. And a big theme that runs through it is the theme that I mentioned to you at ARC, which is that I'm convinced that the most important issue in the history of ideas generally, and that is still the most important issue today because it sits underneath the massive cultural divides is the question of realism nominalism, which is exactly what you mentioned, right? So for anybody who doesn't know, right, realism is basically the question of saying, I look out into the world, you look out in the world, every human being by default looks out into the world and we see structures, right? We think in terms of genus, of species, you know, animal, human, common properties, bipedal, or, you know, that ball is red and that ball is red, whatever it is, as well as these abstractions like numbers and, you know, biological sets and things like that. And the question is when the mind looks out and it does that, you can't stop doing that, it always does that. When it does that, does it do that because those structures are real and it's abstracting, pulling out of the world, structures that are really there and identifying something that's real? If you say that, you're a realist, right? Or is it that the mind just needs to organize things and so these are mental fictions that it projects on a world that really isn't organized, right, it really isn't that it's broken into these sort of genus and species and common properties. These are all just sort of mental fictions to impress order, to impose order on a world that really isn't that way in itself. And if you say that, that's nominalism from the Latin nomen for names, they're just a bunch of names. And what I'm convinced of is that virtually every hot button issue in our culture right now is a riff between people who are intuitively realists or people who are intuitively nominals. And so, the most obvious contemporary example is the trans debate where the first premise is, well, gender is a social construct. Well, that's a nominalist premise, right? That's no small premise. What you're saying is it's just a name, it's just a mental invention, we put it out there. And then for that reason, if we manipulate reality and then give it a new name, well, it is that thing because it was never that thing in itself and it's in the first place. So, yes, we call that lump of cells a penis, but if then we chop it apart and we make it look like something else and we call it something else, like a vagina, then all of a sudden, it is that other thing. And on the other side, there are people who are intuitively realists who are like, I don't think that's true. I think it actually is a penis and I think if you hack it apart and reshape it, it's just a hacked apart penis. It's still that thing in itself. Well, so right there, you have a realist and nominalist divide but nobody knows that that's the divide that's happening and yet it is. And that's why that's no small thing to expose that and say we should actually look at it from this perspective because your first premise is a first principles premise, right? The first thing you have to do when exploring metaphysics and worldview is decide this fork in the road. And that's why I say it's the most important question in the history of ideas because I'm convinced the best way to look at history ideas is just a history of exploring realism and history of exploring nominalism. All the different topics are sort of subsets of that question. And so you see it there, but I think you also see it. It's been less obvious but no less present in things like abortion, right? Whether it really is a human being that has all the rights and stuff, even if it doesn't look like it yet or whether it becomes that at some point, we name it at that at some point. I think it's there in things like feminism and the question of are the family structures and the hierarchies that society has tended toward because of differences between men and women, are those real, are those social constructs that can be sort of disassembled and things like that. So anyway, I see it across the board in all these topics and that's one of the reasons why a central theme within this podcast that I'm gonna launch and we'll see what it involves, evolves into beyond that but at least right now, just a podcast is that theme and trying to draw that to the surface and in drawing it to the surface offer a more sort of metaphysically refined and precise exploration of different questions. Well, I think the challenge to me is, well, there's a number of challenges that I see as a pastor. Number one, the movies, the podcasts, the art, the reproduction, all of this is the deep formation that is happening and continuing to happen at an accelerated rate in our culture. We came out of a world in which people were formed by, let's say the natural rhythms of their environment, harvesting, sewing, and then also the church, the liturgy, all of this, the art of the church, all of this stuff formed a civilization. When you talk about the fact that people, they might not have any clue about life, they might not have any clue about what these words mean. And we talked about it with respect to art but everyone is in fact all being formed. They all have a map inside and they have a first draft map that has been deeply formed by their parents has continued to be tweaked and altered all along. And when there are major transitions in that map, sometimes we'll call it a conversion or transformation or something of that kind. And so whereas in many ways, the church had a good, the church had a rather preeminent place in human culture for a very long time, which yielded this culture in the West that we currently participate in. But the need for, the need for continual formation and also, I've often, I've spent six years doing what I've been doing. And in many ways, people will often ask me, what exactly are you doing? And I'll usually say, I'm still really not sure. Which is terribly bad after six years and at my stage in life, I should have an idea about what I'm doing. But for me, I think the more I get into this, increasingly it's about trying to help people be effective in terms of understanding each other and actually providing a context by which they can be productive. And that's actually tremendously difficult. And art and its powers have a way of sort of forming beneath the waterline of consciousness. And we see, I mean, that's part of the power of art. And so therefore good art, and people have known this in our culture and have dared to say it. And today, if you say it, you'll often be dismissed or sneered or hated. But art has had that power and hence both the incredible need of having good artists who are forming the culture and the people in good ways. It's a tremendous need. And given the fact that economics is an aspect of culture and industry is a part of our world, artists can't just say, I do my art. Well, okay, there you go. Maybe 500 years from now you'll be discovered and God bless you for what you've done. I mean, you as an academic, you see often that some of the people who had excellence in their field were recognized at the time. And therefore we know them because they've been celebrated ever since. Others were never celebrated, but somewhere along the line, someone discovered it. And there was enough of a community that looked at it and said, oh yeah, that we should pay attention to that. And all of those dynamics continue today. So I do very much want to see, I want to see you both continue to do your work, sort of in the industry, let's say. I think that is vitally important. Part of what I think we have sensed seeing these suppose a gatekeeper less flat structures of social media is that, oh, actually really good gatekeepers are actually very valuable. And when you find an excellent gatekeeper that can sort of say yes to this and no to that, and therefore use their position in a hierarchy to push things up and have things come about, that's a blessing from God. But as with everything, there are some gatekeepers who do better and some gatekeepers that do worse and some, all gatekeepers have bad days. So yeah, I'm very excited that you want to get into this because I do see that most of the people that I bump into in church are formed far more, at least initially by television and movies and radio and newspapers. And now today by social media, they're formed far more by this than many of the things that churches and clergy are doing. And I don't say that to encourage clergy to abandon their posts. No, you have to in fact stay there and just actually, you're dealing with an environment that is far more competitive than it was 800 years ago. Right, yeah. So basically clergy have to up their game and really figure out what they're doing. And clergy like everyone else are only, are mostly sort of intuitively tied to things they know not what. And hopefully most of those things will be of some use and some goodness, so. Right, yeah, so I think you're right. I think there's a lot of challenges here. I'll just state a few broad ones before I go back to specifically the gatekeepers and the art side of things that you're talking about. And I think we under appreciate the level to which we are shaped, our cognitive framework is shaped by pre-volitional stuff. So people like William James noticed this where he's like, look, there's certain things that if you pitch them to somebody, they're live to options and they're dead options. And it's not always because of some rationale, it's pretty rationale, right? It just doesn't sound right to them, right? And you'll see this all the time when people like, well, I mean, Joe Rogan for a long time, although there seems to be a shift now, was just like, it was like anything but God, right? Like, God, it just doesn't seem plausible. It sounds like nonsensical myth and fairy tales, but aliens as an explanation, like totally, right? Absolutely. And you see this all the time in different things like in the sciences, right? Dark matter, right? People will be like, yeah, absolutely dark matter. And then you're like, okay, so how did we get to this conclusion of dark matter? Well, the answer is there's a missing mass problem, meaning the way bodies out there are moving, there should be more mass than we can detect. So there must be some mass that we cannot detect, that we cannot see that's changing the way in which they move. Now, the thing is, if I made that same argument, when I switched out dark matter for angel, people would go like, ugh, it's so stupid. And I'm like, what? It's moving, it's not moving the way it should, given how much mass is out there. So there must be an invisible hand. I'll call them a celestial hierarchy of angels. Be like, that's ridiculous. But there's no difference in the two arguments other than the word I used at the end of it. And one sounds more sciency than the other one. And so we're like, yeah, dark matter, obviously, we all know that's real. And then it's like, angels, that's stupid. And that just speaks to what James is talking about, these pre-volitional, one is just live option to them, one is dead option. And people oftentimes mistake those pre-volitional impulses for reason. There's actually nothing rational about that. That's really just sort of taste. And that's shaped by your culture. And so there's a lack of appreciation for the fact that most people who have, let's say, an evolutionary narrative, which is really what Darwin wanted, right? This is a creation myth, right? For Darwin, that's what it is, is creation myth. And they don't really sort of realize that it's a creation myth, because for them, it's just science, right? It's just what we know. But most of them actually don't know too much about the theory of evolution. It's just the cultural myth in the culture that they live in. And so everything that presumes it sounds plausible, right? On the face of it. And so it's not rational. It's pre-rational. And then with that, you also have people like Peter Berger, the sociologist, his book, Rumors of Angels, he talks about the same thing, the fact that you're a social animal. And so in many ways, what you come to know or believe is plausible or implausible is based on broad impressions of what most people think, right? What most people know, right, to be true. It's based on that. And if you translate somebody, like an anthropologist, into a different culture, all of a sudden they're tempted to go native, because now everybody else knows something else is true, right? And that's not to say that there is no place of reason. It's to actually say reason is really important because it's the thing that can come into that conversation and look at the pre-rational stuff and assess how rational it really is. And so now I say that because I think for a long time, there's been a myth of secular neutrality, especially in the United States, that's been able to thrive on this, right? We all actually had, we underappreciated how much we had been shaped by the church, by Judaism and Christianity, that's there in the founding, it's there in the enlightenment, it's passed on to the founders of the US, even if many of them were deists, right? It was still just there in the culture of the United States. And so even when people abandoned Christianity, they still lived in a culture that had boundary lines by the instincts of Judeo-Christian religion. And so in many ways that allowed us to say, well, obviously we can talk in non-religious, secular neutral terms about these arguments because like, who's gonna ever say that, right? And yet, as we've seen it dissipate, those fumes of Christianity dissipate, what we see is those boundary lines get further and further and further out, right? So again, to use the trans thing, like 20 years ago, everybody would have blocked at the idea, anyone would remotely consider that. And certainly the idea that anyone would ever think that hacking apart your child's genitals is like a good thing and like for their good. People would go, that's insane. I don't care who you are, nobody would ever believe that. And I think that's because 20 or 30 years ago, the fumes of Christianity were still pretty strong. They were creating this invisible boundary line that, and then as they start to dissipate, those boundaries get further and further and further out. And so we under appreciate just how much our culture and our common cultural reasoning has been shaped by whatever myths and stories and things like that that we tell. So early on, we had this underpinning of a broadly common Judeo-Christian mythology. And here I'm not using it as necessarily false, obviously. I'm just saying like that was the sort of broad cultural sentiment about morality, about the universe and things like that. Atheists were weirdos, right? Like that was just the way things were. And what we're seeing now is as those are dissipating, now new myths are setting in, right? Evolution is the primary myth. The priesthood are the scientists, right? And this is all incidentally by design. You look at people like August Compton and others, they were like, that's what the movement toward utopia is. You're supposed to engineer that and slowly replace the liturgical calendar with political holy days, right? You're supposed to replace the saints with the white coats and the scientists and all that, and so on. So it's all by design, but as we're starting to see one influence, invisible influence dissipate, we're seeing all these other things. And then you add to it the storytelling, whether it's through movies or television or music. And then you add to it these other sorts of things, like as you move towards self-actualization, right? New sentiments that say, actually, I shouldn't even try to shape my child. I should let my child shape themselves and things like that. And now it all begins to accelerate. And obviously the internet accelerates it as well, because if you're talking about, like Peter Berger talks about, as I mentioned, this sort of cultural influence, right? He talks about the phenomena of being a cognitive minority, where if I discover that I'm in the minority in opinion, I either go silent, I abandon the belief altogether, or I proselytize. And proselytizing is the least likely because you're a social animal and that's dangerous. So more likely you go silent or you abandon it. Well, social media has the ability to create impressions of what everybody thinks just by scrolling for a few seconds. Just by likes and dislikes and things like that. And so now you actually have algorithmic tools to socially engineer those impressions. And so that's, I think, one of the reasons why you're seeing those accelerated narratives happen. And I think in order to address that, yes, you need parents stepping up their game, you need pastors stepping up their game, but you also need to address the myth of cultural neutrality. You have to get into the storytelling game and create the counter story that's there. There's a lot of big scale things you have to do because this is actually a big scale game, it's not a small scale game. Now the challenge, of course, we haven't talked much about gatekeepers, but you're right, there are good and bad gatekeepers. And then you also have to talk about patrons. So I'll talk first about the patrons part, right? In the days of Michelangelo, to be a patron of an artist for his entire life was not that expensive, right? I mean, yes, you had to give him a salary, yes, you had to pay for supplies and things like that, but the cost of making a sculpture versus the cost of making a movie is quite different. And if you're talking about multiple movies over lifetimes, you're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars. And so the idea of finding a patron to support an artist was once more realistic when the artist did paintings, right? Movies are multi, multi, multi-million dollar endeavors every time. And so you run into this problem of bringing together patronage with business. How do you make it sustainable? Because it's not sustainable if it's all just always donations or something like that. And so this is where I'd really like to see, and I've actually sort of taken the lead in my own world now to try to engineer this. You really have to figure out a sustainable business model that's also mission-minded. If you wanna tell certain types of stories, you've gotta find an economic way of doing it. Now, what you also need is you need to find people with money who appreciate the mission side of it. And for that reason, they're like, okay, I'm willing to direct significant resources toward the storytelling, but we're not gonna do it in a stupid way. We're gonna do it in a way that is sustainable. So we're gonna marry the business with the mission side. And right now I have my own endeavors along those directions. If there's any multimillionaires out there who wanna talk to me, you know. Can you talk to me? No, so I- Nathanajacobs.substack.com. Yeah, you know that? Yeah, hit me up in the comments, right? So, no, so yeah, I mean, I think you do have to figure out a way to do that. And I think that's a worthy endeavor, not just art for art's sake, but because you realize you're in a battle over story. Yeah. Right, and you need to tell the better story through the means by which people tell stories. So I think that's the sort of financial patronage side of it. The other side is the gatekeepers. And on the one hand, there are a lot of bad gatekeepers right now. I was talking to you about certain projects that I've heard about, right? That have run into problems with gatekeepers. And we see this all the time, right? We see this all the time when we're talking about, you know, a movie, a studio that had like three, all the studios except for one passed on this project. And then it blows up and everybody's like, how could they pass on that? It's so good. The answer is, because none of them are creatives. They didn't see it, right? You only think it's good because you got to see it, right? None of them are in the head of that, you know, writer or director or whatever. And oftentimes that's part of the buffoonery that happens in Hollywood. I mean, you sit here and you imagine like, let's pretend that before Tolkien's book goes to press, we're like, you know, we need to make it more commercial. You know, let's grab this guy over here and that gal over, let's put a room together to scrutinize this thing. And you know, maybe see if we can whip it into shape. It's too esoteric, you know, too layered. People aren't going to be able to understand this and they start to mutilate it. I mean, it would be outrageous. It'd be quite literally insane. And yet that happens in Hollywood all the time. And honestly for myself, that's the flip side of the coin when I talk about trying to find a way to sort of make it business viable to push my own stuff into the public sphere unmolested is exactly that. Is that I'm sitting here going, I'm encountering time after time after time gatekeepers who have no business being gatekeepers molesting my projects. And so there's these walls between me and the audience. That's actually part of the appeal of what you do. You get to just go to the audience, right? Yeah, I get to good, bad, right or wrong. It's all out there and have at it folks. There is a comment section and people do know how to type. That's true. Well, and incidentally, I mean, that's part of what's refreshing for me about Substack. I don't have to go through a publisher. I don't have to go through gatekeepers. I just take this letter that I answered this question. I put it out there, right? Like it's just out there. But on the other hand, as you pointed out, good curators, good gatekeepers are invaluable. So you get somebody who is Tolkien like or something like that, somebody who actually can identify underappreciated talent and they give them the doorway, right? They open the door for them to go out or, you know, you know, they're able to actually put together teams that do make people better. It is true that writing rooms and artists coming together can make things better. It can make them worse, often does, because of the current machinery in place. But it is true that there are brilliant writers and artists and things like that, that when brought together can enhance things. Yeah. And I've experienced both side of this, right? I've experienced people who were a bear to work with and were perpetually dragging down the quality of my material. And I've seen people who I happily relinquish the reins because I'm like, you're brilliant in your area, which is not my area. And that's great. Like, let's move and here's just my few notes on what you do. And so what I wanna see, and I think is really important, at least in the film side of things, is exactly that. Is that what you need to do is you need to come up with the business model that is able to offer smart patronage, where it's like, yes, we're going to be wise and use business savvy in how we utilize these dollars in order to make it profitable and sustainable. And I have my own model for that that I'm working on bringing into existence right now. And then you also need to have good curators, right? Good artists who you can bring together so that you can elevate people who need that push out there, give them the support that they need, as well as provide means of enhancing what they do and making them better than they would be otherwise. So that's sort of the two-edged sword, but that's exactly that good version of all that, is exactly the same thing that I'm trying to accelerate and hope that in the next couple of years we'll actually be real and active. Well, and I think it requires community. And Tolkien would never have done what he did without the inklings. And people can name, usually people get to three inklings, Tolkien, Lewis, they might know Barfield, and then it sort of trails off from there. Who's the art guy, right, and things like that. Yeah, but I think, I mean, ideally a good, I don't even know the nomenclature in Hollywood, but having a good community that can listen to each other, test each other, and again, gatekeeping, when it sort of goes down, it's when to encourage, when to, and how to discourage in a productive way, pointing out, yeah, more of that. I mean, Lewis, of course, was, more of those elves. And of course, in the 1930s and 40s, who was gonna write about elves? That's right, that's right. But then finding and then developing the spirit between those people that this thing can actually go somewhere, because of course, I mean, part of the, as a preacher where you're putting out something every week, you begin to become accustomed to the fact that some of the things that you love really aren't very good, you just love them. And other things that you think aren't very good, maybe have some promise in them, and there is, and sometimes things that are good land flat here, but eventually go, and it's a very interesting dynamic, the way these things that we create sort of have a life of their own, and then work their way in the midst of all of the other lives that we are living among. So yeah, and so I don't know, for me, I've actually found that social media, in the case of YouTube for me, if handled well, can actually be a place where you can find a community, be a place where you can find a community, and get, and have a nice, and have a venue for which, because a venue for which you can actually discover something of value, because so often it's the case that you put out so much stuff that, you know, what if what I've put out is any good? The only way you know that is by feedback, and having people that are, and you need a whole community of people. Some people might be very developed and well-formed, other people might be sort of along the way, but with that mixed group, you can begin to say, okay, so that communicates well to these people, but not over here, and I think again, the cultural challenge is to, as you said earlier, to try to elevate people's tastes, because one person's elevated tastes might become the platform that another person sort of comes in on as their first draft, and that in fact is how over time, you actually improve a culture, that all of the people have a sense of yes, no. So your gatekeepers get better, the parents get better, and you know, that's basically how you improve a civilization. No, I think you're right. I mean, on the social level, it expands in that way. The sort of microcosm on the creative level that my mind goes to is Pixar, early Pixar. Yes. So the entire early Pixar process, they spent so much time in development, storyboarding every scene, scrutinizing every scene, trying to make sure that there are Easter eggs everywhere, bringing in people who are obviously working on the project, but people outside to hear the pitch or to see the things, and it went through so much rigor, partially because you have to render it. This is one of the interesting things. I actually think some of the best directors in Hollywood were oftentimes animators, or that animators sometimes who weren't even directors were some of the sort of best intuitive directors, because you look at, for example, the contrast between, let's say, like the new live action Beauty and the Beast or something like that. And you take Gaston's, like basically his riot song, right, where he's going to rile everybody up, and you contrast the performance with the animation. And what's interesting is, put aside the voice quality of the different actors and who's a better singer and things like that. If you look at the minute direction of the animators, right, as the cartoon character is playing this, right, it's all about these hands and these wild facial expressions. And every moment of every appendage is thoughtful in terms of how it's played out, because the animator has to literally draw every frame. So they're sitting there going, what should his hand? And if you watch Disney animators back in the day, they would have mirrors and they'd sit there and be like, what does it look like when I go, right? And then they're OK. OK, right. And that's how they would do it. They'd look at their hands and examine how that expressively comes out. Obviously, it's exaggerated, it's a cartoon. But in many ways, it was far more meticulously directed and thought through than anything you get in live action. All of a sudden you get to live action, he's just singing, they're singing. And you're like, who directed this? Somebody who clearly hadn't thought through every beat and every moment and every word and what they mean. And they didn't provide that direction to the actors and things like that. And you look at those older things, you know, they did. It wasn't just the animation, it was the voice actors that they would sit there and talk through every line on and all that sort of stuff. And obviously, there's with animation, because it's slowed down, you're building every frame, you're building every line. You have a certain luxury to meticulously build like that. But that really is the job of a director, right? When you're sitting there to get the actor to understand and manifest that on screen. And so I think what you see is that animators, because they have to be so meticulous, they actually do think through every detail. They have to build the room that they're going to be in. So they think about Easter eggs and they think about the architecture and all the things they can slip in there. And I think that comes through in the Pixar process that they spent so much time on development, which is rarely financed in Hollywood. Hollywood, you like a concept, you got a script. All right, let's do it. Right. And you're into pre-pro as opposed to saying, we're going to spend months on development and meticulously scrutinizing the story and bringing in other artists who we respect. Right. Not just rando voices, we're bringing in artists who we respect, directors who we respect to get their outside fresh perspective. And we're taking that into account. And I think that's why those early Pixar movies were so successful, because they they had that community that you're describing. Now, what you're describing is expanding that, you know, expanding that out into a broader culture, where now it's starting to be the things that the conversations you're having here expand them into the churches, into the political sphere, you know, into the artistic and the musical sphere, into the comic book sphere, whatever it is. And I think you're right that that that sort of microcosm, as it grows into a macrocosm, is the sort of thing that that does create change. Well, we should we should land the plane. My phone is my phone is people are leaving me messages. Oh, life goes on out there. There are church people that have demands on me. Well, that's right, Paul, your pastor. I forgot about. I know I am not. I am not just a rather unsuccessful YouTube celebrity. I just do that in my spare time. Well, what what would you like to so we got your sub stack. Do you still have your website? You had a website before. That's how I first found you. I did. You know, it's a little dated, but it is still there. You can you can find it. And so it's Nathan A Jacobs dot com. OK, you need to don't forget the a. Yeah, there was there was a couple of reasons I needed to include that in everything, one was because I taught a University of Kentucky in the philosophy department for a while. And there's another Nathan Jacobs at University of Kentucky. He was in computer science. So I would get like invitations to conferences that speak on like computer science. I'm like, yeah, absolutely. Sign me up. So there was that. And then I think there was also like a a America's most wanted who was a Nathan Jacobs to that. So in order to it's not me in case anybody's curious. Well, you do have those tattoos. Did you get those in prison? Maybe an orthodox prison. That's right. So anyway, so I did include that. So everything is Nathan A Jacobs. If you're looking at my publications or searching me online or whatever, that'll narrow it down. So, yeah, I've got my website, Nathan A Jacobs dot com. You can see there samples of my artwork. You can see there, you know, some some information again, dated like for my first two movies, I don't I don't think I've put anything up related to the newer stuff. You can also find a catalog of academic publications, which will trace to my academia page where I tend to post PDFs of all those. So you can read them if you want. And then a little bit of about the sub stack, as I said, is where I publish stuff that's most meant to be more accessible. And now I do think it's still a little deep waters for, you know, for folks who maybe aren't accustomed to reading philosophy or theology, but I try to make it rather accessible. And then Nathan Jacobs podcast, the Nathan Jacobs podcast, that'll be coming out here soon. I don't know if this will be up by the time it's out, but maybe maybe if that's up, you can point people to that. Throw that in the heap as well. And if not, just on the pile. That's right. If not, just, you know, search me from time to time. What was the name of your document? I did Becoming Human, but then I got a bunch of monkeys with sticks. Right, right, right. Now becoming truly human. Truly human. Yeah. You get monk. You get monkeys if you keep out the truly and then truly you get me and a bunch of religiously unaffiliated folks. There it is. I really like that. I thought that was a I thought I thought it was a great documentary. It was I think it really the tone was right. It was. You know, with this therapeutic culture, in some ways you sort of have to start with that door. And then once you develop a degree of credibility, then you can kind of you have to have a pretty firm found American. Americans are so there's such flighty little creatures sometimes, you know, they can't take a lot. Yeah. Even even though even though the world is pretty doggone cruel. Sometimes so. Yeah. Well, the other thing I will say, if people aren't interested in my theological letters, what they can do is there is a post on there called For Those Who Like Podcasts. And so there's a table of contents pinned to the top. You can always navigate the site going there. And so if you find for those who like podcasts, I actually just cataloged all my different podcasts, appearances and put it up. So that OK with hyperlinks and things like that. So that's everything for me on, you know, on here with you to like closer to truth, the PBS show and things like that. So OK, there you go. All right. Beautiful. It should be more than enough for anybody who's curious about me. Well, I will be very interested to hear after you've gotten into the weeds of podcasting a little bit and seen where it's gone. You know, don't feel free to send me a text when you get so Paul. Listen to this podcast because I'm OK. I'm a gatekeeper of such I've become sort of a gatekeeper. That's good. It's good to know a gatekeeper. Well, you'll be surprised who comes through that gate sometimes because after I post this, they're definitely going to be coming. So I must warn you. OK. OK. You know, as a guy who went to art school, lived in the slums of Baltimore, grew up in Chicago, have lived in Kentucky and, you know, taught philosophy and religion and now in Hollywood. I mean, nothing surprises me anymore, Paul. I feel like I've met them all. Well, maybe that's good. We will see. We will see. I've got a number of very interesting critters and in the menagerie that sometimes called this little corner of the Internet. So, OK, we will see. We will. I'll let you know if anything surprises me along the way. I'll be sure to do that. Sounds great. Well, Jacob, it's great talking to you. And yeah, keep in touch. I'm anxious to see where this goes. Yeah. Thanks, Paul, for having me. All right.