https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=iYSLD7g4Axs

 Hi, this is Paul haven't made a video for a few days Friday and Saturday. I brought my youngest son to college Sunday I had Sunday Monday had a funeral Tuesday was traveling for church work. So just the way it goes sometimes Friend sent me an email about the simulated world and if you want to pause the screen you can read as read his email It's a good email Basically, I don't think we're living in a simulation as we conceive of that We we imagine that we're we're on the screen of some Someone behind there who is who is doing something? I think what's interesting about the simulation argument is how it moves us From this position of what Elon Musk calls base reality when Elon Musk says base reality He is assuming that we are Built into that phrase built into that message is the assumption that human beings are to the best of our knowledge the only conscious subjects of The world and these are exactly the objections that my friend was raising in his email about being observers What's what's interesting to me about this is Elon Musk in his description of this said well we create simulations to amuse us and therefore base reality Beneath the simulation must be quite dull but the observation that he makes that now that we have sufficient computing power to This remember this was in the context of AI to create machines that can That can show us a context where we assume agency it Must be possible for this to have been done before And if it is possible for this to have been done before and if the universe is as big as it is it's very possible that You know, well it is in fact the whole universe might be part of the simulation So it's very possible that there might be another being in a sense that has created this universe What's interesting all Sam Harris goes on to read to refer to Bostrom in I forget which of the lectures but he but Sam Harris is impressed with the argument and This is Nick Bostrom who came up with this many works of science fiction as well as some forecasts by serious Technologists and futurists predict that enormous amounts of computing power will be available in the future Let us suppose for a moment that these predictions are correct One thing that later generations might do with their super powerful computers is run detailed simulations of their forebearers or people like their Forebearers because their computers would be so powerful They could run a great many such simulations suppose that these simulated people are conscious as they would be if the simulation were sufficiently fine-grained and Certainly and certain widely accepted positions in the philosophy of mind is correct Then it could be the say the case that the vast majority of minds like ours do not belong to the original race But rather people simulated by the advanced descendants of an original race It is then possible to argue that if this were the case We would be rational to think that we are likely among simulated minds rather than among the original biological minds Therefore if we don't think that we are currently living in a computer science simulation We are not entitled to believe that we will have descendants who will run lots of simulations of their forebears And then he has there are these three there are these three points below The fraction of human level civilizations that reach a post human stage That is one capable of running high fidelity ancestor simulations is very close to zero or the fraction of post human Civilizations that are interested in running ancestor Similization civilizations is very close to zero or the fraction of all people With our kind of experiences that are living in a simulation is very close to one Now even Sam Harris thought this was an interesting argument than a powerful argument Again, my interest isn't necessarily in this argument because in many ways this argument is imaginatively contained Within the capacities that we are discovering as we continue to develop computer technology But as Elon Musk has given the advancement of that, why are we limiting limiting it to necessarily our ancestors? I think essentially this argument is there's a striking resemblance to the cosmological argument as I've mentioned in previous videos I think Peterson knocks on the door of the ontological argument regularly in terms of the God that he is imagining and and the the necessity of the He's refusing to make or he's pulling back from making metaphors metaphysical claims a God that Brings into account sufficiently the kinds of relationships We are capable of having with each other and the kinds of civilization. We are capable of creating I think this argument actually triggers within us the cosmological argument because what we are beginning to see that as our capacity to create virtual worlds grow and our capacity to fool human beings with respect to these virtual worlds and as our science fiction continues to generate More and more ideas about what kinds of simulations we might run This goes again all the way back to the the movie The Matrix increasingly The larger part of our brains that are not tied up with the little conscious story that we experience as ourselves I think are more and more Open to the idea that well, perhaps When Elon Musk says base reality Base reality isn't as base as we imagine and that there is something beneath it that there that what we have been calling base reality for a few hundred years actually hardly even that long is is probably more a reality created by a mind that is sufficiently larger and greater than our own The cosmological argument in natural theology and we're going to talk about natural theology a little bit in philosophy a cosmological argument is an argument in which the existence of a unique being Generally seen as some kind of God is deduced or inferred from facts or alleged facts concerning causation change most in contingency or finitude with respect to the universe as A whole or processes within it it is traditionally known as an argument from universal causation an argument from a first cause or a causal argument in this case the Cause is the imagination that maybe We didn't get here first. Maybe another being has created this situation and Now that we are increasingly fooled by even the beginnings of immersive computer realities we are starting and and as Philosophically we are more and more aware of the degree to which we are prisoners of our phenomenological assumptions We are beginning to imagine that perhaps all of this is the creation of another being And what kind of being might that be? See my interest here is not so much that Arguments work because all of these arguments the ontological argument or the Cosmological argument Why do they work when they work and if you go back to the last couple of videos I created I created With respect to thinking about God in quotes or the gods These we are One of the things we are always doing is trying to orient ourselves These meta stories these huge stories are functionally orientation devices and we pick up these clues That inform and influence which orientations are And we pick up these clues That inform and Influence which orientation devices we embrace based on whole realms of things Now what I'm going to do in most of this video is go through NT Wright's first Gifford lecture Because what we're really talking about in terms of Jordan Peterson all along and I didn't really put this together So I started watching the Gifford lectures is really natural theology Because what Jordan Peterson has been doing is arguing his way up to the existence of God from Darwinian science psychology and this This coalition of things that Jordan Peterson has been bringing to the table Now when arguments work is at least as interesting as the arguments themselves and we've been talking about Jonathan Haidt and This moral universe and how we you know, how how our moralities come into play and how the sociology Amongst each other shapes these realities, of course Jordan Peterson and many others Really big things like this aren't so much reasoned. Although there's plenty of reasoning but felt In other words, why is it that This is this is Charles Taylor's huge question Why is it that before 1500? No one had trouble believing in a god After 1500 we see this process by which increasingly the idea of god is axiomatic and Elon Musk's base reality Becomes the assumption We do this in groups as Jonathan Haidt has been Strenuously putting forth and Jordan Peterson has and Jordan Peterson says says, you know We do this in groups And Jordan Peterson has and Jordan Peterson says says, you know, we do this in groups and these mythologies get you know these mythologies become The stories in which we we inhabit and these become the filters that we use to move into the future a very Generous and kind viewer sent me this book by Owen Barfield and if you If you go If you go to youtube and google owen barfield owen barfield was a personal friend of cs lewis at a very interesting relationship Owen barfield gets into a lot of these kinds of assumptions about our perceptions and how they work Now NT Wright in last february Did the gifford lectures and I didn't know anything about the gifford lectures the gifford lectures are very prestige prestigious lecture series I'm sure there's a prize an award and he he gave those lectures and he gave them and the gifford lectures are dedicated to natural theology Not a lot of biblical scholars are given that the last new testament scholar to be given it was was barfield not barfield was Is boltman in the 50s and then james bar later alvin plantiga has done them Charles taylor did them? And so basically these are this is theology up from the bottom And and the question of natural theology is what can we know? from below and as we've been looking at jordan peterson many times i've talked about the fact that jordan peterson has been arguing towards a god from below and this In our secular age almost any argument from above gets swatted be let's get swatted away So there's a lot of interest In what can be had from below? Little definition of natural theology natural theology is a program of inquiry into the existence and attributes of god Without referring to any appeals to any divine revelation that should make sam harris happy In natural theology one asks what the word god means whether and how whether and how names Can be applied to god whether god exists whether god knows the future free choices of creatures If our choices are in fact free and so forth the aim is to answer those questions without using any claims drawn from any sacred text or divine revelation Even though one may hold such claims For the purposes of studying natural theology jews christians muslims and others will bracket and set aside for the moment their commitments to sacred writings Or traditions they believe to be god's word so on and so forth now Again, we've been doing a lot of talking about jordan peterson's god And he has his axiomatic god or god number one god or the gods are shaped and developed through evolution They are built into us through hard and soft structures And what peterson is bringing to the table is that he believes that we as a civilization Ignore this at our peril and that's his conversation with sam harris now if you listen to You know a number of say christian Critiquers of jordan peterson they will often find him insufficient in some ways that christians are Putting together their universe, but this is the project that we have been working on So what i'm going to do actually through a bunch of this video and you might say well What does this have to do with a simulation? My point in this is that what in this first lecture nt right is going to be doing is walking us through Similar to charles taylor and he'll use a little bit of charles taylor and i'll refer to charles taylor a little bit later walking us through How we got to this point because it isn't the case That's not an accurate historical rendering of the process because in fact the process has Had some certain steps and stages and nt right will talk about that now nt right if you're not familiar with him is A new testament scholar and a classical historian He's a professor of science and he's a professor of science of science of science of science of science of science of science of science Of course, he's a professor of science With him is a new testament scholar and a classical historian Biblical scholars focus in different ways Tom rash earning his scholarship by a nonathaages interface Senate no. Two One of the upcoming lectures he spends an entire lecture on the question What is history which actually gets into some of the same? same territory that Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris were talking about because you get into the question of how can we know this, this world outside of ourselves that is impinging upon ourselves and what's our relationship to that world. So let's jump in and we're going to actually play most of this lecture and I'll give a little bit of commentary along the way and drop a few other things along the way. My mother now in her 95th year asked me what these lectures were going to be about. I explained that some people used to think you could start from the natural world and think your way up to God from there, that other people thought that wasn't such a good idea but that fresh thoughts about history might lead to fresh ideas about Jesus and thence to God after all and that on the way we might learn something about the nature of knowledge itself. I thought that was quite enough to explain to her. My mother thought for a few moments and then said firmly, I'm glad I don't have to listen to those lectures. Anyone who agrees with my mother should feel under no obligation to stay but let me sketch a slightly fuller version of what I want to do. I shall begin by putting the earlier quest for natural theology, including Lord Gifford's bequest, into its 18th and 19th century cultural context, particularly the rise of new forms of epicureanism. Then in the second lecture, Wednesday, I'll show how the same distorted perspectives crippled modern biblical studies from the start. This includes, I fear, Bultman's interpretation in his 1955 Giffords of History and Eschatology to which my own subtitle alludes. That was the last time a full-on New Testament scholar gave the Giffords, as was said. Since then, there's only been an Old Testament scholar, James Barr, in 1991. So if we exegetes are rationed to one shot every generation, perhaps my successor in 2050 can pick up the conversation from here. So the first two lectures form the first movement of a four-movement proposal sketching the historical context. The second pair of lectures then address the question of what history and eschatology themselves might mean. Historical knowledge is real knowledge about the real world and forms a key part of the relationship between that real world and God. And that will enable us to clarify apocalyptic and eschatology in the fourth lecture. Now, just to note in terms of some of the things that I've said about C.S. Lewis, that's part of C.S. Lewis's point in terms of the differentiation between Christianity and many other religions. That Christianity is built on history, and certain ideas of history are actually, Christianity is dependent on certain ideas of history. And that's, in a sense, why many other religions are essentially assertions about metaphysics and the metastory of the world. Christianity is dependent upon history in some rather unique ways for its story. C.S. Lewis gets into that in his book, Miracles, and some of the other C.S. Lewis doodles that you can find on YouTube incorporate that idea as well. Then the fifth and sixth lectures, the third pair, will place Jesus and his resurrection within the world of first century Jewish cosmology, eschatology, and anthropology. And that's where new creation comes into its own, leading us back to the question of natural theology with fresh possibilities and lines of thought. And that leads to the final pair. In the seventh lecture, I'll explore these possibilities in detail. And in the eighth, we'll offer some combined cosmological and missiological proposals which address the underlying problems. There's too many illogicals in there. We should invent a new way of saying these things, but that's where we are at the moment. Now, I'll warn you that a lot of these lectures are technical. This first lecture is less technical. You don't need to know as many things about, let's say, history of interpretation, history of philosophy, and social history in the West in this first lecture as you do in some of the other lectures. NT Wright writes more books than many of us can read, and he's got a pretty impressive knowledge about history. And I will be explaining throughout what I am calling rather loosely the epistemology of love as the appropriate means both to grasp new creation and to think back from that to the original creation itself. All the lectures apart from this first one will take place, you'll have noticed, during Lent. Perhaps they will function as a call to penitence. Lent is the liturgical season of the church in anticipation of Good Friday, which is the remembrance of Jesus' crucifixion, and then Easter, which is Jesus' resurrection. But my overall theme is the Easter message of new creation, discerning the dawn, and the relation of that to natural theology will, I hope, become clear. You remember that C.S. Lewis said he believed in Christianity as he believed that the sun had risen not only because he saw it, but because by it he could see everything else. And so, N.T. Wright, in a sense, has to keep coming back to the fact that he is going to do natural theology here, unlike what he does in much of his work, which is making cases from scripture. Making a metaphor out of that, similarly, we might say that the relationship between the sunlight and the newly glimpsed world is precisely the theme of natural theology. So, the puzzles we inherit. When I was Bishop of Durham, my study contained many books that had belonged to my predecessors. And one day, a postcard fell out of one of them, dated 300 years ago last year, 1717. It was an invitation to tennis addressed to a young man then seeking Anglican ordination. That young man was Joseph Butler, who became Bishop of Durham from 1750 until his early death two years later. Butler's classic work, written in 1736, was the analogy of religion. Butler argued against the then-powerful deists that the perceived problems in the Bible, the mysteries and cruelties of sacred history, were matched by the mysteries and cruelties inherent in the natural world. So, he argued, thank you, for what he called analogies between the world of nature and the truths of the Christian faith, lending support to the latter. Now, that summary. Now, it's helpful to notice. This is 1736. And if you listen to the description of the argument he was making, you might say, well, all of this is, isn't this new stuff? Isn't it just this new awakening that we have that, you know, the Bible is archaic technology and Christianity has been dispelled by science? This is 1736. This is a long time before Darwin. And they're grappling with the same kinds of issues. As those of you who know Butler's work will know, does scant justice to his subtle and powerful learning. But Butler is important not just for what he said, but for what he represented, a mood of Christian optimism. The missionary movements of his day were mostly postmillennial in inspiration. Now, postmillennial here refers to eschatology and Christianity as study of the last things. Premillennial means Jesus, the second coming of Christ comes before a literal historical millennium where he will reign from Jerusalem. Many people in American evangelical churches today are premillennial. The Left Behind series was a premillennial interpretation of eschatology. My tradition is amillennial, which doesn't, which basically refuses to take a position on this millennial matter. Postmillennials tend to be people who argue that history is slowly advancing. It's a progressivist view of history, but Christian postmillennialism, Christian progressivism imagines that the world is getting better and better and better and that basically things will continue to get better and will just go right up into Jesus reigning. And into your right, we'll talk about that a little bit more. The kingdom of God was growing and soon Jesus would be hailed as Lord of Lords right around the world. Handel set this to music in 1741 in the Messiah. An earlier example is Joseph Addison's hymn of 1712, The Spacious Firmament on High. At one level, this is simply an Englishing of Psalm 19, but at another level, it bears the stamp of the same Christian faith which Butler put into his anti-dayist arguments. So N.T. Wright is talking about the kind of the attitude that was present in the church in the early 18th century. There was a great deal of, well, it was the age of discovery. Europe was expanding into all the world and that growth of civilization, of Christian civilization was seen as, well, now all the world will be Christian like us. And it's in that mood, now obviously today that's seen in a very different light, but that mood led people to believe we're getting it all right. We're doing it all right. And this was very big in the church at the time. What though in solemn silence all move round the dark terrestrial ball, what though nor real voice nor sound amidst their radiant orbs be found, in reason's ear they all rejoice and utter forth a glorious voice, forever singing as they shine, the hand that made us is divine. Now notice reason. And again, if you've been watching the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversation, you'll notice how reason is often set up as in opposition to faith. There in the beginning of the 18th century they were asserting that reason is in harmony with faith and together faith and reason will continue to arise together and faith and reason, faith will employ reason and the world will now come under Christ's reign. This is Christendom in its high time in a sense. Now this you might think is natural theology at its best, a scripturally sourced acknowledgement that the natural world speaks and indeed sings of its creator and that human reason can hear that song. Such ideas were widespread. A noble vision. And then came the crash. The earthquake that struck Lisbon on All Saints' Day 1755 destroyed 85% of the buildings in the city, killing around a fifth of the city's population, not least those who were in church for the festival. But the shattering geophysical events were as nothing compared with the philosophical and ideological devastation. The fallen shrine of Lisbon symbolizes the collapse of optimistic natural theology. Now I'm going to jump into Tim Keller's book at this point and we're going to go back to NT Wright. Tim Keller's book Walking with God Through Pain and Suffering. I think this is actually one of Tim Keller's best books. And I want to contextualize this so he has a chapter on natural evil and the Lisbon earthquake, but I want to jump a little bit forward to Tim Keller's treatment of Charles Taylor because I know some of you have been writing me and said I'm trying to read Charles Taylor's book and I can't get through it. Well, join the club. I think reading Charles Taylor's book is a very daunting task. Tim Keller will give you a little foot, a little cliff note of it. In the early modern era, Christianity was ascendant in Europe and in the New World. This is the post-millennial heyday that NT Wright was talking about. But over the next 500 years, things changed. As philosopher Charles Taylor asked, why was it virtually impossible not to believe in God in say 1500 in our western society while in 2000 many of us find this not only easy but even inescapable to not believe in God. And again, this is why I find this Jordan Peterson moment so interesting because for the last 500 years we've had big terms now. We've had revivals along the way and many different places. Jordan Peterson seems to be again a fly in this progressivist ointment. Over the last five, over the last five century, the originally faith-filled religious societies of the west have slowly become more secular. Religion and faith have decreasingly influenced in public institutions. Belief in God is allowed but regularly challenged as problematic. That's, you know, Sam Harris would say problematic at best. And seen as just one option for life among many others. Taylor coins a number of unique terms to describe contemporary secularity. He says that today we live in an imminent frame. The view that the world is a completely natural order without any supernatural. And we're going to get into those words with NT Wright. It is completely imminent world over against possible transcendent one. Another phrase he uses is the buffered self. In older times the concept of self was open and porous. It included a soul, for example, which connected us to God and the spiritual world. And therefore much of our inner nature, feelings, intuitions and attitudes were under the influences of forces outside of us, forces we could not control. It was often assumed that one was required to look outside of the self to nature and to God to learn the right way to live. Modern people, however, have a buffered self, a self that is bounded and self-contained. Because there is no transcendent supernatural order outside of me, it is I who determine what I am and who I will be. And if you've listened to a number of my past videos, I bring in often David Brooks, the road to character where David Brooks talks about Adam one and Adam two. And then this transition of the self in American culture after the World War II generation to what I call the secret, sacred self. Well, this is part of this buffered self where I am not afraid of being possessed by evil spirits. I'm not afraid of the evil I. Now it's interesting that Sam Harris in his talks continues to assert that, and I think actually Think Club does a good job of debunking this, that Sam Harris continues to assert that these influences on me can be put away if I just think about it rationally. And I think that's a naive perspective that in fact these ideas are not simply held within my brain. They are held within our sociology. They are held with the gods among us as if you look back over my previous videos in terms of who these gods that Jordan Peterson is talking about are. These, we imagine that, well, I'm just going to think rationally and I'm going to think separate from my neighbors. That's not how human beings are constructed. And so if you read Jonathan Haidt, you'll read all about that. I do not need to look at anything outside myself in order to know how to live. I just listen to my heart and let my heart be my guide. Again, you can read Christian Smith's work on, as a sociologist on the younger generation in terms of where they get their religious or moral knowledge. They imagine that their religious or moral knowledge is unconstructed. So again, Jordan Peterson comes along and says, no, it's highly constructed. As does Jonathan Haidt. Today, the self is the mastery, master of the meaning of things for it. Indeed, we now, we stake our claim as legislators of meaning. And often freedom from religion people will say, meaning is what I bring to the world. And the entire Jordan Peterson movement I think arises because a great many people are skeptical of that claim and they are saying, I don't think I'm just putting meaning on things. That leaves me over there with the relativists. I think I am actually discovering meaning and meaning is out there in the world. And then Jordan Peterson is leading people to ask questions. Well, if meaning is out there in the world, where does it come from? It comes from a bigger story. Well, which bigger story should we inhabit? The shift to the new sense of self, Taylor argues, required an enormous new growth in the confidence of our own powers of moral ordering. And Sam Harris is in a sense on the tip of that wave. In older times, there was a much greater humility about our ability to understand the universe. The reason was it was a bigger universe. There was infinite mystery to it. Depths that human reason could never plumb or know. There were more things in heaven and on earth that could be dreamt of in our human philosophies. It was not a universe framed solely by imminence. It was shot through with the spiritual, again, one of those words that fudge as well. But the imminent frame developed and grew alongside the buffered self-sufficient self. While Taylor speaks, well, Taylor speaks in academic language, more popular and vivid expressions prove his point every day. Recently, a New York Times article observed a trend in people, particularly women, naming themselves. OK, so now we're even past, things have been accelerating, we're even past Keller's book where people are not only renaming themselves. You used to be named by a parent. They're naming themselves. They're taking on new genders themselves. They imagine themselves to be the source of their own creation. The self is truly buffered and it's truly an imminent frame. And despite part of the reason Jordan Peterson is nervous about this trend is he rightly sees that all of the work that has asserted that, in fact, we are constructed. Well, this is all just being moved away. Don't tell me what categories I must fit in. My biology has nothing to do with it. One woman who renamed herself after divorce explained, naming myself was symbolic in many ways. It signified to me how I had to take full responsibility for my life. I had to create my own happiness to build my strength to be the engine of my momentum. The shift to the immanent frame did not immediately remove all belief in God, but it altered it. The frame, as it were, was not solid on all four sides, but had a small opening at the top. Taylor explains how deism came in among the elites of the 18th century. And we're going to get to them in NT Wright's lecture soon. The idea of deism is that God created the world for our benefit and now operated it and it now operates on its own without his constant or direct involvement. This world works like a clock and can be understood scientifically without any need for divine revelation. Is all this sounding familiar? In this understanding of things, God exists, but becomes somewhat or something more distant, not someone we can know. No, we're getting to God number, the separation of God number one and God number two. Our main responsibility is not to love, worship, or obey him, seeking his forgiveness when we fail to do so. Instead, human beings main purpose is to use our reason and free will to support human flourishing. Again, that should sound very familiar. In short, the older Christian idea that we exist for God's glory receded and was replaced by the belief that God exists to nurture and sustain us. And again, one thing I like about my new headphones, I've got a longer cord. Oh, come on, grab the book. Probably should have paused. So this is where we get Robert Bella, Habits of the Heart, and Christian Smith, Soul Searching. And what you find in these books are the fruit of that process that Taylor is trying to describe. One of the first places that the new modern self came up against evil and suffering was in the great Lisbon earthquake of 1755. N.T. Wright just brought that up too. A famous example of what has been called natural evil. Now pay attention to the name. If you've been watching my sermons on Sunday, you'll notice that Jonah runs away from God and there in the ocean comes the torment, comes the storm. And as I mentioned in the sermon, the language of that is theophonic language. And what that means is God shows up as a storm and the sailors are terrified. But Jonah knows who caused the storm. When you have a tsunami, now Christian pastors are quick to run in and say, God didn't do it. Well, okay. But who did? Or what did? Or what is nature? And therefore, what is God number one? Now Jordan Peterson might be, now I'm not going to run in there and say, well, the hurricane that destroyed New Orleans, blah, blah, blah. We can't do that. But this older assertion of providence recedes and we have this idea of natural evil that, well, there's a problem in the system that has caused hurricanes. Now it's funny because if you talk to, let's say, someone who is thoroughly naturalistic, they will say, hurricanes are not problems, people are. We die because we are in the way of hurricanes. Okay. But you can see already the pieces are coming into play here. So Lisbon 1775, a famous example is what was called natural evil, suffering caused not by human agents, but just as part of the natural world. And now you'll also recognize when Jordan Peterson distinguishes between this kind of catastrophe and evil. He does that quite a bit. Well, that's because he's playing along these same lines. On All Saints Day, November 1, a massive earthquake almost completely destroyed the chief city of Portugal and killed tens of thousands of people. Many philosophers and thinkers, and you're notably Voltaire, saw this as evidence against the existence of the loving God of the Bible. Now what's interesting here is notice how the character of the God of the Bible has shifted. Voltaire says there is no loving God. Sam Harris might say this is consistent with the God of the Bible, which is why we have to get rid of it. Both Voltaire and Sam Harris want to get rid of the Bible, but their characterization of the God of the Bible is a little bit different. Looking back on this event from deep within a secular culture, we might think that the problem of evil questioning God in the face of disaster was completely normal. Today, every new major tragedy evokes the same kind of public questions and challenges to faith in the divine. But Taylor points out that the problem of evil discourse about the Lisbon earthquake was actually a new thing. Of course, people have questioned the ways and justice of God in human affairs since the book of Job and earlier. The Old Testament is full of that conversation. In fact, many books of the Bible are focused on that. And in fact, Peterson, I was relistening to some of his biblical lectures again. Peterson turns and notes that when there's a calamity, the Jews turn in on themselves and they ask the question, what did we do to cause this to happen? Now, many of us would say, well, that's an unfortunate question. And I as a pastor will agree sometimes that is an unfortunate question. But Peterson says the turning in and asking that about ourselves actually has an optimistic side where we might say, what can I do to do better? In other words, my house was destroyed by a hurricane. What can I do to do better? Maybe build a stronger house or not build right on the beach. Of course, people have questioned virtually no one on record had previously argued that evil made the existence of God impossible. The assertion that evil disproves God's existence was something that would arise only if the imminent frame assumptions about God were already in place. Notice it's these background assertions that are feeding the imaginary that's Charles Taylor's word, feeding the imaginary of the gods or God number one or God in quotes. And these things are orienting us in terms of our assumptions about God. And I think if this simulation argument continues to gain traction, we're going to see Jordan Peterson, the simulation arguments and other things perhaps marking a wave, a turn away from what Sam Harris is imagining. And on a popular level, people increasingly asking if we're living in a constructed universe, it might be good to get to know the constructor. And in fact, trying to figure out the constructor has been pretty much the subject of every meaningful conversation from the beginning of recorded conversations. Taylor writes that when Western society believed in a world that was mysterious and unknowable by reason and in a God who was glorious and ineffable, the problem of evil was less acute. In that view, inexplicable evil was to be expected. But the secularity of deism made the problem of evil much worse for two reasons. In earlier time when suffering occurred, just because we couldn't think within our own mind of good reasons for it didn't mean that there couldn't be any. In other words, we believed in a God and that the God was mysterious and that the Lord gives and the Lord takes away. Blessed be the name of the Lord. It's from the book of Job. God's works in mysterious ways that no one can fathom. If you had that idea built into you and disaster struck, you might have a chance of imagining these bad things might not turn out badly for me and that there is hope even with the bad things that have happened to me. Now we turn it on its head and say, this is all just chance. Bad things still happened. Well, what then? You're in control. But if you've ever sat in a hurricane, you know you're not in control. But by the 18th century, we believe that with our minds and reason, we could eventually understand everything. Now pay attention here. It wasn't that they understood everything, but they had the assumption that in time they will understand everything. And I've seen this often because on one hand, the atheists will complain, well, you Christians are banking on a next life that that we don't believe you will ever see. And I can test that and say you atheists are imagining human progress that you even agree you won't see. So whose idea is better? Because we became confident in our powers of exhaustive observation and this conviction changed the way human beings regarded evil. Evil now became a much bigger problem. In other words, the getting rid of God didn't get rid of evil. And you'll notice how many times Sam tries to go back to saying, well, in Hindu societies, evil is just ignorance. Oh, so with education and knowledge, we'll get rid of evil. The certainty that we have all that we have all the elements we need to carry out a trial of God can only come in the age of the world picture. Earlier, in dire straits in the world God made, we can more easily be inclined to appeal to him as helper and savior while accepting that we can't understand how this creation got into this fix and whose fault it is, presumably ours. Again, that's Jordan Peterson and this Jewish move. Now that we think we see how it works, people in the coffee houses and salons begin to express their dissatisfaction and reflection on divine justice and the theologians begin to feel that this is the challenge they must meet. Second, people now believe we were not created primarily to serve God for his benefit, rather God had made the world for our benefit. That's deism. But Taylor goes on. It is this deistic conception of God, not as much the traditional Christian view that the Lisbon earthquake threw into crisis. He wrote, once we claim to understand the universe and how it works, once we even try to explain how it works by invoking its being created for our benefit, then this explanation is open to clear challenge. In Lisbon 1755, it seemed it seemed clearly not to have worked for the benefit. So the imminent frame. So the imminent order ups its ante. Let's go back to NT Wright and see where he goes with this. There were, of course, other reasons for the reaction. Lisbon did not generate Voltaire's skepticism out of nothing. And Jews and Christians had always known about earthquakes and famines and the like. Perhaps they only became problems when Christianity has taken either a deist form or the Butler-like response to it. So in other words, Butler is trying to fight deism. But the problem is built into both of their categories when Lisbon hit, which is what made Lisbon such a catastrophe in the West. Nor was skepticism itself new. Over a century earlier, Descartes had unleashed, despite I think his intentions, a wave of potential skepticism. And memories of intra-religious conflict whipped that wave higher. People, in other words, already had sociopolitical reasons for wanting traditional Christianity to be untrue. And now they had epistemological tools to help. The Lisbon earthquake then was seized upon by those who, for whatever reason, wanted to reject Europe's Catholicism and Protestantism alike. Voltaire's sarcastic comments about God and Lisbon. Will you now say, he asks in a famous poem, asks the devout, will you now say that this terrible event will merely illustrate the iron laws that chain the will of God? These comments expressed what many others were thinking. And when the dust had settled, the deism which Butler had opposed had been replaced with a similar but sharper worldview, a revival of the ancient philosophy, Epicureanism. Now, I was so interested when NT Wright went here in this lecture, because when I was trying to think about Sam Harris, in a sense looking at the Sam Harris Jordan Peterson conversation, I was thinking, this is kind of a deism versus an Epicureanism. There's an Epicurean take to Sam Harris. And so then when I watched this Gifford lecture, I thought, wow, there's NT Wright needs to talk to these people. Things were now explicit. People had often confused deism and Christianity, as they still do. No chance of that with Epicurus. Now, Epicureanism had been increasingly popular in Europe as an alternative to the official religion since the rediscovery of the great Epicurean poet Lucretius in 1417. Now, in previous videos where I've talked more about history, the Renaissance, the Renaissance brings back their discovery of these ancient texts, partially due to the crusade and the greater openness to the Muslim world, and brings back these teachings, and these teachings come back into this focus and fascination with the classical period. And so in comes Lucretius. It had been influential, though inevitably controversial, in the complex debates of the 17th century, including the rise of new scientific endeavors. Edmund Halley used Lucretius as a model for the ode he wrote in celebration of Newton's mathematically coherent system. Cannon Robert South of Oxford, eager to say the worst thing he could about members of the Royal Society, described them in... Now, the Royal Society is this group in London that's trying all kinds of crazy experiments on all kinds of things. And I've been reading a book that's been going through some of the experiments that the Royal Society made, but this was, this was, this is the beginning of science. 1678 as, quote, sons of Epicurus, both for voluptuousness and irreligion, unquote. All this had been in the air. But after 1755, Epicureanism had come to stay. Forget those stars and planets singing the praises of God. If there is a God, he or she is a long way away, takes no notice either of us or of the whirling stars. Religion is a human invention designed to keep the masses docile. Here's some marks. The world does what it does under its own steam. It develops and changes in random ways without outside interference. Now, again, the rise of the simulated world argument, which, again, I don't think we're in a computer simulation with a 13-year-old playing video games with us. But the rise in this is in contrast to Lucretius. Now, you might think, well, NT Wright, he's going into all these strange things. A couple of years ago, the swerve Stephen Greenblatt wrote a book. This book's pumping heart is Mr. Greenblatt's complicated reckoning of Lucretius's masterpiece. It's a poem of startling, seductive beauty, he writes, yet one that is recognized as a bold work of philosophy, one that helped recalibrate thinking when it began to recirculate during the Renaissance. This is alive today. And in fact, it's when I read, when I read, I didn't finish it, but when I read swerve, and when I saw this pop up in one of my listservs that I was participating, a Christian listserv, I thought, now this is fascinating how this has come back into the public sphere. Apparently, according to NT Wright, it never left. As atoms move randomly and sometimes through swerving, bump into one another and produce new effects. That's all there is to life. Sound familiar? When we die, we die, so there is in both senses nothing to be afraid of. That is Epicureanism in a nutshell. From the great man himself in the third century BC, through Lucretius's poem in the first century BC, all the way to Machiavelli, Thomas Jefferson, and many more since. Karl Kurpen, a close friend of the young Karl Marx, claimed that Epicurus was the great enlightener of antiquity, a view echoed by Marx himself. This robust materialism has become so much today's stock in trade that we don't even realize its ancient roots. As Catherine Wilson, formerly of this university, argued, when we read summaries of Lucretius, the ideas seem deeply familiar because, quote, many of the work's core arguments are among the foundations on which modern life has been constructed, end of quote. This renders the process, the project of natural theology, a lot harder. Or rather, it makes it harder to argue from the world up to anything like the Christian god. Epicureanism does offer a kind of natural theology. We look at the whirling atoms just doing their own thing, and we conclude that the gods were never involved in this world, and they still aren't. Christian natural theology, however, now not only has to make bricks without straw, it has to build on land already liable to subsidence. Before proceeding further, let me briefly clarify three things. First, on the history of ideas. Now, these three points are really good, and I remember when I first heard them, I thought, yeah, these are good things to keep in mind when we're talking about ideas and thinkers, like we're talking about in almost all of my videos. I do not suppose that great thinkers were always consistent, or that as soon as they'd said something, everybody in Europe believed it. Some were outrageous pioneers whose ideas took a century to be accepted. And I think that's Nietzsche. Some caught a public mood and expressed it strikingly so that as with great poetry, people glimpsed something that oft was thought but ne'er so well expressed. Is that Jordan Peterson? I don't know. We'll have to wait 100 or 200 years to find out. Most great thinkers come somewhere in between. Now, I'm using words like modernity and enlightenment here heuristically. The key figure... And you might remember that word from Brett Weinstein. It's that these are simplified models to get at something. ...often didn't think of themselves here heuristically. Now, I'm using words like modernity and enlightenment here heuristically. And a little bit later, he's actually going to go into enlightenment, and the use of the word, a lot of which I didn't know. The key figures often didn't think of themselves like that. We think, after all, of Schubert as standing on the bridge between classical and romantic music. But Schubert himself was thinking about love and death and the next tune. Only in retrospect do we see where people fit into a larger sketch. And my aim is not to attempt a chronology of developing ideas, but to draw attention to currents of thought which, with hindsight, we see to have shaped the world within which our questions have been asked. And to propose that, after the shrine of an older natural theology had fallen, it was replaced in the popular mind with something quite different. Now, that's important because what we're really talking about here in terms of, okay, how does this simulation come in and why do I think this argument might be symbolizing a movement in something is that we all have natural theologies that we're working with. And Peterson has been, again, he's not going to talk about anything from above because that is going to place him to the sidelines. If someone comes into the debate and says, well, here's the Bible, out of bounds. That's something that's been, that the government, that the universities have already established and it's broadly asserted we are not going to let that class of information in, which is amazing because that's not sufficient for Sam Harris. He wants to, we have basically had a public and private agreement with respect to it. You can read your Bible at home, but out in public, you're not going to take it into the courthouse and use it that way. So then, deism and epicureanism. Deism was widespread in the 17th and 18th centuries in Britain and elsewhere and it offered an easy transition into full-on epicureanism. So what's the difference? Deists and epicureans share the view of a gulf between God or the gods and the world we live in. For the deist, there is a supreme being who created the world. He's the watchmaker who made the machine and keeps it well-oiled. For some deists like Newton, inconsistently perhaps, the watchmaker comes back from time to time to wind it up or adjust it. But for the epicurean, God or the gods had nothing to do with making the world and they have nothing to do with its maintenance, nor is the world itself a well-oiled rational machine, since it makes itself by non-rational trial and error, with atoms swerving and bumping into one another at random. There is therefore no problem of evil in epicureanism. The world is what it is. For at least some deists, God cares how we behave and might eventually call us to account for epicureans, and this was always its great attraction, of course. The gods don't care and they won't judge us. So how we behave is up to us and at death we dissolve into nothingness. Now it's interesting, a few minutes ago I said, Peterson kind of a deist, Harris kind of an epicurean. Peterson though is, the gods are around us, the gods are built into us from millions of years of watching each other. The gods inhabit this social imaginary between us, the gods are created by us watching each other and learning how to behave with one another and a morality developing amongst each other and figuring out sacrifice and all of those things. So on one hand there's a deistic element to Peterson in that the gods are, it's not an interventionist god number two, but there's a deism there, but for Peterson, the gods aren't way up there, they are all around us, okay, and they're built in. Now they're not, we might not be able to distinguish them as not having personalities, and again I was looking at, I'll see if I can find that, Jonathan Haidt in The Righteous Mind talks about the agency detection module, and this then factors very prominently in the New Atheist story. And the difficulty though is, you know, hyper sensitive agency detection module tries to, you know, continues to help us develop. Well, so with Peterson, these, you know, this agency detection module, the gods are among us, and this then is used to explain, you know, how we imagine things that are around us, but not only how we imagine, but how we articulate them, and how they become real to us. And of course here you get into Sam Harris's big fight about, well, what is reality? Lacks Epicureans have always seen this as an invitation to licentiousness, serious ones as a council of moderation. Many today, however, hearing the word Epicurean think of morality, or more likely immorality, I'm primarily indicating by this word the cosmology, which says that the gods domain is totally different from ours, and it's incompatible with it. Oh, you can acknowledge the gods if you like. You can give a distant, cool appraisal of their superiority. But don't imagine that prayer or devotion or holiness will have the slightest effect on them. When modern surveys suggest that more people say they believe in God than go to church, here's the answer. Why would you get out of bed for the distant deist god, let alone for the absent Epicurean one? So third, a clarification about this blessed word enlightenment. Immanuel Kant used the word Aufklrung in 1784. He was picking up on a theme from the French encyclopedists who referred to Lumiere, the lights of new knowledge. The English word enlightenment wasn't used until the 19th century, and then often contemptuously mocking those shallow and pretentious continental intellectuals and their politics. Kant's own definition was a campaign slogan which we could summarize thus, enlightenment means the freedom to make public use of one's reason with the goal of liberating humankind from its self-imposed immaturity. But actually the enlightenment really started in 17th century England because Kant looked back to John Locke's sense-based epistemology, to Francis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes and David Hume. They were leading lights even though they didn't use the E word. By the early 19th century, William Blake was shaking his fist, not only at the movement's French leaders, Moccon, Moccon, Voltaire, Rousseau, but also at their underlying epicureanism, the atoms of democracy. Now historians of the enlightenment differ in emphasis and analysis, but they all look back to something like Kant's definition and his sense of a project. A new kind of knowledge had opened up a new era of freedom, a human coming of age. There is a book being published in America tomorrow by Steven Pinker called The Enlightenment is Succeeding, all words to that effect. This mythology lives on. Now such a movement, enlightenment, rooted in complex philosophical, social, cultural, and political debates does not appear in a flash with Albert Schweitzer or AJ Airs springing from the head of Kant like Athene from the head of Zeus. And of course, throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, there were leading thinkers and Christian movements who showed no sign of enlightenment tendencies. The Wesleys, Samuel Johnson, John Henry Newman. If you listen to Sam Harris and Doug Murray talking, I mean their concern is the enlightenment didn't go deep enough. Countless others come to mind, but there was a tide running with the enlightenment. The book entitled God's Funeral is not about the 1960s death of God movement or the Dawkins and Hitchens new atheists. It's about the Victorian era. Atheism is the end of the Epicurean road. There isn't much difference between having distant unknowable divinities and there being no God at all. And this is where... And this is where you get into... I mean one of my large... One of the big things that I keep thinking about in terms of the Jordan Peterson thing is, okay, well where does the church fit in? Well, if you pause for a moment and consider the fact that we are not just brains on sticks, but you consider the fact that the world we inhabit is a constructed world. Well, if you go back and look at... I did a thing where Tony Campolo is talking to his son Bart. And Tony says to Bart, he says, you know, he stopped going to church. And that had its impact. And this business and even Peterson who doesn't go to church says, you know, going to church every week, that's going to do something to you. Well, what exactly is it going to do to you? Well, that's the question. What is it going to do to you? And how... we're not just... this is what I intend to believe. Well, you're going to have to stay away from people because people are going to do things to change you. Many had embraced that new vision and they supposed it to be based on science. And the word enlightenment says it all. Till then darkness and superstition has reigned and now came the light. This, ironically, is exactly the same appeal launched by Lucretius. A new world free from ignorance, free from fear of divine interference or final condemnation. Sam Harris couldn't have said it any better. Now we've found how the world works. We will do things our own way. We're grown up. We can stand on our own feet, take control of our own destiny. And we must then accept the dark fatefulness of this random world. There's a great 19th century example in the poet William Ernest Henley. His Invictus of 1875 is best known for its last lines, I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul. But the whole poem accepts the new philosophy and announces a human self-confidence from within it. Under the bludgeonings of chance, my head is bloody but unbowed. And death itself approaching as the menace of the years finds and shall find me unafraid. Now this shout of defiance should be put in context. Having suffered from tuberculosis as a boy, Henley had his lower left leg amputated when he was 20. The poem expresses a robust epicureanism. Whatever the gods may be up to, I will live my independent life and death will be nothing to be afraid of. Twenty years later, the University of St. Andrews awarded Henley a Doctorate of Divinity. Pay attention to that. Pay attention how these movements get into the church. And when I'm done with writing this thing, we're going to talk about how we've all got lots of this stuff in us. And it's not terribly well differentiated. It's all swirling and it's all this river that we're moving through history together in. And it's in the church. Let me sketch five telltale features of late 18th century culture which show where all this is going. First, there were the revolutions. America, France. In France, the earlier Jansenism combined with a new intellectual analysis of and reaction to the corrupt collusion of the church with the unpopular monarchy. It isn't clear that ordinary French people wanted to destroy the church, but the revolution gave political force to the attractive idea that society could now be comprehensively reordered. And this led to the de-Christianization campaign of 1793, which unleashed a particular vein of epicureanism, setting up the goddess of reason in Notre Dame Cathedral. Getting rid of princes, getting rid of God and his earthly representatives were to the most radical two ways of saying the same thing. Robespierre attempted to mediate with a form of deism, suggesting in his final speech to the convention that death was not an eternal sleep, as the epicureans would have said, but the beginning of immortality. And in June 1794, he supported a proposed cult of the supreme being. But his far left opponents weren't having it. They guillotined him seven weeks later. Epicureanism, not deism, was now the new orthodoxy. America, meanwhile, had long been eager to get rid of George III and all his wicked ways and the theological and ecclesial structures which appeared to support him. Thomas Jefferson later declared, I too am an epicurean, though to be fair, he was a great many other things as well. Most of the founding fathers were actually deists, though consistent theology was not their strongest suit, and some were quite devout, calling people to pray for God's help and guidance. The tension between that cautiously integrative approach and the more powerful deism persists to this day in America with debates about prayer in schools and so on. I suspect that at least some American attempts at natural theology may have been aimed at finding not the Christian God, but the supreme being who still presides over a certain amount of American religion. Anyway, the revolutionary leaders didn't want to reject bishops, they just didn't want the royalist placement that George III kept sending them. The deistic separation of God and the world was to be mirrored in the strict separation of church and state. So both France and America, in their very different ways, wanted to get God off the public stage. Alongside the political revolutions, there was, second, the rise of pre-Darwinian evolutionism. Note the ism. This isn't just a theory about biology. This is a worldview in which evolution necessarily took place without divine guidance. Some people have called this naturalism, but that's inadequate. It's Epicureanism. It was developed by people like Charles Darwin's grandfather Erasmus, who with his colleagues were inspecting the creation for signs of internally driven development. Like Democritus' atoms, the scientific heart of Epicureanism, the organisms that Darwin and his colleagues were studying, and the machines they were inventing would do their own thing without outside interference. Put the question of God on one side, and science will flourish. Third, there was the radical economic theory of Adam Smith, who in 1776 published The Wealth of Nations, arguing for the existence of an invisible hand, motivated by self-interest, that would guide the flow of money without intervention to bring about social improvement. Basically, Newton's mechanistic universe translated into money. The clock would work by itself. And in the same year forth, there appeared the opening volume of Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, arguing into alia that an otherworldly and squabbling Christianity had helped to sow the seeds of imperial decline. Gibbon was one of the main back-markers for what's now called historical criticism, and he used comprehensive documentary research and a caustic style to dethrone an easy-going view of Christianity as a force for good in the world, as in the expansionism of the early 1700s. If there was to be optimism, it would have to find other grounds. The shrines were falling to left and right. And fifth, and right in the middle of all this, there was the start of what came to be called the quest of the historical Jesus. Herman Samuel Reimaris believed as a deist in a good and wise deity who would have to be discovered by unaided reason, since for him the Old Testament was misleading nonsense and the new was a self-serving fabrication saying little about Jesus himself. Jesus, said Reimaris, was in fact a deluded would-be revolutionary who died a failure and whose followers hid his body and invented the new movement. G.E. Lessing, who brought Reimaris' work to posthumous public attention, is known for his ugly broad ditch between the eternal truths of reason and the contingent truths of history. Reimaris' account of the contingent truths of Jesus' history made the point, how could you base any eternal conclusions on that stuff? And even if you tried, Jesus wasn't like what the church had imagined. Heaven and earth remain opaque to one another. All these things go together. Politics without God, science without God, economics without God, history without God, and finally Jesus without God. Their Godfather, if that isn't exactly the wrong term, was David Hume. The five features I've mentioned are different in some ways, but they're united in a Humean philosophical thrust. They're not just straws in the wind. They are flags flying strongly to announce a new world, a new day. By 1800 the shrine had fallen and a brave new independent world had been born. This sense of a new world embodied the idea, the new idea, of progress. But how could that notion appear within Epicureanism? There's no guarantee that randomly swerving atoms will produce outcomes anyone might like. But the Enlightenment's philosophers and social activists announced that the new dawning day would get brighter, still, and brighter. The French philosopher Condorcet said what many were thinking, the human race set free at last from its shackles, was now, quote, advancing with a firm and true step along the path of truth, virtue, and happiness. Thomas Jefferson, for his part, quoted Virgil on American banknotes to this day, Novus Ordo Seclorum, a new order of the ages. This resulted in a parody of Jewish and Christian eschatology, a new form of inaugurated eschatology. The French revolutionaries were most explicit about this because, like Bar Kokhva in 132 AD, they restarted the tradition. Bar Kokhva was a Jewish revolutionary after the time of Christ who led a popular revolt against, again, Roman occupation. ...started the calendar, year one. This modernist belief in a new dawn was a new phenomenon for the times, and in part it was a secularization of earlier Christian optimism, what we saw in the early 1700s, and behind that an older doctrine of providence. It drew also on ancient mythology, which you can see already, for instance, in Keats's poem Hyperion. But its central claim wasn't just that new and better days seemed to be happening, but that they were in some sense happening automatically. All you had to do was get on board and push aside anyone who didn't see the point. So that automatic thing is important because, again, you have this automatic quality of deism, and that somehow gets merged with Epicureanism into a progressivism that, of course, Marx and others, Hegel, I mean, Marx basically gets it from Hegel, and off they go. Hegel didn't invent that idea, but he came in on the tide, believing that rational progress was demonstrable, not only in science, but also in philosophy and the arts, and even history and even religion, he thought. Now, invoking Hegel helps us to see how the cuckoo of progress appeared in the unlikeliness of Epicureanism. Banish the old deist divinity up to his inaccessible Epicurean heaven, and perhaps, however paradoxically, you might discover a different kind of divinity within the process itself. Theology, like nature, abhors a vacuum. A divinity within the process. Well, what is that? Well, that's in a sense, you know, that's in a sense the gods. This is a way of understanding the gods among us. Atheism can sometimes beget new forms of pantheism. Democritus's world of swirling atoms becomes the vehicle of Hegel's immanent geist, the spirit, moving inexorably, though dialectically, forwards. Marx suggested in his doctorate that Epicurus had anticipated Hegel's principle of inner self-consciousness. Now, for the right-wing Hegelians, progress was a smooth evolution. This remarkably led to the idea that the kingdom of God itself was advancing under the guise of the new Western culture. It may seem a big step from Jefferson and Adam Smith and Edward Gibbon and the rest to Albrecht Ritschel in the second half of the 19th century. Ritschel was a liberal theologian, an important one at the end of the 19th century. But with Hegel as the bridge and with only a little oversimplification, the job was done. By the end of the 19th century, it was widely assumed, in Britain and Germany at least, that the spectacular achievements and advances of Western civilization were part of what it meant to say that the kingdom of God was at hand. Now, it's helpful. There's another book I can pull out for you. Philip Jenkins, very interesting book on World War I, The Great and Holy War. I read this a few years ago, but it illustrates N.T. Wright's point that the marching into World War I, Queen Victoria's, the children of Queen Victoria, all of these cousins, they're marching into World War I. And this is an exceedingly holy war that they're fighting. They are imagining that this is God's work that they are doing. And this is something that we seldom see in World War I treatments. But Philip Jenkins goes into this quite a bit. It's quite an interesting book. This was natural theology made easy. Just look at our wonderful civilization and see the handiwork of God. Stephen Pinker's new book says, just look at our wonderful civilization and see the result of the Enlightenment. The 19th century had many virtues, but modesty was not one of them. The rhetoric of evolution sustained this, but this isn't how biological evolution works. If the fittest survive, that means that most developments don't. Most of nature's experiments end in blind alleys. What else could you expect from swerving atoms? Likewise, the idea that science and technology are making the world better is ambiguous. Industrial pollution, atom bombs, gas chambers tell a different story. But at the popular level, the ideology of progress ignores these counter examples. Like the eager British and American socialists who visited the Soviet Union in the 1920s and returned to say we have seen the future and it works. The ideology of progressive thought and forward thinking movements, quote unquote, sweep all before them on every chat show, every time someone says in this day and age, or now that we live in the 21st century. You can just hear Jordan Peterson and Kathy Newman right there in that description. So by the end of the 19th century, we find the following combination of philosophical and cultural beliefs. First, there is the ongoing Epicurean framework. God is out of the picture. The world does its own thing. Second, the scientific theories about evolution give credence, however unjustifiably, to a belief in progress, whether through steady advance or revolution, Hegel or Marx. This coincided, third, with actual political movements, and this toxic combination is with us still. There have, of course, been loud protests. Jean-Jacques Rousseau thought advances in arts and science have actually damaged the human race, not made it better. Kierkegaard saw through the whole sham. Charles Dickens displayed the seamy side of the Industrial Revolution. Nietzsche foresaw nothing but disaster. Karl Barth's Roman's commentary offered a word from above, a divine rebuke to the 19th century Tower of Babel. Look where your progress has landed us now. So too with Walter Benjamin in the 1930s, Theodore Adorno in the 1940s. Postmodernism itself directly challenges the narrative of progress. Wisdom does not advance chronologically. But even with the horrors of the 20th century, the postmodern protest hasn't actually made much headway. The idea of progress has embodied its own principle. It's gone ahead under its own steam, sustained by the fruits of science, not least in medicine. People sometimes say to me, oh Tom, you're so critical of the Enlightenment. And I say, listen, I don't want to be operated on by either a pre-modern or a postmodern dentist. Thank you very much. I want the benefits of high modernity. But sustained by the fruits of science and the achievements of technology, it applies to the future as a whole. The principle that had already been applied to politics, science, economics, history, and even Jesus. Rethink them all without an external divine figure directing the traffic. Providence, but without God. This has produced a strong sense of innate superiority. Very interesting. Classical Epicureans wanted to withdraw from everyday ordinary life because they wanted to imitate the happy gods who were detached and distant from the messy world. Now, few ancients could afford this kind of social withdrawal. You needed money and a nice vineyard and compliant slaves. But with Europe's new skills, it seemed possible. The modern Western world has acted out the ancient dream to be the enlightened ones, the developed or advanced countries, the ones who know how things work, operating on different principles, living by different rules. We live in an Epicurean paradise. It comes at a cost, usually borne by others. Of course, modern Western housing and healthcare and communications and so on are innately desirable. That's why so many want to come to the West and enjoy them. But to infer from this that the latest Western cultural or moral fads are likewise superior is laughable. No wonder we're in such a tangle with multiculturalism and postmodern identity politics. Our philosophical basis gives us neither a clear analysis of what's happened nor the tools to cope. So the social and political implication of Epicureanism remains powerful today. Political debates sometimes mirror theological ones. Thus, the question of geopolitical intervention reflects the theologian's question about divine action in the world. The Newtonian deists in America want to intervene to wind up the watch. The Epicureans in France don't. The British, as usual, get puzzled and pretend not to understand the question. But these are the puzzles we face after the fall of the shrines. Where do they leave us? How do we now face the task? The task reimagined. The question of natural theology, can we arrive at truths about God by inference from the world around us, is flanked awkwardly by two others. First, does God intervene in the world by doing miracles? And what about so-called natural evil? These are in apparent tension because if God could intervene to raise Jesus from the dead, why didn't he stop the Lisbon earthquake? And so on. I take it that Lord Gifford's intention for these lectures was to see if one could address the main question without appealing to miracles and things like that. And hoping that maybe the problem of evil would shrink somewhat as well. But something's missing. History in general, and the history of Jesus in particular. History has to do with things that happen in the natural world. Now here there is a paradox. Our historical evidence for Jesus is mostly found in the New Testament, so you might think, oh that wouldn't count, that's part of the special revelation we're not supposed to be using. But that's... Remember the definition of natural theology that I read earlier. ... muddled. That imagines that the Bible consists of abstract supernatural truths revealed from above. In fact, much... Now, pay attention because this is exactly how Sam Harris says, well the Bible, you know, these people think it comes from above. And Jordan Peterson says, no it doesn't. Well, he's saying, I'm not going to talk about that. It comes from below. And it reveals stuff. What does it reveal to us? Well, it reveals ourselves, and it reveals our gods, and it reveals who we are, and it makes up the framework and the foundation of our civilization. And Sam Harris is nervous because he keeps... It's like he's got a tennis racket and he keeps wanting to swat up, and Jordan Peterson keeps building from below. And that makes Sam Harris very nervous because, no, I didn't want the Bible from above. And Jordan Peterson says, I'm not taking it from above. I'm taking it from below. I'm doing natural theology. And Sam Harris doesn't want any theology done at all. Which again, abstract supernatural truths is how Sam Harris keeps critiquing the Bible and says that's all that the Bible is and therefore we must dismiss it. And Peterson keeps coming at it from below and says, well, but from below we're seeing things too. Revealed from above, in fact, much of the Bible, especially the Gospels, purports to be about stuff that happened in the world, history, about things that actually went on. Now then a skepticism will come along and say, well, you can't... That's all made up. Well, really? How do you know? Absence cuts both ways. And the more we follow Hume and Gibbon and Reimarus, the more we find Jesus as a man of his time, as part of the flow of history, part of the natural world order. You can't have it both ways. You either have to rule him out or you have to rule him in. In other words, well, he just said it. You have to rule him out or rule him in. Well, I want to get rid of him. Well, he's a moral teacher. Well, he lived and he spoke and therefore it's history. Therefore it's in. And again, I started talking about Christianity's weird, weird situation. The skeptical historians accidentally offered a challenge. They said, well, history itself is part of the natural world. OK, why can't we use it in natural theology? The problem is that the cultural presuppositions that have shaped enlightenment thought as a whole have also shaped the study of Jesus. And as a result, would-be orthodox theology, systematics, philosophical theology, has mostly ignored or even sneered at the historians' portraits of Jesus. And this is where N.T. Wright comes. And in fact, his second lecture is going to go a lot into the question of where do these assumptions that are asserted and in fact what little Sam Harris knows about the Bible, one of the things he says, well, Jesus, the people in Jesus' time, Jesus' early followers assumed a quick return. And in fact, N.T. Wright will take that on in the second lecture. And has projected back into the first century a construct called Jesus composed of later theological formulations. It has in fact often agreed de facto with Lessing. We want the eternal truths. So let's not worry about the contingent truths of history. But Lessing's challenge can just as easily work the other way. Supposing we did the history for ourselves to see if Ramaros was right. You cannot then logically keep the question of Jesus and history out of the question of natural theology. The problem is how to stop both questions, let alone any answers, being distorted by the surrounding culture. And one further feature of that culture, often invoked to help Christians face the rising tide of secularism, has hindered rather than helping. I refer to the Christian retrieval of Plato. What happens if you want to be a thoughtful Christian within an Epicurean world? The answer ought to be read the Bible and see that that rigid God-world split is a category mistake. But sadly that hasn't been the usual reaction. The more normal answer has been to invoke Plato. And since many of the fathers did that, you can go some distance down that road without noticing that the Bible itself is dragging its feet and pointing in a different direction. This has many implications I just very briefly mentioned too. And in fact this is ironic because this is exactly where some Christians attack Louis, say he's too much of a Platonist. First, modern Western Christianity has largely abandoned the biblical hope of new creation and bodily resurrection. Interestingly this protest of mine, which I've been banging on about for some years, is mirrored exactly by the equivalent protest of Professor John Levinson of Harvard speaking from within the Jewish Orthodox world. And if you've been following my videos you know that I keep coming back to this idea of the bodily resurrection of Jesus as necessary in terms of being the most real moment. That if you don't have this bodily resurrection you don't get the, in terms of Peterson's schema, the multivariate confirmation of this true myth. Most people in the West now think that Christians believe in a single stage post-mortem reality, going to heaven with no thought of new heavens and a new earth or indeed of new creation at all. Some theologians speak without embarrassment of our souls being presently in exile here, longing to return home to heaven. That's Plutarch, not Paul. And of course Plutarch, pretty influential and Augustine, but a little advertisement for two of Enthi Wright's books, Surprised by Hope, this is his popular treatment of eschatology. Really probably one of my favorite books of his where he goes through a number of the New Testament passages if you're a Christian and you're interested in this. Really a wonderful book. This is of course part of his big series and this is a much more technical book on the resurrection going into the historical facets of it and how that works. I've mentioned that book before. But if this world is not my home, then looking at the present world to figure out who God is becomes not only harder than it was for the Psalms or Isaiah or even Jesus, it becomes suspect. What could you learn about the Holy God from looking at the wicked world? The second implication of holding a Platonic spirituality within an epicurean metaphysic is an open invitation to Gnosticism, which is one of the default modes for Western religion. Epicurean elitism, interiorized and individualized, combines with a Platonic secret inner reality to highlight not a sinful soul that needs redeeming and transforming, but a true self that needs liberating from the distortions that the outside world and even one's own body might try to impose. And this is the secret, sacred self that I mentioned when I was reading parts of the Tim Keller piece. Like progress itself, this view has recently become orthodoxy. The political elitism, which allows enlightened Westerners to look down at the rest of the planet and either bless it or bomb it, goes well with an inward elitism of those who know themselves to be the spiritual high fliers, the real moral heroes. Thus, an old minority of philosophy has become the new majority. Even those who have modified it by finding either a pantheistic progress within it or a Platonic escape route out of it have lived within the Epicurean world. Never before has a whole culture organized its life on the basis of a radical separation between our world and the world of the gods, if any. That was Charles Taylor's point in his Giffords, A Secular Age. And never before then has there been a time when it would be harder to obey Lord Giffords' instructions and talk about natural theology, or indeed to attempt what I see as the necessary step towards that, which is to talk about Christian origins. Taylor's point, however, alerts us to four crucial conclusions. First, the idea of the modern world. Most of us were brought up believing that science had now discovered a new view of the cosmos rendering all earlier worldviews obsolete. This chronological snobbery is ridiculous and unwarranted. The current Western worldview is in fact an observable variation on a well-known ancient one advocated in the early modern period on social and cultural and political grounds long before anyone looked for scientific evidence. Whether the worldview is true or not is another matter. The only new thing about it is its sudden dominance. Second brief comment, conclusion on the word religion. The Epicurean separation of religion from ordinary life would have been unthinkable to the ancients. The word religion has actually changed its meaning. Ancient religion was woven into the fabric of everyday lives all over the place. The ancient Epicureans sneered it was a sham to induce fear. But ancient religion matches neither the modern meanings, private spirituality and immortal hope, nor the early Christian reality. Jesus' first followers established a new thing, a network of worship-based, ethically rigorous, egalitarian, philanthropic, fictive kinship groups. Church for short. Listen to that definition again. Of worship-based, ethically rigorous, egalitarian, philanthropic, fictive kinship groups. Church for short. Nor the early Christian reality. Jesus' first followers established a new thing, a network of worship-based, ethically rigorous, egalitarian, philanthropic, fictive kinship groups. Church for short. But the Enlightenment decreed that religion should now mean private human devotion. Many Christians have gone along for the ride. Contemporary usage, flattening out early Christianity into a religion in the modern sense, has then aligned the Christian movement with other so-called religions or faiths, with all sorts of consequent confusions. And the word religion has generated new sub-disciplines, philosophy of religion, where you might discuss natural theology, and history of religion where you might discuss early Christianity. But the word religion, as now understood, makes both more difficult and their integration almost impossible. This brings us third to naturalism and supernaturalism. In the medieval period, the creator was always at work in the natural world. Sometimes the creator would do extraordinary things which you could call supernatural, indicating neither the abolition of nature by grace, nor the invasion of nature by grace, but the superabundance of grace over nature. But now the word nature and the cognate term naturalism describe one half of the Enlightenment's false antithesis, the implication being that methodological naturalism would rule out supernaturalism from the start, or that methodological supernaturalism would be irresponsibly credulous. The labels naturalism and supernaturalism have thus become rhetorically charged and even less useful than before, using these terms, merely hands lessing a free pass, leaving his ugly ditch in place and merely wondering whether God sometimes leaps over it. I suspect Lord Gifford's question owes something to this antithesis, because Christian apologists of the 18th and 19th centuries often resorted to claims of special revelation. In other words, what this golf sets up is, no he didn't, yes he did. And I see this often in Christian atheists' attacks on one another. And I think, in a sense, once you've already seeded that line, well, there's not much point in fighting. The miracles, which I'll talk about in a second, or of inspired scripture, which was itself being challenged, the apparent trump card, oh we have a sacred source, cut no ice with lessing, and it wasn't going to help the people whose questions Lord Gifford wanted to address. Where could you turn for help? Well, a standard 18th century answer was to appeal to the miracles of Jesus. But this word too has shifted decisively since Hume. The Humean denial of the miraculous and the apologists' reaffirmation of it both made the same mistake. They both saw miracle as an invasion of the natural order by an outside power, such as might provide evidence for the truth of Christian claims. Hume insisted that this was a priori impossible, the apologists that God could do the impossible. Now, again, you might look at C.S. Lewis' miracles and say, well, is that what Wright is talking about? Well, if you read Lewis carefully, you'll see that nature was always built for this in mind. And nature is an accommodating host. It is not God. Sometimes, actually, Lewis uses that term in terms of God's invasion. But it's an invasion from our point of view, because actually what Lewis would say is that we are in rebellion, and it's not so much an invasion. Invasion, it is God restoring the order that is built in. This standoff too persists. As with the word religion, the word miracle now reduces diverse phenomena to a single category and, moreover, an unsuitable one. It is now heard within the split world of Epicureanism, inalienably carrying that notion of invasion, whereas the New Testament speaks of the original creator effecting redemption and healing and renewal within his own world. Final conclusion. Epistemology. How do we know? The proposal I shall be advancing throughout is that the ontology of mainstream Enlightenment Epicureanism had a symbiotic relationship with its implicit epistemology, a theory of knowledge that had screened out a crucial element. Epistemology is not neutral territory. But we can sometimes spot when things are missing. The missing element is love. Now it's interesting here, because again, if you watch the four talks with Peterson and Harris, suddenly love comes in from Harris. And it's like, wow. And in all frankness, love hasn't played much of a role in Peterson either. And in fact, all the way up until this point in N.T. Wright's lectures, love is nowhere to be found. Now Wright is going to say, well, it's in fact been the point of it all along. This word, too, is rendered almost meaningless by overuse. I use it here heuristically. Theories of knowledge tend to polarize, for instance, around objective and subjective. When I say I know this is a desk, am I making a claim about a reality external to myself, or simply about the state of my perceptions and imagination? And again, if you've been following Peterson and Harris, this is core to the conversation we've been having. Behind this, there is the standoff between idealist and empiricist. Do we start with ideas and work out to concrete examples, or do we begin with raw data and work up to generalizations, or what? Classic Epicureanism was always wary of love. Lucretius, like Oscar Wilde, advised that falling in love got in the way of properly appraised erotic pleasure. It would disturb the soul. This for swearing of love has now become an epistemological principle. Supposedly detached rational inquiry is the epistemological correlate of atomistic materialism. Consider the legend of Faust. Mephistopheles promises Faust everything on one condition. He must not love what he is enjoying. He must never want the blissful moment to remain. In Goethe's phrase he must never say, Verfeiler doch du bist so schn. Faust makes his pact. Objuring love, he will have power and wealth and pleasure. Wagner saw the same point. Albrecht the Nibelung gives up love in order to get the Rheingold and with it the dark power that drives the story. Thus the rationalist enlightenment, screening out the God dimension of reality, screened out love at the same time and for the same reason. It claimed instead the objective knowledge of the physical world, obtained and exploited through science and technology, and it wrote off the subjective elements as mere opinion or worse, mere projection. And the result, one way or another, was Frankenstein's monster. There have again been sharp reactions. The Romantic movement, including fervent Christian discipleship from Wesley and others onwards, went the other way. What mattered for them was what warms the heart, what we know deep within ourselves. But sadly one can be strangely moved by things which turn out to be false. Romanticism is not enough. We need to put it simplistically. Both the objective and the subjective pole, the Romantic and the rational, just as we need the ongoing dialogue between ideal and empirical. How is that possible? It is love which affirms the otherness of the beloved, be it a person or a tree or a star, and which wants it to be itself, not a mere projection of our own hopes and wants, and which also takes appropriate delight in this knowing, leaping beyond mere cool appraisal to a sense of delighted, if unexpected, homecoming, of belonging with, even in a new place. Thus, since one of the problems of natural theology discussions, as also with the historical criticism of the Bible, is how do we know, my proposal developed throughout these lectures, is that the highest form of knowing, including historical and theological knowing, is love itself, the greatest of these, as Paul says. Now, of course, this proposal is hardly original, goes back in the history of philosophy and theology, but it doesn't usually impinge on contemporary discussions, either of natural theology or of the historiography of early Christianity. Now, I want to stop here because I've been having a conversation with a friend and you might know that I'm coming because he, and I want to highlight more of his work because I think he's doing great work and nobody knows about him, because how could you know about him? But, you know, that's where I got this noun and verb thing from, I get it from him. And so when I hear NT right in this section talking about love in this perspective, you know, love is the, love brings the noun and the verb together. And Sam Harris, and then my friend said, McGillchrist talks about, you know, the noun and the verb in a sense that, not really the two sides of the brain, but the new atheists are all about nouns, they're all about nouns. And everything, everything in the atheist world for Sam Harris is a noun. It's all nouns, all the way down, it's just nouns. Well, that's part of the reason they have such difficulty with morality, because morality is about action and action is about verbs. And so when NT Wright comes along and says, well, epistemology is love, well, how can that be? It's because love is a special kind of verb that pulls in the noun closer. And this, of course, isn't original to NT Wright, as he just said. You know, even you go to Augustine and Augustine gets into the question of, you know, it isn't just a world full of nouns. It's our love and it's what we desire. And I've been relistening to this course on tape on the city of God. And of course, I don't have time to make even the videos I'm making right now, never mind the videos I want to make. But in love, love, the noun and the verb come together. And my friend has a lot of interesting ideas about, he's really good at distilling it way down. In Christian theology, of course, love became human in Jesus of Nazareth. But this bald claim can sound like an uncritical fantasy designed to close down further thought. Which is exactly how Sam Harris sees it. I believe on the contrary, that it avoids fantasy and opens up further thought. And that's where we'll be going next time, seeing how the philosophical and cultural situation that forms the backstory of natural theology has contextualized and seriously distorted the reading of the New Testament itself and its portrayal of its central figure, making it much harder than it should be to bring Jesus into the discussion of theology and of natural theology in particular. And I'd love to bring Dallas Willard in on this, because this is, you know, Dallas Willard, who's the smartest man that ever lived? Well, Jesus. And people step back and say, well, why would you locate Jesus there and not Einstein or Socrates or Plato? And Dallas Willard will then go into that. In case anyone might suppose that the theme of love is pointing straightforwardly towards Valentine's Day when the next lecture takes place, the review of Modern Gospel Study will remind us that it is also Hash Wednesday. Thank you very much. Hash Wednesday is the beginning of Lent. So, a little bit of contemporary summing up. Whole minds in groups. What's going on in our culture? Why is Jordan Peterson a man of the moment? Look at what our poets are saying. Well, who are our poets? And I think many of our poets today are the screenwriters for television. Now, movies are having a hard time, the two-hour format. But television writers have much larger palettes upon which they can produce stories. You know, one of my favorite, I haven't watched Game of Thrones, but Breaking Bad. Incredible tragedy. Better call Saul a prequel working on it. But Breaking Bad, incredible tragedy. In many ways, I think our poets are the television screenwriters. And look at The Walking Dead and look at dystopian materiality. There's a great degree of pessimism as to where things are going. And there's also been a slew of resurrection return stories. But they're dystopian. The dead come back and, well, the world has gone on without them. And I've used the imaginary, you know, if my father came back to life, what would we, you know, we'd have to get his clothes and how would he fit into this world? Well, a lot of screenwriters are playing with these ideas. And also I've noticed a lot of afterlife programs, The Good Place on a major network. And Forever was on Amazon Prime and I just finished watching it. I'm watching these programs and I'm seeing, right now the poets are seeing the running out of us. The running out of the enlightenment. And so could it be that, well, Jordan Peterson is part of this same thing that we're all feeling, that the enlightenment has gone about as far as it can? This is Thomas Nagel in terms of the subject has to, subjective has to come back into the objective. And there's the fear that the objective will lose much of what we've gained. And thinking about it in terms of Jordan Peterson question, losing much of what we've gained includes, you know, destroying ourselves. And Jordan Peterson's conception of truth. And modernity, technological power combined with optimistic perspective on human nature was crushed in the 20th century in the wars and the genocides. And now the fear of global climate collapse and nuclear war and the Fermi paradox where we wonder if the world is passing through these filters and, well, we survived nuclear war and how many other worlds haven't. And will we survive climate change and how many others? But eventually there's the final filter and you never get past that. And so Moss-Waltzberg, in the conversation with Elon Musk where Josh Tepolsky comes in and quickly jumps in, well, we might get rebooted. Well, this is the question of, you know, base reality. And we're recognizing that if we are the gods, we are insufficient. And so, of course, Sam Harris is waiting in and say, we need rationality and I can solve the Middle Eastern crisis. And everybody looks at him and says, it's not simply a real estate transaction. It's what Jordan Peterson said, or maybe it was Brett Weinstein. It's not simply a real estate transaction. So I wonder with all of these things if, in fact, you know, Peterson isn't part of this package that we feel the end of what has brought us to this place and there needs to be a reappraisal. And suddenly someone comes up and says, you know, in very short order we've completed, we've created these virtual reality cocoons at 100 or 200 years if we pass the filters. Would we even know we're not in one? Well, do we know we're not in one now? And again, my point here isn't so much a simulation. My point is the yearning question is, is there someone in charge? And way back, the transition with Charles Taylor, the Lisbon earthquake and tsunami, and we got to a point of thinking, we're home alone. This is wonderful. And it's not so much that we have a buffered self. So, you know, the two bad guys at home alone, you know, can't come in. And we've got our traps all set only to realize from another movie, I'm in the house. We are insufficient gods. And so we hear about a simulation and we think, well, maybe we can be, maybe there's hope. I think it's the, I think it's, I think it's the cosmological argument. Who is the architect? This goes through the Matrix movies. What do they want from us? Well, suddenly if there's an architect, meaning is so much more possible. Well, how can we discover them? Well, everyone in the ancient world, that was their dominant fascination. And all of these competing stories were in competition with each other. Who, what really runs the world? Because we know it's not us. And now it's, we're terrified if it's us. Why are they hidden? Why don't they show themselves? We've seen ourselves as architect now and we can't trust each other or even ourselves. Now there's, here's the thing. You've got deism, you've got epicureanism, you've got Christianity. All of this stuff is in the water. And Sam Harris just imagining that he's not, he hasn't been influenced by Christianity just because he says there is no God. Jordan Peterson rightly calls him on that. Sam, it's just, it's just in the wash. I'm not going to say that there isn't deism built into me. There isn't epicureanism built into me. There isn't the secret, sacred self to me. I'm subject to all of these influences. And I'm a product of all of this stuff moving through the culture. And I'm a consumerist to degrees that I would, I do not like to accept about myself. There are no purebreds around here, boys and girls, where the degree to perhaps if you were raised in a very, insular religious community, you might have a little bit more claim than many of the rest of us, but we're deeply secular. And even the secularists are deeply religious. The tribes we see have so, are so cross pressured, elements woven into them already. We are not terribly consistent, rational thinkers. And the chattering writers find many incoherent strains at hand to make the elephants' intuitive decisions appeal to the watchers for status and esteem. One of the things that I've been giving real thought to in terms of the current crisis of the church. And so there are two crises. One is the church as the old systems recede and people abandon the church because the story is no longer gripped. I look at what's coming behind Jordan Peterson and a bunch of the Christians will say to me, well, it's not too many people. I don't know. Because I wonder if this isn't if he's not the tip of the spear, if he's not the on the edge of the wave, if and then I look at those people who are gathering in my meetups and I got to schedule another meetup and the people I'm having conversations with, especially those who who don't believe in God. And I think what do they need? Well, pastor, why are you asking what they need? Because to be a servant of Christ means to be the servant of all, which means I'm not just a pastor of people in church, although they hire me and pay me and I have to give them priority. And this is something that the church always struggles with. I'm a servant of the atheist. I'm a servant of Sam Harris. I'm there. And this is where noun and verb come together. I'm here to love Sam Harris. I'm here to care about him. I'm here to not too quickly dismiss him. And maybe I've been too hard on Sam Harris. And and in doing so, betrayed my master, who is Jesus, because what you see in Jesus is is noun and verb come together. That's love. So I'm not going to out you yet. If you tell me I can use your name, I'll use your name. But I don't think his name is on the blog. But again, I want to I want to he'd like to be involved more in my channel. And he's already my watchers have already been he's been sending me emails for a long time. Foundational questions is design built in that's tell us that's ends and meaning or is it merely a projection of frightened patterns seeking beings? That's what you know, if you go back to if you go back to Jonathan Haidt, Chapter 11, he says, you know, this is what the this is what the atheists have said. And it's way, way more complicated than that. Thunder and lightning surely might seem as though somebody up in the sky is angry with us. Suppose a group of people begin jointly creating a pantheon of invisible agents who cause the weather and others assert good or bad fortune. Voila, the birth of supernatural agents. See, again, if you frame it that way, you've already given in to Lessing's Lessing's ditch. And who says you have to frame it that way? That's the thing about loss of authority. You're always stuck with who says. And so what the what the simulation argument does is posits the idea that. Well, if if if the this gets back to my other point about immateriality, we really want an immaterial universe because. We can colonize it. That's what agency does. That's what persons do. And what the simulation idea says is that. What if there's an agent? What if there's a person? What if what if, in fact, you know. Tolkien. See, again, it's not just computers and games, it's books and fiction. Tolkien. Bilbo lives in Tolkien's head with a personality. And Bilbo may do things that Tolkien doesn't want. And you might say, but that's that that doesn't work. Tolkien can force him, but Tolkien won't force Bilbo to do what is inconsistent with Bilbo. Are you saying Bilbo's alive? Sorta. And this is what happens with the simulation argument suddenly. Again, because our conscious self is this tiny little sliver and the rest of our mind is watching and taking in and always trying to orient. And that's a communal a communal thing that we're doing all with each other. And it's happening all the time. These things move through history. And I wonder if we're not at the end of a wave. And we're at the end of Sam Harris's wave. And. You know, this is a C.S. Lewis metaphor in the springtime. Few plants pop up through the snow. And you begin to think spring is coming. Winter won't always be here. Is the conscious self here to stay or something like a dream that vanishes in the morning? Is love merely desire dressed up pretty or the enduring will behind all being? I'm doing the epistle of First John in my Sunday school class. What do we say? Well, first, first, first, God is love. Doesn't say love is God. This is God is love. What does that mean? Now, one of the things that Jordan Peterson has really blessed me with is really forced me to think about mind and action. We are limited creatures use consciousness to filter a world too large. I think Peterson is dead on right about this. The values developed to produce to productively engage the world in action act or die. God or the gods or at least individual communal representations that give coherence and meaning to the whole show. And again, this does not this does not rule out other agents that we are that we can't be aware of. And again, the simulation, the simulation argument suggests what if other agents have set this up and have meaning and purpose? And what if what if we are living in Tolkien's head? You need to act as if something is true. I think this is what Peterson has been demonstrating that the freedom from religion people that usually once a year around Easter will take up a lot of business. And they say we see wonder too. And we bring meaning and purpose. We find meaning and purpose. And if you if you if you read C.S. Lewis's. Come on, watchers. Men without chests. The abolition of man. If Jordan Peterson came to me and said, what's the first book I should read from C.S. Lewis? Well, it'd be a close competition between till we have faces, which is his best work of fiction, which I think Peterson would be all over. And the abolition of man where Peterson and Lewis are making some of the same points. But but in the abolition of man, you know, if meaning is just an experience I bring to my life. Well, well, well, we're waiting for a meaning inducing drug that we can give to make me feel like everything has meaning. Would we accept that? We don't really. And this is the problem with nihilism and depression and despair and why people are turning Peterson because something deep within says, I can't look at my child and not know meaning. I can't I can't go to my job. And if I don't feel meaning at my job, I'm not going to bother doing it, even if it's keeping food on the table. I need meaning. And I don't just mean the emotion of it. The emotion has to be sacramental and be tied down to something deeper. And I think our watchers, when they hear the simulation talk, think, could there be? What if there is? What if what if something has built this? Well, I don't say that this is just merely something within a computer that this this is that there is a world out there. And I think Hoffman has a point that I'm experiencing touching my bookshelf. And but we say, well, this bookshelf has at least as much space between as more space between the particles. But so does my hand. So this is a very strange world I'm living in. And I'm not saying other aspects of this of this bookshelf. But someone built this. If someone built this, what does that mean? What should I do? Because you need as you need to act as if something is true. Because if you stop acting, you're out of the story. You're out of the game. So yeah, there's a little two hour one for you. I hope it'll make up for my absence. You can I can't go back in time. So I've got another funeral this week. I've got two classes meetings next week. I'm going to be busy. And so video production might suffer. Sorry.