https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9SQSS0z5Yns

 Are we on, Rick? We're so out of practice. We're still in the silent period. We are on. So yeah, we're so out of practice. I don't have my little window with my little Rick and my little window on the screen. So yes, some of you might remember this. It is Friday morning, 10 o'clock. Father Eric is in the Discord PVK Q&A recorded chat room. Something that we had to sort of dust off the chairs and take the cobwebs out. And if you want to see the most brutally honest meme done by Father Eric, yeah, you can see what I've done. But here we are, Friday morning, not the first Friday of the month because I was on vacation last week, but the second Friday of the month in the Bridges of Meaning Discord answering questions. And so if you would like to ask a question, you can go into the Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer room and ask a question. And well, let's say invite people, invite, drop that in there. Oh, come on, paste. Paste, paste. There it is. That's how to get there. Rick is taking care of business on the back end here. So we will begin with Van Gogh's ear has a question for me. And his question reads as such, I've recently read the passage by Cormac McCarthy. Once Luke hears this, he'll be very excited because that's one of Luke's favorite authors. And there's a quote that went, femininity encoded mandates that were far less forgiving than anything men were familiar with. How true that is, I don't know, but it made me think of Islam and how Islam views women. Based on how you see Islam, do you think the subjugation of women in Islam, once you say the subjugation of women in Islam, you've already sort of stacked a deck here. And I don't know much about Islam, but I suspect when a lot of Muslims hear subjugation of women in Islam, they'll have ideas, but we'll continue. Compared to Christianity is based on secretly or unconsciously believing this out of fear of uncontrolled, unlimited femininity, rather than seeing them as inferior simply because they were women. Well, you know, starting out with a biggie. So Mary Harrington, who is a very interesting person to listen to, is coming out with a new book and she's been on the book tour. She's been on many this little corner adjacent channels. In fact, before I started the live stream, she was talking to Glenn Scrivener. She had a conversation with Chris Williamson. She had a conversation on trigonometry and I've listened to a fair amount of it and it's been excellent. I expect we'll see her with Jordan Peterson at some point. That would be my guess. This morning I was listening to Grim Grizz, who unfortunately didn't make the list that was in the video that I released this morning on autodidacts, which I think we will have to talk about at some point. And you know, Grim Grizz is a genius when it comes to naming and pointing. And that's something that we should pay more attention to probably. You know, he had a couple of genius little pointers in this morning's live stream and he comes out with them quite a bit. One of the things he often says is Papa Peterson and giving Jordan Peterson's current Twitter war with Pontifex, Papa Peterson is probably a pretty good name for him given now that we have a rivalry to the oldest large-scale institution the world has ever seen. But I digress. But you've come here for my digressions, I know, because I don't finish my sentences. One of the things I think we are going to see is another very radical turning around in the question of femininity. Mary Harrington has basically making the argument that the the ubiquity of effective birth control was the first step to the I'll rephrase it in a little bit more tricky way. The beginning of the first step was the beginning of transhumanism. I think if you listen to Mary Harrington, and she makes a lot of sense. It's really difficult to listen to these things because as for Vickie, I think so correctly points out our relevance realization and our biases are two sides of the same coin. So what we find to be insightful is in many ways a reflection of our bias, which is in some ways the basis of vulvarisms. Islam as a system, having this big talk about propositionality in the autodidact conversation, which for me was a really helpful breakthrough. But Islam is all about what many religious systems are about in terms of preservation. And religious systems don't just preserve the propositional P, they also preserve the procedural P. And part of the reason that you don't have women priests in the Roman Catholic Church or in the Orthodox Church is because of the preservation of the procedural. I think Mary Harrington is correct in her observation that the major disruptors of the procedural human changes have deeply impacted women as well as men. Industrialization was an enormously disruptive movement through the world that really scrambled the relationship between men and women. And in some ways, we're still dealing with industrialization as what a lot of this machine learning, and if we phrase it that way, what a lot of this machine learning is, is industrialization of the upper register. So now we have language models that are produced in the upper register. Now we have language models that are producing code and talky, thinky talky stuff that gives us the sense that we are engaging other flesh and blood human beings, the Turing test. Islam, of course, is post agricultural revolution and pre industrial revolution. And many of the conflicts between at least the postage stamp size vision of Islam that I know and the quote unquote modern world tends to be even just around the disruption that happened in the industrial revolution. There is a really interesting TV show on Hulu that I watched through called Rami, which was about a young Islamic man who was in northern New Jersey trying to figure his stuff out, trying to sort himself out with respect to Islam. The seasons, as with many of these streaming seasons, the seasons devolved as they sort of went through. The first season was the best, the second season was second best, et cetera, et cetera. But the issues that were raised in that series, I thought, were applicable to many other, many of the issues that we are dealing with in the church. Now, I was going to say zip codes matter, but we are talking about the world here. So GPS coordinates matter. And life is lived in radically different ways in different places in the world. When I was in the little town that my mother lives in in Massachusetts, I sat down with the two CRC pastors and one of the pastors who didn't grow up in the Christian Reformed Church, his first church was in Palo Alto here in Silicon Valley. That's where I got to know him. Now his second church, now he's the pastor of my mother's church. Every time my mother's church goes vacant, I usually do what I can to make sure they get a good pastor, and he's a good pastor. And he was doing some reflection on the transition from the world of Palo Alto, California to the world of a exurb, former industrial town, sort of now sleepy suburb, about an hour out of Boston, in terms of just the social world of the people. And he rightly observed that more people live like they do in that little town in North America than live like they do in Palo Alto, California. The same can be applied to this question about women and Islam. I was listening to on the way to work this morning, which is only five minutes, I listened to a little bit before. I haven't listened to anything done by Dave Rubin for years, but Peter Thiel was on and so Peter Thiel is an interesting guy. So I was giving him a listen and Peter Thiel was talking about progress. And as Peter Thiel was talking about progress and talking about mobility as sort of a telltale sign of progress, I thought about, is it really though? Isn't rootedness part of that value that so many people feeling the waves of nihilism on their internal shores? Isn't that what they're feeling? So it's on what basis ought we to judge the rightness or wrongness of, let's say, pre-industrialization femininity versus modern femininity versus postmodern femininity. Mary Harrington, for all of her brilliance, is very much rooted in this world. Part of what all of our position and status give us is sort of a functional libertarian posture, where Mary Harrington on one hand is about as sharp as a sharper critique as I've heard of what is happening in the world. And I think that's the kind of thing that's happening in what has happened, what it's like to be a woman in the West today, especially in the English-speaking West. She can't shed that libertarian ethos and I'm likely there with her. I didn't forego the education of my daughters. They're both very bright, wonderful human beings for whom I want many options and choices for their life. If they wish to pursue a career, and now my first option for them would be very selfishly that they marry and become mothers, is that because I want to be a grandfather? Yeah, I'm sure that's part of it. It's also because, as I've told my children, there are, in my experience, but again, this is semi-consumeristic and it's very hard to defy that power as we talk. I have had few things in my life as meaningful as being a father and participating in my children's lives and watching them grow. It's also challenging, it can be terrifying, it can be scary, but my goodness, having an up-close seat for those five human beings that my wife and I conceived of, gave birth to, sacrificed for, raised, at this point in my life. I just spent a week with my mother, which was an excellent time. We did almost nothing. She needed a new computer, so we worked on that. She had a list of little fix-up things around the house, which I did for her, so we worked on that. I see my visits with my mother through a whole new lens now that I have children who are no longer living in the home. For my wife and I, our time with them doing just about anything is the highlight of the week. We let very few things get in the way of those times. In many ways, underneath your question is there a better life than this way which we are so biologically coded for of family? Now, as Grim Grizz, very much a prophet in this little corner of the internet, notes in his conversation with John Van Donk, which gave us the image of Grim Grizz on a cross in Chino, California, wearing nothing but a jock strap as members of this little corner pelt him with paintballs. Yeah, there's an image not so easily unseen. You can thank me later for embedding that in your consciousness. Grim Grizz notes that, well, family doesn't just mean the nuclear family, it's also the extended family. When Peter Thiel talks about mobility as progress, I sometimes wonder. I have a cousin in Massachusetts who is just a few months from my age, and growing up we played with each other all the time when I was in Massachusetts together. Whereas I, the city boy, went on to college and seminary and church work and traveled out of the country and live in California and am not only serving the Christian Reformed Church and my local church but the world in a sense through YouTube, my life is in stark contrast with that of my cousin who is a welder, and he doesn't live very far from the home he grew up in. And all of his siblings live within a few miles of his house, and he's been married to one woman for his whole life, and he has two children, one who lives a little bit ways away. He's an electrician on Martha's Vineyard, and the other is his daughter lives in town, both of whom now have given him grandchildren, and many of the contrast between myself and my cousin would be quite stark. You would not see my cousin talking on YouTube. He is a sincere, undeconstructed conservative Calvinist, goes to a Calvinist church which is more conservative than the Christian Reformed Church at this point. And it was funny because sitting and visiting with my cousin, we always got along great, and we always do. He's just someone for whom the fruit of the spirit seems to naturally drip from him, a wonderful human being. But it was interesting to sit next to him on the sofa and sort of compare our lives now, you know, 50 plus years after we first knew each other, living parallel lives, cousins, and asking, okay, so in the eyes of the world, you know, I might have more status. I have a YouTube channel, I'm a pastor, I, you know, maybe someday I'll write books. All of these measures of value. My cousin is a welder. He has a wife who worked in a mundane office job, and now she shoes horses, which she really loves. They'll never be wealthy. They have two children, and son's an electrician. I don't know what their daughter does right now. Last I saw, she was working in a hardware store, which is better. It's not an easy thing to say. And so, that whole meme of control is so tightly woven to this really stupid idea that the only motivational factor that people have is power. What a reduction of a human being. And, you know, poor Jordan is getting a lot of grief for his war that he picked with his wife. And so, he's getting a lot of grief for his war that he picked with the pope. I don't even know if the pope pays any attention, and if the pope even knows about it, he'll probably ignore it. And that's sort of the difference between the status level of the pope and the status level of even the pope. But, shoot, I lost my train of thought. Oh, control. Every time Jordan Peterson just sort of goes off on imagining that the sole motivational factor of a human being is the joy derived from somehow controlling another person. What a stupid thought. What a stupid reduction of the complexity of human motivation. One of the most alarming things about the current conversation is just how stupid it all is. As if thousands of years of profound human reflection on the human condition and what it's like to live in this world is simply cast away because someone has the idea that the only reason for injustice is that some sick person, either consciously or unconsciously, simply enjoys the sense of power that one has in dominating another human being and controlling their life. If you've ever actually had to take any responsibility for another human life, you realize just how difficult and impossible the task is. So, yeah, but again, if I were a woman, and I'm not, at least not today, would I rather live in the industrialized west or in Saudi Arabia? Well, maybe that depends on if I'm the wife of an oil sheik. Who knows? But generally speaking, yeah, I'm glad my daughters live here and not there. I'm glad they live under a Christian-ish regime and not an Islamic regime. And someone might listen to my answer and say, well, you certainly don't have a lot of firmness in your convictions. And now that I've spent almost the whole first half hour simply riffing on the first question, we know that we are in fact doing the bridges of meaning question and answer because that has been my practice. So there we have it. Anybody in the PVK QA recorded chat room wish to weigh in? Oh, see, Luke is gone. He always wants to talk. Father Eric, do you have anything to add given the rather different postures that Protestants and Catholics have on the question of femininity? Of course, you have a very high status woman that's much more prominent in the Roman Catholic tradition than the Protestant tradition. I don't know, any thoughts? Father Big Mac? It's kind of hard to jump in here, but I do think women do hold an awful lot of power and sometimes they're unaware of it and that can cause problems. Okay. As a Protestant and who also has a high view of women, I actually think that I actually think that the highest view of women is afforded in the reformed tradition in well-oriented. What I mean by that is stating that in spite of a sinful creature who has been defiled by the curse of Adam, they are used for such glorious purpose and that is to be held in the highest regard in the household and most especially in the birth of Christ. Wow, great answer. Cool. See, this is why we do this. This is why we do this. And you know, Rick and I evaluate the different, so we're using the V-Mix protocol this morning to do this. If Rick's not here, I usually use StreamYard and kind of evaluate back and forth. I would have loved to have seen that expressed with a little face in a box. It would have been even better, but thank you both. Thank you both. All right, next question. On we go. People are, let's see, are people adding questions? Yeah, they are. GrimCrizz, what's crying? What did he want? Okay. Zach Rudolph, what percentage of this little corner uses high-minded abstractions as a place to hide? Zach, Zach, what, 100%? Three people said 100% and I'd have to agree with that. That's, I think, certainly a piece of our motivational structure. I shouldn't tell Tori's stories out of school. Yeah, yeah, Vendant calls it myopic mental meanderings. You know, we talk and if you've got a lot of education and a lot of smarts and because it gives us status, we do a lot of lip flapping with all of this stuff and I'm the king of that, someone might say, except Jordan Peterson now since his daily wire hookup seems to be able to put out more product than I do nearly. So yeah, yeah, that's always, we love hiding in abstractions, but I think Christ is quite clear. Again, one of the really critical things that Protestants have to wrestle with, we being people who want to really focus on the book, is that in the New Testament all of the mentions of final judgment are based on our actions, not our propositional assent. It doesn't mean that actions and propositional assent are disconnected, but it is just so easy to talk. Of course, Jesus has a lovely parable about that, about two sons, father told two sons to do something. One father's one son said, I'll do it and then didn't do it and the other said, no, but then he went and did it. Which one gets the best evaluation by the father? It's an easy question. Jesus has a way of getting right to the point. So great question, Zach. David Walker, Kansas City, Missouri. The settlers lost to the missionaries, the Anglicans lost to the Puritans, the fundamentalists lost to the modernists, the trads will lose to the left and the right-handed universalists, the roundheads beat the royalists, the patriots beat the crown, the Catholics pretty much lost to the Protestants. Ouch. What pattern is this supposed to be that keeps happening over and over? I don't really discern much of a pattern in there necessarily because losing is, of course, an evaluation. Our evaluations are our own. It's something to continually remember. Did the fundamentalists lose to the modernists? I'm not so sure about that. The fundamentalists have shown a surprising amount of staying power. Someone might say that the Christians lost to the lions, but where are the lions today? So in many ways, there's no judging until the final judgment. So yeah, I don't know. Hey, Paul. This is from Zan. Looking for some advice. I'm currently moving from my small town in Paducah, Kentucky to Melbourne, Australia. Wow. For a year on holiday and work visa. Wow. Heck of a holiday and work. It's really cool. And want to remain intentionally on strengthening my relationship with the Lord while I am overseas. Any advice on how to get plugged into a new church and all the rest? Well, you can look up my friend Warren Mills in Melbourne, Australia. If you say Paul VanderKlay sent me, I'm sure he'll open up with welcome arms. He's got a lovely traditional Anglican church in Melbourne. Warren, he's been on my channel before. He's the one that organized the Jordan Peterson conference in Australia that didn't feature Jordan Peterson, but featured me. We had John Anderson give a little bit of introduction. When I did a little video recording with John Anderson, he's sitting there with suit and tie and he looks at how I'm dressed and he's like, that's, that's Sacramento is a political town. And I used to show up for political events without a suit and tie. And some of my friends would look at me like, such a rube. Yeah, get it, get plugged into a church. Warren grew up a dispensationalist became a Pentecostal and now is a very traditional Anglican. And so he's been, somebody's calling me from CAT Exteriors. I have no idea what that is. It probably has to do with all of my storm damage. So I would say, yeah, get connected with a church. There's lots of good churches in Melbourne. Yeah, look up Warren, go to church with Warren for a Sunday or two and see if that's your taste. I went to his church as a lovely pastor. I met some people in the church, lovely people in the church. It's in downtown Melbourne. Warren now lives on the 13th floor of a high rise. Warren's a great guy. So that, but there are others in this little corner that are in Melbourne, Australia. And I would say just work your angles. But if you're only going to be there for a year, find a church that's close enough and stay in the same church the whole time and use that year to build some relationships and gain some perspectives from another part of the world. Before you come back to North America. And I think your life will be enriched by what the Christians in Australia have to share with you. So great question. Hey, Paul picked up on you noting the NIV using Lake and the KJV using sea in your first draft of 11 February. I've made that point in a number of them because Lake is a great word. So in terms of this migration into the symbolic world, the NIV's translation of what in Greek is the word sea for lake because Protestant translators say the sea of Galilee is a lake, not a sea. Misses the point. Misses the point. This the sea of Galilee is this little mini sea where they have storms and fish and drama and chaos. I mean, if you demote the sea of Galilee to a lake, you lose all that stuff. Sorry, I'll be back. I'm gonna get back to the question. Do you have any thoughts on the KJV using charity and the NIV using love in 1 Corinthians 13? Okay, VanderKlay, you complained about this one thing. What about the other? The difference really isn't in the King James. Part of the challenge, the King James Bible has some wonderful things about it and some more difficult things about it. There are textual issues that Anselman can, the autodidact of our comment section can teach you about the textus receptus versus the critical text, for example, in terms of what Greek text to use underneath your English translation. So my issue between sea and lake has nothing to do with any of those issues. The King James version was speaking to an audience that's 500 years old now and the English language has changed in those 500 years. The how to translate the Bible is an enormously difficult thing because what any translation surfaces are all the layers of filters that we pass through. So the symbolism layer, the, let's say the lyrical layer, and of course the King James version is one of our best translations in terms of its lyrical quality. Another quality that the King James version has is just the fact that it's old and common and in a sense archaic. It being archaic is a plus in many ways because it gives us a sense of the strangeness of God and his word. I noted in my video on the Jesus people that during the late 60s and early 70s there was a whole range of new translations, really paraphrases, that came in. There was a paraphrase of the Bible called the way. There was good news for modern man. Now some of these paraphrases have become the terribly named translation, the new living translation, because it's not a translation. It's just an update of the paraphrase called the living Bible. Having seen the living Bible used now for 40 years, on one hand I can appreciate the fact that many people used the living Bible and now use the new living translation and really like it because for them it's clear. It's clear because the good evangelical theology is already chewed and digested and prepackaged for them like a TV dinner. If you read the Bible you will find sort of homogenized, reformed theology built into your translation. Is that a bad thing? I don't think it's necessarily a bad thing, but it's really helpful to know that that's what you're reading. So in my adult Sunday school class this is stuff that I... so I'm going to give you guys a little insight. This Sunday, Rick and I might be able to bring in the StreamYard participants for the Sunday morning Roman study and there will be a link in the comment section if we're able to pull it off on Sunday morning. But in order to participate you got to show up live at 9 30 a.m. Sunday morning at Living Stones after daylight savings time. Boy I've got a lot of nerves about that. Rick's gonna really have to, you know, we'll probably limit it to three or five or six participants because the reason I've never opened that door is that I don't want to overwhelm the dear saints at Living Stones and there are a few of them. But that class is really hard to do properly if I don't have any audience at all and some of the regulars are currently in hospitals or care units. And so that's part of the ongoing question about Living Stones in this digression. At a council meeting last night and you know the council who hasn't had a respite because we're about out of council members in the population of the congregation. But they're very optimistic about the future of Living Stones. We have some wonderful people who are driving in for church on Sunday morning, younger people, and they have a little group and they know each other and they enjoy each other and we've got other people who come to the estuary meetings and some of the estuary people are stopping in on church on Sunday morning. So yeah, MJ, it's working. That's nasty. That is a trollish part of me. I get it from my mother. My father had none of that. So yeah, the new Living Translation, which is a paraphrase, it's got its place. Now how all of this relates to Protestantism? There's another fun question. So the King James Version has its place. I've got a lot of my biblical memorization in the King James and the Revised Standard Version. Some of it's in the NIV. The NIV sort of tries to you know cut the difference between a translation and a paraphrase. It's mostly translation, but then they have their dynamic equivalents where they'll give you sort of often a a broadly reformed perspective on a particular text to the degree that that satisfied the NIV Translation Committee. So charity is something that if you say it on the streets of Sacramento, they'll think you're talking about a woman's name or they'll think you're talking about a soup kitchen. Love is probably the better word, but better again is a very difficult thing because if better means having someone on the streets of Sacramento understand what you're saying, love is better. Charity historically for someone who let's say perhaps has a really good English degree from a really good college and not a good English degree that required them to actually not read any English or historical English. Charity has some undertones and some nuances that are better. Now I know Wesley and Whitefield because I met him at the event in Ireland. He was a very good Ireland and so I have his face in my mind right now. How this is sensed whether charity in Ireland is a word that has not lost its meaning and this is a difficulty with these universalized translations. So where and this goes the same with the question of has the multiplication of English language translations undermined the Bible. That's a fair argument because when there was just the King James Version it had a degree of authority and uniformity. Everyone was reading from the same text as it were in the English language world. As one might push it back a little further and say has the use of the vernacular in the church been a problem. Not out there to all the Roman Catholics who say we had a universal language in the West and it's Latin and you can kick that back another degree and say no we had a universal language in the Christian world and it was Greek and kick that back a little further and say no we had a universal language and it was Aramaic. Kick it back a little further and you say no we have God's word in Hebrew. So here we are. Good question. Mr. Boltitude using the oh that little cartoon was that like that little Bible robot cartoon evangelical thing great icon there. Hey Paul I recently read C.S. Lewis's space trilogy. I got to read that thing. Have you ever read them? I read them before I was old enough to really appreciate them. I read them in high school and if so do you have any thoughts? My thought is I need to reread them because ever since I started this channel whole bunches of people have been yelling at me to reread them and I have not. Just as more bunches of people have been yelling at me to read Jung to read Nietzsche to read read read. Making videos I can't be reading and making videos. No that's that's actually the the Jesus people video was me reading and making a video at the same time. So I guess I could do it. I could just turn on the camera and start reading the space trilogy. It would be a very long video because I don't read that well. I feel like I wouldn't have understood half of what was going on if I had read them before I found this little corner. There you go. Point taken. Father Big Mac is there a big difference between the Dutch Calvinism and English Calvinism? Define big. Big as in Big Mac. Here one of the um here one of the best ways to get a sense of the difference between Dutch Calvinism and English Calvinism is to read the Hutterburg Catechism and then read the Westminster Confession. And my father used to talk about this and so the Westminster Confession is tighter. Part of this has to do with the difference between England that little island that has so influenced us all and the continent. The continent is a little bit more diverse. It was so much fun visiting Europe this summer for the first time. Quite a shock to go over to the Netherlands and realize just how small it is and now with Europe well after the second world war we just drive out of the Netherlands and we drive into Germany and you know France is right over there and you know it's not a terribly large place if you compare it to our expectations of what we have here in North America where everything is so huge. So the Dutch also have a tradition of tolerance. It's helpful to look at how the reformed aspect of the Protestant Reformation rolled out. So of course you have we have Jan Hus a generation before and then you have Martin Luther in Germany and what was left of the Holy Roman Empire because Germany wasn't yet when Martin Luther was there. And Lutheranism, the first one to be in Germany and then up into Scandinavia because of course you got Denmark and Daneland and all those places up there. John Calvin was in Switzerland and you have the very different geopolitical reality of Switzerland with all of these sort of little city states that make it up and then the Anabaptists of course were sort of first to settle in the Netherlands and then the Anabaptists of course were sort of first to settle in the Netherlands and the reason that the you know there are a lot of reasons why the Netherlands was sort of the fringe. Boy I'm going to get in trouble with this. It was sort of the tolerant fringe of Europe by and that's how the Netherlands in some ways continues to be and so that impacted Dutch Calvinism and so there is actually a fair amount of diversity within Dutch Calvinism but there's also a fair amount of toleration. You will find generally speaking a bit more toleration in Dutch Calvinism than you'll find in English Calvinism or Presbyterianism. It just had very different and then of course Scotland, the Scotch Calvinists. So it's just a very different history. A lot of people in the Christian Reformed Church will look over at the Gospel Coalition, at the Orthodox Presbyterian Church, at the Presbyterian Church of America, but also the PCUSA and they will look at those and yeah they're different from us. The Dutch Calvinists tended to have to deal with pluralism a little bit more. I just was reading on Voices, a different Eric who is a Navy Chaplain in the Christian Reformed Church and he was writing about Kyperian, his questions about Kuyper because Kuyper of course had polarization in the Netherlands to try to deal with pluralism. Richard Mao, Nick Waltersdorf, all of the Dutch Calvinists from Calvin College tried to promote the idea of principled pluralism. Tim Keller has read a lot of Dutch Calvinism. Tim Keller I would argue and I think this is part of why a lot of people are annoyed with him. Tim Keller even though he's a conservative Presbyterian in many ways is right on the edge of of English Calvinism and Dutch Calvinism. I remember when I visited with Tim Keller in 2006 and we had a little contingent of us from the Christian Reformed Church and we were noting just how often he quotes Richard Mao, Nick Waltersdorf, Alvin Plantinga, George Marsden, all of these lights from the little post-World War II renaissance that Calvin College had thanks to Rod Jellema and the philosophy department. And Rod Greenway who was the father of a classmate of mine and he was also our admissions teacher at seminary. Greenway is another one of these wonderful families in the Christian Reformed Church that has generational Christian Reformed pastors. You know was a colleague of Tim Keller's over at Westminster Philadelphia. So the Dutch Calvinists have been impacting the English Presbyterians and back and forth. A lot of what people are complaining about in the Christian Reformed Church right now is that in a lot of ways the emergent young restless and reformed which has been a significant movement in North America is now in many ways impacting the Christian Reformed Church to a significant degree. A lot of in sort of the mixture of right and left in the Christian Reformed Church Tim Keller was accepted more by both sides. John Piper not so much. Doug Wilson makes some people scream for the exits. So yeah look at the conservative Presbyterians and compare them to the Dutch Calvinists and you'll see sort of a I don't know I don't know Father Eric if that answered your question or not if you had something more specific in mind. Yeah so I remember one time listening to you talk about the doctrine of total depravity and if I remember it properly it was something like there is no aspect of the human person that has not been wounded by the sin of Adam and if that wasn't correct you feel free to correct me. That is correct. Yep that's right. And I was sitting there thinking that's not total depravity that's pretty close to what I believe. And I always said Calvinism is Christianity see I don't know how much difference there is in some of these things. Right well I always I don't know I don't know where I picked this up but I always thought that total depravity meant that the human person doesn't have any capacity to cooperate with grace before they're redeemed. And if I'm wrong about that I'll be wrong about that. That is definitely a valid reading of our doctrine and that is I would say I'd say total depravity doesn't just have one definition. Okay. Part of the problem is that part of the problem is that these old combatants I don't think I got anywhere near as fair a representation of Roman Catholic theology as I should have. Right. Given you know the the years of rivalry and warfare and a lot of that has been clean is in the process of improving over the last 30 years. But whenever the Christian-formed church tries to like change we the Christian-formed church put a footnote in one of the Heidelberg catechism sections about the mass being a condemnable idolatry. Pretty strong words sort of backing away from that statement and a number of the Latin American Christian-reformed clergy did not want to back away from that statement. I think partly because the Roman Catholic Church in North America is a little bit different thing than the Roman Catholic Church in Latin America in some ways. Absolutely. You guys are just so massive. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah you know hopefully we can we can talk fairly to each other and then when you get into this question of of works righteousness and what we both mean by that. Did the reformers you know one of the things I really liked about Brett about Brett Sockel's book is that I think we're at a point now where we can we can understand where the reformers weren't necessarily being fair to the tradition but then again all of those reformers had zip codes too so God is our judge. Amen. Works righteousness and what we both mean by that. Oh it's me again. Somebody needs to mute me. All right okay next question. There we go. Thanks Rick. Okay pineapple pizza. Regarding autodidact and the church leadership. Boy that that conversation that we had on that stream and then reflecting on it I was reflecting on it this morning and wrote a big Twitter thread. I might make a little video on that Twitter thread that I wrote because you know bringing some of the ideas here together in terms of the abstractions you know we need these systems of abstractions in order to work on our communities together and work on our thoughts and you know the Christian informed church has always accepted those baptized by Rome. Now maybe that's historical because that's who everyone was in the Reformation. He had to work from the baptism of Rome and then they you know they basically said well accept any baptism when who's baptized in the name of the trinitarian god which of course well I don't know when Sam was baptized or who baptized Sam but this is all so difficult and the rise of the autodidact we talked about servetus in the stream. I'm so glad that when I met Sam I was under no authority to put Sam in handcuffs and bring him to Grand Rapids and have him burned at the stake. I don't want to see my friend Sam burned at the stake. The world has changed a lot and but yet this question of autodidacts and church leadership you'll notice that I've never had a debate with Sam on the trinity partly because I pushed him over to Brett Sockel for that because Sockel's a theologian and Sockel will know a lot more. He'll be able to fight more fairly for the trinity side than I am and you can watch Jonathan Pigeot also in a number of videos sidetracked the trinity wars as much as Jacob would like to pull me into endless disputes Jacob my friend but regarding the autodidacts and the church leadership I think satisficing versus maximizing what is good enough? Well let's look at satisficing. Satisficing is a decision making strategy or cognitive heuristic that entails searching through the available alternatives until an acceptable threshold is met. The term satisficing a poor man too of satisfying and suffice interesting was introduced by Herbert A. Simon in 1956 although the concept was first posited in his 1947 book Administrative Behavior. Simon used satisficing to explain the behavior of decision makers under circumstances in which an optimal solution cannot be determined. He maintained that many natural problems are characterized by computational intractability or lack of information both of which preclude the use of mathematical optimization procedures. He observed this in his Nobel Prize in Economic Speech that decision makers can satisfy either by finding optimal solutions for simplified work or by finding satisfactory solutions for a more realistic world. Neither approach in general dominates the other and both have to continue to coexist in the world of management science. Like CS Lewis analogy goes a hallway of many rooms of denominations but you have to settle in a room long term with a with a present ability to learn so many propositions maybe the analogy is now people can try to create their own room and renovations our friends who stream while construct who stream while constructing but will that be sustainable or do you settle for something established but many have other avenues to scratch the thinky talky itch while others living out the love and implication of the propositions you propose so maybe i'll generalize a little bit so as not to make people real people uncomfortable as a pastor i get to talk to church people as part of the job i have heard christian reform elders give definitions of divine election that are flat out arminian and they don't know it i have seen jehovah's witnesses give articulations of gee of their christology which are completely or at least seemingly orthodox rather than heretical as they would hold in the jehovah's witness church church given everything i read in the gospels with the diverse excellencies of jesus christ he who would accept the gift of the woman of ill repute who came to him and who was washed his feet with her tears and dried them with her hair to the disgust of his hosts who did not offer a foot washing which had would have been hospitable jesus clearly understands our dilemma and this is why only god can judge when i say only god can judge i do not mean that human beings don't need to discern when i say only god can judge that means that god alone can finally assign us to any future of judgment or reward that he has in store for us that position only belongs to god local church leaders you know when when when the bible says you know be careful those of you who wish to be teachers for you'll be judged at a higher standard we ought to take that seriously and the same goes for church leaders part of why local churches are important and part of why church polity is important and part of why i like and i feel very at home in the christian reform church system is that we try to balance the authority of the local council with the authority of the regional assembly that's the classes with the authority of the binational assembly which is the synod and we we work we work in that way and then some some of you will notice that wow that's a lot like the way government is supposed to work yeah that's because it's all downstream from protestantism it would be easy to point out sam in his biblical i almost always call him a biblically universalist when he's a biblically unitarian it'd be easy to point out sam and say oh sam must not pass this line or fellowship with us because of his deficient theology of the trinity well fair enough but if he wishes to be with us we have to figure that out because if i were to give a sufficiently intrusive theological examination to i could do it with my church small enough but i would i would suspect to do it to any church and again this is something that protestants probably have to wrestle with more i could fail any congregation i'm sure i could and others can fail me as you regularly do in the comment section and in other videos which is fine i'm i'm totally mostly comfortable with you pointing out my errors because to the degree that i have humility enough as the proverbs the book of proverbs says if you point out my flaws you are my friend because i can perhaps become better because of you so you know anselman with his with his sharp eye for um for protestant missteps in the comment section i don't ban anselman i wish him to thrive now there's a degree to which this stuff can become counterproductive and we've seen that in discord servers and in other places and it's part of the reason why my videos are not one video after another pointing out all of the errors of everyone else because of course by the measure that you evaluate them that measure will be used against you a certain jew whose name starts with j said very clearly in the most famous sermon in all of human history so local church leaders have to figure out what to do what's best for the flock and in reformed and most protestant groups that means that groups of them together lay people who probably know less theology than the idodidacts have to make decisions have to make decisions that judge in some cases their theological betters that's the way it is and this is why this is why i keep pushing love up to the top of the hierarchy now it's too easy to game that system too and you can say well then why don't you why don't you what let everyone have no discernment have no lines no because i can tell you having no lines can be just as unloving as having too many lines and lines that are too bright like skin we need semi-permeable membranes and we will have to live with the limitations of those membranes this leads to the strange place that i am in the christian reformed conversation where as much as it frustrates some people i'm i don't use my channel to promote lgbtq inclusion in the christian reformed church as currently constituted but i do even encourage some of my friends who are in progressive churches that seem absolutely persuaded and intent on following that path to say follow that path leave you know let's figure out denominational lines you'll be outside of it but um you know if you think this is the next evolution in christian discipleship i can't stop you even if i wanted to try so but that leaves us all with the human condition where we are given agency and we get to think and we have to choose and we have to live with the consequences of our choices both temporal and eternal so finding ways to satisfy or satisficing yes reality always involves that and but what was so helpful about you know it was sam in the video that said you know we have a problem with auto-didax and i thought bingo there he is he's right he's right and and he said there he is he's right he's right and and this is why i don't want to have a world where i draw lines and i can't talk to sam when sam came into this little corner hit mary you know we we've got this is why i don't doubt these the existence of these ecclesiastical spiritual theological bodies because when when sam came in as a non-trinitarian it was like 1700 years of an of an immune system kicked up and manifest themselves through the absolutely lovely mary cohen and i thought oh my isn't this interesting it kicked up through me because i thought you know i could talk about jordan peterson and half of the things i talk about on my channel all day long and not get anywhere near running afoul of my confessional standards of my denomination but trinity but as sam has been around you know i some of you commenters i've got a good memory and i remember what a bunch of you wrote when sam first came into the channel you don't talk that way about sam anymore sam's your friend now i just read another comment that i don't think was fair to sam and it'll be interesting to see how that relationship goes in this little corner but when jesus says love your enemies all the way up to and include it will love your love your neighbor all the way up to and including your enemies it includes women of ill repute it includes heretics it includes jews it includes muslims it includes includes atheists it includes it's it's it's a universal now figuring out what love looks like oh there we are and so figuring out what love looks like for sam's local church looks like for sam's local church it's easy for me to sit across the country and say i wouldn't decide what they decide yeah but i'm not the pastor of that church they've got to make decisions it's easy to say sam should just submit oh okay but you're not sam so and it's not just sam you know poor sam poor sam gets to be the poster child for all this stuff and anyone who's met sam and knows sam knows that he is a brilliant well-read lovely you know humble servant of god who wants who wants the best for this world that's that's who sam is and but there are many others i mean cw was in that chat and if you get into cw's story about his relationship with the opc this is this is a feature now it's a feature that that it's a struggle and a challenge that we have due to our affluence and due to our blessings but it's still a challenge and we have to figure it out and if there's anything i'm interested in it's having the church work and yes is submission an answer absolutely but submission has to be freely chosen and you know it's it's easy to sort of point to our adversaries and rivals and say they must submit but then to line up behind martin luther who did not or to line up behind john calvin who fled or to line up behind john calvin who fled france or to line up behind john nox or um henry the eighth or you know just pick your pick your side in the catholic orthodox spat in terms of the procession of the spirit from the father or the father and the son the son each of us stands before the judgment throne and we'll give an account about what we've done and as i said um the new testament is pretty consistent that we're judged according to what we've done does that mean that the second person of the trinity won't have a delightful conversation with sam and jacob i want to be there for that but then of course they're going to say that the non-triune god will have a very interesting conversation with me and part of the delight of this little corner is that well it's not ecclesiastical estuary is intentionally church adjacent will it be synagogue adjacent or mosque adjacent i don't know you know we have um you know for a hot minute there um raj was the i told raj at the last meetup i said raj you're the you're the hot girl of this little corner right now once raj came on the channel everybody wanted to have a conversation with raj and everybody should have a conversation with raj talk about a smart sincere delightful wonderful human being that and this is maybe mj's vindication that you know it was after his contact with me to what degree i had any participation in this i have no idea but it was after his contact with me that he decides to wear the head covering and have his facial hair in a certain way and work on his relationship with with siki so have i made raj a better seek how will god judge me for that but if i have to give a defense to my lord i will say this i will say you taught me to love my enemies and that included my friends and my theological rivals and i know i haven't done it perfectly but i did put that at the top of my hierarchy and um when i read jesus jesus who jesus who on one hand can be so gracious and welcoming that many think him irresponsible and so strident and bombastic and demanding that many of us think him unreasonable and i will say to my god i did my best to be like jesus and i did my best to be like jesus by the ones that i found in matthew mark luke and john informed by the rest of the new testament informed by the rest of the scriptures informed by the theological and ecclesiastical tradition that i received by virtue of my birth and my choices along the way and that is where i'll stand and for that reason if i am faithful to that jesus i will do what i'll do and i'll do what i'll do with sam and with john verveke and with jacob and with mark the favor of navigating patterns and just so that i don't miss i love all my children equally but i sure do watch a lot of grim grizz because i you know just can't get enough of that little fella and he's somebody i really can't wait to meet this spring but all of this goes down to jesus it is it is because of jesus that i do these things and so when i have to answer to my god about all of the different ways that i have failed him this is very protestant of me my only defense will be pointing to jesus and say i you know i'm certainly not your best servant but i know whose servant i want to be so there's that and church has got to work that up work that through all right are christians bound to the sabbath episode 9 spoiler alert dennis prager asked that question gosh i'm way behind on the exodus series i've kind of been waiting for them to come out on youtube because then my next question to daily wire is if i do a commentary series wow because just because something's on youtube doesn't mean that i can do what i do with them like if i back in the day when joe rogan was on youtube and i tried to do what i do with joe rogan you know rogan polices and you know he doesn't like his clips going out there so i don't know what daily wire is going to do when it's on jordan's channel but um yeah so i'm not up to episode 9 christians bound to the sabbath christian from church has a tradition of sabbatarianism which is not unique to the christian form church that was not an uncommon thing in the 19th century if you've listened to any of my sermons you should know about misery deliverance gratitude i think sabbath is a gift to us and those of you who know a little bit about calvinist doctrine will say oh wait a minute there's calvin's third use of the law so if you want to google that calvin's third use of the law you can see that so that's again part of my theological tradition so i don't see the sabbath it's so difficult to know how to handle the law because in many ways even if you see the law as an a work of gratitude for the deliverance that god has given us there still needs to be some of that crunchy lawness to it for the law to work in our lives and hearts so um i think um i think the sabbath is a gift given to man the sabbath was made for man not man for the sabbath someone said that you can google that and see who said it before me what's crying what are emotions and how do we relate to a soul emotions are emotions like dreams are signs and signals and language from other members of our consciousness congress as i often tell people if you divinize emotions which is a real um weakness of romanticism if you divinize emotions then you have an idol and a false god don't do that if you always mistrust emotions um you're not listening to the other members of your consciousness congress emotions tell you something about parts of yourself that aren't necessarily that don't necessarily trade in the propositional so emotions are communications from parts of ourself that we might not be terribly aware of and we have that you know you're watching a movie and suddenly you find yourself crying what does that mean there are also there are also communications from other parts of your extended self that aren't necessarily limited to to you since birth just like that um autoimmune response um autoimmune response that that mary cohen exhibited when she first saw sam and some of the rest of you did too so that that came upon her as an emotion and then she acted upon it and later upon other reflection had to say huh and if you go into therapy a lot of therapy is oh you're having these emotions why why am i having these emotions uh maybe i need to process that in my thinky talky resources and maybe if i process it in my thinky talky resources the emotions will start to change we're very mysterious creatures so that's crying eric young hey paul i've been really struggling with my personal relationship with christianity and what it means if i pursue it further by joining a church oh you and how many of my listeners as an ex jehovah's witness i really want to share what we've learned from this little corner about the true history of christianity with my mother and brother that are still in the cult but i know once i do this i'll be labeled an apostate if i'm not already and be shunned forever with no chance of reconnection you are illustrating this excellent question and surfacing of the word satisfying i'm saying it better as i practice any advice as a pastor on how to help people who have been brainwashed into wrong beliefs if you're looking at if you're looking for people who have been brainwashed into wrong beliefs me speaking as a calvinist using my definition of total depravity that father eric agrees with you're talking about all of the rest of us who share the planet so there's that do you have a do you have a particularly intense form in your family members probably be as shrewd as serpents and as innocent as doves jesus tells us which means i feel your dilemma and you're going to i i would my advice to you would probably be don't not join a church because your family will label you an apostate i'll say that first because in some ways they won't know you're serious about what you believe to be true until you act on it and joining a church would push that might they shun you yes might they shun you forever there's a dynamic that happens with with these kinds of things if you watch for example the movie color purple there's a there's a lovely scene where shug the church is singing a song and shug who because she's a lesbian begins singing and what a powerful part of that movie i i feel emotions gris i feel emotions they're telling me this is touching something deeply in me i've used that scene for sermon illustrations back when i was using movie clips gasp i'm so sorry gris i'm so sorry gris i'm so sorry gris i'm so sorry but it's a beautiful scene because what conflictive situations such as shunning do is sort of elevate the tension and the elevation of that tension can science and sometimes provoke the big transformations that sometimes need to happen so i would say you don't probably do your family members a favor by masking how strongly you feel about this but you gotta make you get nobody can do those equations for you this is why you know i'll often get questions from people people who are in let's say in a bad marriage and all of their friends are saying get out of the marriage i'm not talking about a marriage where there's where a woman is being assaulted physically by a man i'm not talking usually about men who are married to women that are because he's a man and she's a woman she's not beating them up with all that happens too sometimes but you know she's she's sure doing a number on him she's sure doing a number on him i won't tell him to leave that's his decision i won't judge him for leaving either because i see what's going on but god gives us choice gives us agency and we got to use that agency so but the one piece of advice i can give would be don't necessarily not join a church because of your family let them deal with it there's you're not the first person to leave the jehovah's witnesses trust me on that and for that reason you've seen it but um in time in time those family ties are strong so great question chad the alcoholic what can we do to be more useful to you oh chad you are so useful to me you do friday morning nameless i watched the i watched the video this morning with the zipper oh chad what have you observed in me that i could work on oh chad i don't know you well enough to critique you but from what i have seen of you um you are a wonderful guy who brings yourself to this corner very generously and um when chad loves he loves hard um blessed be his wife you're doing you're doing what you can do chad i so look forward to seeing you again in may down in chino again part of me is going to be really jealous of you guys camping um because probably not gonna rain as it did in germany where i felt really bad for the campers um i don't know chad just keep doing what you're doing you know i don't have time to watch everything and so you know i usually check in on grim gris and chad's channel to see what they're picking up in the corner and that helps me sort of sift through and prioritize things so you do a lot for me chad but just just keep being who you are and keep you know chad you like me like many of us are working out our salvation in front of cameras and posting it on youtube gosh is that insane what does it mean but i think we're finding it a big help because as that mimetic genius grim gris notes we're virtually not alone and um many of us if we didn't have such a space would be much more alone and in fact i see others who i mean everybody's working through all the stuff that we work through they really are maybe not at the level we are with the kind of intensity we are but we have each other in this thing and um that's that that's the real value here the real value is not a youtube channel with millions of subscribers the real value is not a a patreon account that brings in you know millions of dollars a year the real value is not a book deal or fame or you know all of the things that the world has the real value is each other and the um you know what what what immense value in my life has now i'm going to do the list thing again so please forgive me if you're not on it but and i'm going to use some you know jacob and nate and mark and gris and chad and john vervecki and jonathan peugeot and jordan peterson and you know channels big and small and and karen and you guys are the value because you know here i go protestant preachers the problem with these q and a guys get me preaching the money's gonna pass the fame's gonna pass all of these things are gonna pass but one way or another i believe god is working with us and through us for his glory and at least some of us it's up to the lord maybe all of us if the universalists are right but i'm skeptical we're gonna have everlastingness together or eternity together depending on how you understand those words you know the car the money the all of the things that this world values these things um what we share is of more lasting value than these things so so chad what can you do keep sharing yourself and do so honestly and i see you do it honestly and i know will will you sometimes share things that later you go back and say what a knucklehead i was yep you will and i can i can point to i've shared more than most of you and so i have more examples of that than most of you but i've shared myself i've given you some of me again it's just a part of me look at my conversation with tim york recently but i've tried to share myself with you because you know what what what has got what has god given me that is more valuable than myself who of you you know look at look at what jesus says about exchange the whole world for your very self um so yeah chad keep sharing yourself because you're you're a remarkably beautiful person and i mean that and that's why we love you because you're a remarkably beautiful person and you share yourself and the same goes with nate and with grim and with jacob and with mark and with all the other people on this little corner especially the ones that have aren't trusted you're not all trustworthy i know that and i'm not naming names hi pastor it's considered cross dressing for men to not crow pears if they can okay i really should i really should do my so my my sister so a lot of people always ask about merch so my sister whose youtube channel and clay the primitive home she did merch because my sister looks to youtube to make much more of a living than i do at this point am i gonna am i gonna is it gonna become the big the big grift is pvk gonna be a grifter but so my sister used teespring for a bunch of her things and then teespring just really messed up a whole bunch of stuff so she stopped using it so but my my daughter did this beard evolution thing that um my daughter's known me a lot of years she's watched the beard grow and shrink grow and shrink lose its sides gain its sides i should probably be more conscious of my personal appearance if you if you look carefully you can see i've got a spill here and uh yeah i'm i'm i'm just a slob what do you think of men's only spaces being pushed to the periphery and essentially only existing in spaces that are hyper masculine by nature think combat training gyms are we creating a monster yes what i think of men's only spaces i think we need them i loved what mary herrington had to say on trigonometry about that we need men's only spaces we need women's only spaces the freedom of assembly so you know this is a hallmark of the american system people should have the freedom to assemble in the groups that they find helpful and that can go along sex and gender and all sorts of different ways it's good for us and you know this little corner of the it's good for us and you know this little corner is this is an assembly in many ways churches are an ecclesia they're an assembly so yeah and if you start and and this is you know i'm i know peterson's in trouble for his war with the pope um but i wouldn't keep watching peterson if i didn't think it was right about a lot of things and if i'm i usually stop watching people because i'm annoyed by them more than necessarily think they're wrong but you know peterson recently even though people think that he's some right wing ideologue i mean he's been critiquing desantis and some of what florida was doing and he had an interesting conversation with christopher rufo who i didn't know who he was but found that conversation quite interesting um you know the way to deal with drag queen story hour is probably not to try to ban drag queens listen to pachaud the fringe is the fringe the center is the center um the difficulty and actually made a video about this which might come out on monday the difficulty with banning is that when you ban something you make it sacred uh again that doesn't make sense but it's a good again that doesn't now i'm not going to say banning banning because that then makes banning sacred so there's a real there's a complexity to reality that is that we have to continue to contend with so you're exactly right when you if you ban male-only spaces then you get hyper spaces it's and if you ban if you have tremendously rigid masculine feminine dress codes you will start getting hyper dressing um wisdom is about managing the unmanageable and so we have to work on those things so yeah no i agree happy friday paul thanks dave 77 to what extent do you think let's see what now we got time to what extent do you think there has been tremendous confusion over the understanding of what the word world in the new testament oh yeah big thing it means three things within one chapter in the gospel of john in the new testament for example the the verse love not the world neither the things that are in the world right and god so loved the world now the gospel of john is full of that um does a christian not have to see this present world as being good as god declared in genesis yes it is good but fallen that's usually what we say i asked because i grew up with christian parents that by reckoning did a lot of harm by not caring to engage in this world because it is it was just something to pass through until they got to the actual world to which they felt they belonged innumerable problems occurred with this mentality do you see this outlook as being a way in which christians are actually refusing to have proper faith so one of the interesting little items in the jesus people chapter that i sort of remixed for the video that i made this week about them was the fact that part of what the jesus people was opened the door to the christian world for new kinds of music that's a wonderful thing and the christian-informed church in the 1920s along with many other protestant denominations maybe some roman catholics too i don't know um christian-informed church warned against worldly amusements and one of those amusements was card playing and so if you had cards with kings and queens and jacks those were forboating but you could play cards with a raven on it that just had numbers called rook you couldn't go to movies and i remember the first movie i remember seeing in the theater was sound of music sound of music brought broke the back of the christian-reformed prohibition on movies um from my baptist mother-in-law i know that that prohibition on movies um was far more broad than just the christian-informed church so my mother-in-law would not go to movie theaters to watch movies because it might be a problem for her witness but she sure watched plenty of them on tv you're very right about what it means what the what the word world means in your translations in the new testament and just reading greek won't solve the problem and as i mentioned before if you read the gospel of john there's all sorts of senses to that question all sorts of senses to that question at the same time so what we've had in the last 50 years has been sort of open season on christians watching anything on tv and what used to be on tv was fairly tame and then cable came along and you know you can still sense some of it because you know should a christian watch game of thrones should a christian watch r-rated movies i was really interested to um i was watching so father eric has a youtube channel don't tell anybody maybe he'll put the link to it in the comments um father eric was talking to mark lefaber on the youtube and it wasn't on navigating patterns and i don't remember what father eric's channel is called um they can put the link in the comments you know we crc hate nazis loved watching the nuns own the germans that's exactly right that's exactly right fleabas the crc people cheer yay still said it was when i was in the netherlands they're still sore about the bombing of roddart i shouldn't laugh it's not my loss so so basically what in the so i there was a there was a guy in my christian school went to the netherlands reform church and didn't have a tv you know what that dude read books that dude read tons of books i think he's a landscaper now probably still reads books um because he didn't have a tv i wasted how many hours watching laverne and shirley and happy days on tv and how much other junk godzilla movies so you have to work you have to figure out what's best and um sometimes on this side of the internet we might look back and say you know you know maybe i would have been better off if i'd shown a little bit more discernment did i really need to see everything that was in all those r-rated movies to what degree did just seeing them impact me in a way that has become stumbling stones and hindrances to the own development of my righteousness these are tough questions but the thing is you can't avoid the world so it's a great question and one that christians continue to struggle with i i know you can't you need lines but none of your lines will be perfect gordon macedonian guy hey paul we met at b.o.m festival yeah i remember you and i've been frequent um in the past i've been to the b.o.m festival and i've been to the b.o.m you and i've been frequent um and i've been frequenting your channel since thank you for your content well thank you gordon it was it was great meeting you there i remember you're from macedonia and you're going to school in germany i i didn't know until i got to germany that lots of people from all over europe go to school in germany and it's free you just got to get that don't tell americans this because you wouldn't believe what school costs here but if you just get to germany you can have a free college education and a lot of it's in english you don't even have to learn german although going to germany learn german while you're there you know what a what a there's a twofer um i have a problem i've been trying to explore and it'd be great to hear your point of view on this would it be fair to say that the post-christian world is reverting and has been reverting since the enlightenment back to polytheism in which ideas take the place of gods or simply gods without human aspects or is rather reverting back to pantheism as c.s lewis described it is it even fair to present the problem as such in the first place or simply is every debate about beliefs necessarily a theological debate so the gods are still with us but what are the gods um neil gaiman wrote a very interesting novel american gods as a very interesting novel i haven't seen the movie i haven't seen the tv adaptation there are some aspects of the enlightenment is a christian movement say that first because the older traditions of christianity rightfully critique that movement i don't know that the movement could have been avoided i don't think contemporary expressions of older christian traditions can actually avoid being impacted by that movement the power of the enlightenment continues to fade as we see modernity recede but the learnings of the enlightenment also don't go away and so we're sifting so the whole pantheism question is interesting because it very much gets into my god number one stuff this stuff is enormously complex to talk about there are good reasons why the post is can the world actually be post christian after secularization has so deeply impacted the world and christianity snuck under the door but it's a good question i don't know if i can answer it but it's a good question but it's a good question gabby g hi paul it said that here on um that we are on the earth but not of the earth i believe that but i also feel strong connections to the earth specifically the soil itself can you explain why why why one would feel a connection to dirt we are we are the stuff of earth and the breath of god i always do this thing upper and lower register we are the stuff of earth god makes a man out of the dust of the earth and he breathes into the man and he becomes a living nephesh that's why you feel connection because you're you are the stuff of earth and the breath of god and christianity doesn't have us leave behind the stuff of earth christianity has the union of heaven and earth finally perfected and to get back to the previous question about the enlightenment the enlightenment in some ways was the the stuff of earth rising above and connecting back and even though part of the enlightenment comes idealism which has some connections with the upper register have you heard of that before oh yeah so so i really have to get working on this because may is going to come quickly the the theme of the conference is the quest for a spiritual home in some ways when christians sing i'll fly away or this earth is not my home they have a point sometimes there's also a bit of gnosticism and heresy in those songs because in another way this earth is your home but it gets back to the question of what do we mean by world because in some ways this is just another version of the question that he asked about world we are the union of heaven and earth and i think matthew peugeot's book nicely illustrates that nicely illustrates that that's how we are and so when we're the quest for a spiritual home when you've got spiritual home when you put those two words together oh now interesting things are going to happen because in many ways part of my first point is going to be there is a sense in which the world as it currently is is insufficient to host you it cannot finally fully be your home or fulfill the expectations of your home because there's issues with earth depravity and earth has to be perfected this is the resurrected body of christ the resurrected body of christ is creation 2.0 realized still in the time space of 1.0 and when jacob asked well why did he ascend well because he's creation 2.0 and the next creation will return with him but that will be deeply connected to the present creation we live in so and this again has everything to do with the world question and has everything to do with the enlightenment question that we just had before so yes you have a strong connection to this earth because it is your home now i haven't seen anybody wrestle with this in as concrete a way as c.s lewis does in his book the last battle because they recognize old narnia in new narnia and they recognize old england in new england we can absolutely not conceive how we we really struggle to conceive the phenomenology of the new creation but it is not disconnected with the phenomenology of this creation and i think all of that is built into the accounts of jesus resurrection so nate had a wonderful conversation with jordan wood and chris green on grail country about the resurrection now it's kind of highfalutin you know you don't go into grail country without a little bit of education and a lot of book reading education and a lot of book reading that's part of the blessing and difficulty of grail country but a wonderful conversation about the resurrection i'm going to have a conversation with nate and um aaron from the morning show about hell coming up next week dumb dumb dumb i go into that with fear and trembling you know you don't just have a conversation with nate heil and just walk into there lightly you know just again that's the auto didac problem nate is tremendously well read he's very smart he's very articulate he believes his point strongly yeah he's a formidable human being but hey sometimes you go into the lion's den you go into the lair of the dragon that's where the treasure is found but all these issues are connected um so the fact that you feel an attachment to this earth is absolutely right and i believe that in your perfection god will perfect that sense that you have as well in a way that will be better and more delightful than you can imagine i don't do enough of these question and answers because the truth is you guys and your question and answer provoke me into saying some things that i really like to say and i really ought to say but they often don't come out except in the question and answer because you guys you guys provoke the pastor in me with your very real questions instead of a lot of the abstractions and thinky talky questions that we tend to major in in this little corner and um i'll have to i'll have to consider to continue to think about that that gives you a side of me that um maybe others locally see more of me maybe maybe not but um you ask really practical questions um all right so this is the last question of the day um have you been miziah ben joseph pilled yet the lineage of the suffering miziah archetype through joseph ephraim rather than kingly miziah archetype through juda david yet jacob was the one who introduced me to this idea what a cool idea very rabbinic ask jacob sometime if you haven't had that convo yeah he's told me about it would be fun to see it streamed you know if if um if god isn't done with the jews why are they still around as jews the one of the one of the most fascinating people in this little i mean jacob jacob has me jacob has me dead on with this i find i find jesse one of the most fascinating people in this little corner because he's wrestling with he's wrestling with what we're wrestling with but he's doing it in a in a jewish context where in a sense they've inherited the world um yeah jacob can explain maybe jacob should do his own video on miziah ben joseph versus miziah ben david or juda thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven jesus prayer will be answered and when it is finally fully answered i have a lot of critiques of the good place that show that was on nbc um none of us can get it all right because now we know that better because of combinatorial explosiveness none of us are big enough to know and articulate the whole thing that doesn't mean we don't have to discern and that there aren't more right and more wrong here in the world you just you know um there's a piece so i did a little bit of the peugeot i did a little bit of the peugeot david schindler conversation on climbing mount mount sophia like ken's doing a great job on his channel by the way i didn't mention his channel in any of the things it's probably a little corner to the verveky peugeotian side of this little corner but ken's doing a bang up job there and um i clipped you know a little bit of what what jonathan said about the jesus story and jonathan's exactly right can you think of a better story i don't think we can because you know hollywood's movies have been ripping off that story right and left peterson is peterson because he recognized the archetypal character of the story of jesus now again just because it's an archetypal story doesn't mean it's not actually real history and and the more layers that are engaged the more real it is which is why i believe thomas touched jesus scarred hands in bewilderment and jesus said don't doubt thomas doubt is doubt can be fashionable doubt can be inevitable but what we really doubt is the ability of god to do far more than we can possibly ask or imagine we shouldn't doubt that that should be what faith really is that the god who began this story that hosts this story in this world that moves this story will finally complete and perfect this story and in the completion and perfection of the story has the power to complete and perfect you there's the gospel so and this can get into you know a little bit of history of calvinism between the roman catholics and the and and the protestants catholics or protestants and calvinists especially often are characterized as sort of being enormously passive in that we can't do anything and and part of the reason why i don't think that's completely true of calvinists is because they're so often telling people to do something and demanding it of themselves and each other that just as i'm doing right now participate in the the perfection and completion of the story and so to mj who's got all kinds of doubts about the utility of this little corner no matter how fascinating it is i would not be participating and hosting and promoting this little corner and estuary and all that i do in this little corner if i did not believe that we are in fact participating and promoting and in the in the perfection and completion of the great story that god begins in the beginning god created heaven and earth and he's still doing it and he's not stopping and he's never going to stop and he invites you not only along for the ride that would be having the fourth wall up but breaking down that darn fourth wall grim gris and saying you not only get to watch you get to play you get to act you get to participate you get to engage you get to you get to be a part of the story and whatever little life you have been given this is your opportunity don't pass it by it's the greatest possible thing you could ever imagine and it's a gift to you free take it yeah you guys get me preaching chad the alcoholic mat see says best question frankly are the use of hashtags a form of spell casting yeah it's kind of remember jordan peterson's remember jordan peterson's little spat with the pope it's hashtag social justice a little hashtag is not incidental it's not incidental at all in the fight that jordan is picking with the pontifex it's crazy see this is the world you've been given people don't waste it on things that are less than there's a good definition of running away from sin sin is always less than you know i i love jesus attitudes and how many parables you know it's it's it's there's something about there's something deeply christian about going to god and saying it's like moses does you know i want to see your face our hunger for god should lead us to move towards god with reckless abandonment and say i accept nothing less than you i i want union with christ i want to be like you i want all of those things that's what the christian life is about and and and that then is is played out in how many different places and ways down here below you know jordan peterson picking a fight with the pope how much fun is that yeah are there cringey aspects to it sure um but you know isn't the world richer that jordan peterson picked a fight with the pope i think it is was it a good idea i'm not picking a fight with the pope um i won't even pick a fight with father eric why would i pick a fight with father eric i love father eric pick a fight with sam i love sam pick a fight with chad i love chad pick a fight with gram i love love gram i pick fights with some people but um usually once we form a larger degree of fellowship and friendship then the fights change too because then we're not fighting against each other we're fighting for our better selves our better imaginal selves so anyway yeah re watch um peugeot's talk with uh david uh um schindler of i don't know if i have his book here um and and the little corner's getting better and better you know nate's trying to bring in chris green and jordan wood and and and ken is bringing in other people david schindler and and uh blessed are you who are already in the corner because you got in on the ground floor and and you can say maybe you can say to your children someday i was i i was on the virtually not alone channel or i was on jacob's just chatting or i was one of the first thousand members of the bridges of meaning discord server or i was at the german festival or i was in the chicago meetup or i went to thunder bay where thunder bay beautiful city on lake superior i was at urban abbey and there were only like there were less than 200 of us and we had opportunities to to play paintball for jesus and i shot pvk with a paintball he looked like big bird and that big yellow slicker thanks amen um or i got down to chino california and i saw a grim gris and a jock i don't want to see grim gris and a jock step on a cross no no no no no no i don't want to see it blessed are you who is virtually not alone and you get to play all right i'm done how fun not what do you mean not mark wait wait wait rick don't end transmission yet how rebels who are collecting clout from others and use them to the justification of their own interpretation of how to rebel against whatever mark mark mark here's something else mark is something else could not shoot pvk four times gun jammed every time others succeeded though mark i don't know what that says i did get shot repeatedly um yes mark and i sat next to each other at the conference and we had a wonderful time so indeed indeed all right rick you can end transmission you