https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2qwYx2OGNEk

 Hi, this is Paul and I've got a very special guest today. Neil Shenvy. Neil has a little blog called Neil Shenvy Apologetics. Christian Apologetics from a Homeschooling Theoretical Chemist. So that's a very interesting title for a blog. Now we've never, we've messaged back and forth a little bit, but we've never spoken before. So let's dive right into it. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Where you grew up, when you grew up, what your home life was like, and then maybe towards, did you grow up in a Christian family or, okay, why don't you go ahead. So I was born in California, but I moved to Delaware when I was like 18 months old. So I spent very little time in California as an infant. My dad is an organic chemist, or was before he retired. My mom is a foreign language teacher, but I was not raised in a Christian home. I was kind of spiritual, but not religious until I went to college and I met my future wife Christina. And through knowing her, we, after we graduated from college, we went out to graduate school together back in California. And that's where I became a Christian through many different ways, knowing her, going to church with her and reading a lot of C.S. Lewis. There's a very interesting story there. But yeah, so I became a Christian at graduate school in Berkeley, California, which people think is a miracle in itself. But there's actually a very vibrant Christian community on Berkeley's campus. And so I got plugged into a Bible study there and really grew in my faith there. And that's sort of my very brief biography. Okay. For you, what, I mean, well, you met a Christian girl. There's a little motivation. What I mean, is it was Christianity something that you just had never understood before? Or did you have problems with it? And what began to make it appealing to you? Yeah. So I think it had to become unappealing before it became appealing. So I was sort of spiritual. I was very, very proud of my intellect. So I kind of had to figure my own, like to figure my own things out religiously, philosophically. And I think that was one big obstacle was that I was very proud of having this free thinking attitude towards religious things. I was not going to just believe things that other people believe. I knew almost nothing about Christianity. I remember, I think with my sophomore year at Princeton, I remember this musing on the fact that Christians believed in a trinity. And I thought to myself, trinity. Now, I'd gone to Catholic church with my mom when I was like young. And so I remember hearing father, son, and Holy Ghost. I thought to myself, the Holy Ghost, who's that? So I thought that that probably was Jesus when he came back from the dead. He came back as the Holy Ghost, because that was like, I was kind of piecing together some phrases I heard what Christians believed. That shows you that. And this is as a software at Princeton. That was my level of awareness. I thought I was very sophisticated, but clearly I had some basic gaps in my knowledge. So but like I said, I love CS Lewis. So I really funny incident happened to me. I think it was a freshman or sophomore year. There was a then campus crusade had a book table in front of our dining hall. And they handed out free books. And I looked like, who are these guys? And I said, oh, free books. You kidding me? Free. I love books. And they were handing out your Christianity, the screw tape letters, and I think the Bible. And I was like, I can just have these. And they're like, yeah, I was like, okay, suckers. I grabbed the two CS Lewis books. I love the Bible. So I was like, I'm not Bible. I read the Bible years ago. This is, you know, whatever. I'll take CS Lewis. I know this guy. So I read the screw tape letters, I had exaggeration probably like 10 times as a non-Christian. And I could not put it down. I was like, this is so insightful. And I at some point, I even when I met Christina, I kind of liked her. I knew she was a Christian. I was like, it would be so much easier for me if Christianity were true and I could believe it. And so I just can't believe it. But so it's this weird tension between, I know it would be convenient for it to be true for me to be a Christian. But then after meeting her, I realized I was not a Christian. And then when we went out to graduate school, I was like, well, I'll meet her sort of halfway. I will, you know, I'll go to church with her. And that's really where I was challenged that there were people that actually really believe this stuff to be true. In fact, it might be true. And that was troubling to me because I didn't like it. I realized finally, I was like, actually, it's not this sort of like, what is it was called milk and water, like soft peddling, everyone's good and God is nice and he just wants to be happy. No, this is like very serious. There's real spiritual reality. There's heaven and hell. There is sin. There's condemnation. There's a holy God and there's grace and goodness. But that's that's what became real to me. And I realized I didn't like that story. I wished it worked that way. But then the question is, well, but what if it is that way? And if Christianity is true, remember the night I became a Christian, I think, you know, it's hard to tell exactly when I think I was converted. But I think it was the night when I basically came to a place where I said, I don't know. I was talking to God. I was like, I don't know who you are anymore. I thought I knew who you were. I don't know anymore. But if Jesus is your son, I'll follow him. And that was, I think, the moment that I was converted. So it was just the act of saying I'm lost. I mean, the funny thing is that's actually sort of the way Jesus describes it is coming to your senses, turning around, repenting, turning around and saying, I need to be found. And you know, I know your theological background as a reformed pastor, but that's the we do that because God's calling to us. You know, we turn because God is the one turning us. God's calling us and is making us realize our lost condition. Because before then, I would never have been, oh, I'm lost. But suddenly it came to me like, I don't know the things I thought I knew. And I need someone to show me what's true now. So that's how it became a creed. And I had a long way to go theologically, obviously. But I got into a small group in a Bible study and, you know, I came a long way. So when you say you were spiritual before, what did that look like? I mean, never going to church. But I kind of described it like this. It was one more category where I could just demonstrate my superiority to other people. I could be smarter. I could be, you know, so it was a funny game I would play. I mean, not again, not consciously. But the game I played was I'm smarter than everyone else. But if I'm not smarter, well, I'm more athletic. I'm not more athletic than I'm probably funnier. But I'm not funnier than I'd find something that would make me better than them. But being spiritual is like the ultimate trump card, because even if they had all those other things, well, I have this deeper side. I think Lewis talks about this, how it's this, you know, he's the, you know, the patient in Scream, he's himself as this fully or human where he has the he can laugh it up with the worldly sophisticates on Saturday night, but then Sunday he can kneel before, you know, the humble and the religious because he has this deeper side to him. So that was sort of how I viewed spirituality. And again, I would never have named that at the time. But it was one more category, really the ultimate category for self justification. I wouldn't have put it in those terms at the time, but it really was a way where I could feel like I was accomplished and actually better than other people. So so what changed in you with your conversion? Um, yeah, I mean, everything I mean, you know, I think it's not like your personality completely changes your interest change, but I think the I remember one time was so funny. I think also I think post conversion, I think God gives a lot of grace, immediate grace, just to show you that like he's real, that this is a real thing. But I remember also because I think the transition is often so sharp sometimes. And so you suddenly go from death to life and suddenly everything looks different. So I remember in graduate school, I was working with a postdoc and I made this pretty interesting discovery based on the postdocs work. So he presented his graduate work and I looked at it and I said, oh, I noticed something that he hadn't seen. And I showed it to him. I remember sitting in like the common area of our I'm a theorist. So it was like our it was like it was that was in a laboratory. It was our common room. But I remember showing him the math and showing him how I could derive what he had done in a thesis, but I could derive it from first principles. I remember him getting really angry and looking at me and going that you've done you think you're smart. You've done nothing. This is nothing. This is this is this is nothing. It is literally and I think I want to know. I knew that actually it was really interesting what I've shown. And I knew that he probably was feeling a little bit upset and jealous, whatever. But the funny thing is, at the time, I didn't I literally he was yelling at me and calling me like dumb. I remember thinking to myself, why don't I care? Like I didn't mind it. I was sitting. Remember what drove me drove me into that point was pride, intellectual pride, all kinds of pride, feeling that I was smart. And to have to be called an idiot and to have my work disparaged before I was a Christian. This is like literally a few maybe a year would have totally made me get wild up and angry. How do you know how do I'll show you or I smock him back. But I was sitting there almost like in the out of body experience thinking, why do I not care anymore? I just just took it. I was like, OK, well, that's fine. But it struck me so clearly. It's like something's different because I'm not reacting like I ought to. I don't think it's necessarily spooky. I don't want to downplay God's grace, but I think that the gospel, it's just intellectually. Well, why didn't I care? Because my identity had changed. I didn't need to be the best. And so it's not like this magical like grace gun that God zaps you with. It's that God, we realize God loves me regardless of me proving myself. Yeah. In fact, in fact, in fact, if you only knew how bad I am and how worthless I am, then the fact that you're giving this mild criticism is nothing in the grand scheme of things. So that just rationally makes a lot of sense. But at the time, I was just puzzled. I was like, I don't understand why I'm not getting more worked up. But that was one incident, I think, among many. But, yeah, obviously, I have a long way to go. Signification is a very bumpy process. And so it doesn't it doesn't end. At least not in this world. So you got a degree in theoretical chemistry. What is that? So my area of specialty specialization is quantum mechanics. And so in grad school, I did quantum computing. And then as a postdoc at Yale and at Duke, I did a variety of projects involving but all involving quantum mechanics. Well, I'm not a computationalist, so I don't I do some programming, but it's mostly pencil and paper stuff. And the analogy I always use, although it's weird because I don't watch I've never watched the show, but the Big Bang Theory. I never watched it either. No, I know. But I heard people talking about it, talking that they bring like the quantum mechanics concepts into the colloquial part like Ferdinger's cat. Like that kind of there's a whole episode about Ferdinger's cat. That's exactly what I was doing, that kind of quantum physics. And quantum computation is interestingly, it's an application of quantum mechanics at its most bizarre. So it's really weird physics. So it's it's it's it's what Einstein called spooky dark dark. What do you call it? Dark black magic calculus. I think it was this. Now, your wife was in grad school, too. What was she studying? So she was doing chemical biology. And then in our third year, she decided to go to medical school also. So she finished her PhD, then went to get an M.D. at Yale. And now she is at UNC on faculty as an emergency medicine physician. So obviously, yeah, your kids are going to your kids are smart. Yeah. Kids are kids are have a have a tendency to make you humble. Yeah. So so so you you both you both got degrees and then she went on to med school and you supported her through med school. What did you get married in this mix? We got married our first year after our first year of grad school, 2002. And then she went to med school in 2005. And yeah, so I mean, she took five years because we had our son. She had our son in her fourth year, fifth year and then fourth slash fifth. And then she actually then she went to residency and had she had our older daughter and younger daughter in her first and third year residency. And then she had our second son in her fellowship year. Oh, wow. She's all that while pregnant. So it's funny, they called it during her graduation ceremony. They had pictures of her and that they they were they roast that they roast the graduates. And so they they they nicknamed her fertile myrtle because literally they had like a month by month shot of her and she's pregnant and like, you know, 70 percent of the shots. All right. So you're a homeschooling dad. So you you don't you're not currently drawing a paycheck from any place? You're well, I work I do. I tutor at our local homeschool co-op. And so I it's a it's a it's a small paycheck. But yeah, I hope I basically homeschooling. So so what are you teaching? Well, the co-op is a classical education, classical Christian education. And so I do I'm doing the it's the it's OK, it's the grammar stage of classical education. So it's really memorization. But I have to teach all of the subjects, geography, Latin grammar, English grammar, history, world history. But the I the the way that homeschool co-op works, this this it's classical conversations. My job is just to teach them literally like the memory work only. But I don't I'm actually I'm there to show the parents how to teach, not to teach. I'm there to model what teaching looks like. And again, at the level that I'm supposed to be doing, I'm just giving them the information. And in the later stages of the dialectic and rhetoric stages, they'll ask questions. And they'll begin to learn how to think more deeply and critically about these ideas. But for me, all my job is to do I was told this very clearly by my director, said, just convey the information. So I have to learn very much. I'm not a humanities guy, as you probably guess, not naturally. So when I'm home with my kids, it's all STEM all the time. So kind of it's good that I'm rounded out by this co-op to do other things. And what are the age ranges of your kids, oldest and youngest? Ten, nine, see, at least seven. And nine, six, four. She has a birthday coming up like in a week, I think. I think she's six. OK, OK. Now, my wife and I, we have five kids and we homeschooled them too. And there was a there was a portion when she started homeschooling them. And then and then she actually went to work and then I would homeschool them during the day and then come to my office and late afternoon when she got home from school. And then because as a pastor, I could pretty easily shift my hours to evening hours. That wasn't that wasn't a big deal. A lot of people would find it interesting that that you have so much education and such an advanced degree. And you're homeschooling and you're you're not even, you know, you're doing some pretty some grunt work in terms of homeschooling in this co-op in some ways. I mean, you're not you're not sitting on the couch and reading them marvelous books. You're I mean, I'm sure you're doing that, too. But you and your wife are pretty busy people, I would imagine. Well, I mean, busy with homeschooling. It's good because I think it's it's given me a lot of time to pursue my other interests. And my passion for a long time has been Apologize. And so, you know, defending the Christian faith with reason and evidence. And so I actually wrote a book about Apologize. That's not published yet, but just all the standard stuff about the reliability of the Bible and the arguments for God's existence, things like that. So that all was made possible, I think, because I have I have a flexible schedule for homeschooling homes with the kids until seven thirty to two thirty. But then afternoons and evenings are kind of free for me to do other things, which is was not nice in that respect. And homeschooling is fine. Like you really get to push the kids to do to have great opportunities. I keep I was threatened them. I'm putting you in public school if you don't start working harder because then they're like, no, because they love homeschool. But I want them to appreciate I don't think they really fully appreciate how fun and freeing and just just the opportunities they have. And I remember I keep I was telling stories about my education, which I had a good school, but I was public schooled all the way through high school. And in good schools, but I just remember sitting at my desk, staring at the clock for like an hour. So when is the day where I finished all my homework? I would just stare at the draw clocks on my paper and like make the minute hand, raise the minute hand, brought it in again, raise the minute hand, right? Just like waiting for the day to be over. Where's my kids? You know, it's like they have no concept of what busy work is. It's all education. It's all it's tailored to them anyway. So it's yeah, it's a cool opportunity for them. Yeah, I was amazed. I'm amazed how much time is wasted for children in school with homeschooling. You know, we most of my my kids, my kids jumped into school at various different ages. But and, you know, initially, we just, you know, had this concern that somehow they weren't going to be up with the other kids and all that stuff. And as we went through, it was like, that's that's a ridiculous concern. Yeah. And they, you know, they'd get their work done. They'd have time to read good books. They we'd have, you know, we'd limit screen time and that kind of thing. So we'd have can we call it constructive free time where, you know, if they get a little bored, that's actually good, because then they'll they'll they'll go and look for something that interests them and actually pursue it and learn. And it's a it's a it's a wonderful it's it's actually a wonderful way to have family life. You get to get to take vacations while other kids are in school and go to places. I mean, it's it was I really recommend homeschooling, at least for those parents that can that can pull it off. Yeah. Now, so what's what's with your interest in apologetics? How did that start? So when I was in Berkeley, I remember how it started, but I remember a meeting with a guy who was the president of the Atheist Society at Berkeley, the Freethinkers Club at Berkeley. And I don't know how I got plugged in with like it came to him because he was an undergraduate. I was a graduate student. But then I remember him saying something like, you know, if if they were just if they were just like one example of a miracle, that that just happened clearly in history, I would totally believe in God. And then and then I said, what's I said, I said, like, so you're thinking like one, one, just one example of a moment when like the laws of this it's totally broke down and can't and inexplicable happen. They can't just what I said, just just one. Yes, absolutely. Like, well, what about the big bang? He's like, and he goes and he goes. And I had not said it at all, that would nothing like this is not this is not like a carefully. This is just like off the top of my head. I was like, well, wait a minute, wait, you know, I'm a scientist like we don't know what happened. No, that clearly is outside the realm of science. We have no idea what caused it, whether it was what there was cause, how they even work. But I remember he was just floored like everything. Is it that easy? Is it that easy? I guess I was like, I was like, when I was I remember thinking, I think myself, I went home thinking, do people do this? Like, are people not giving people these reasons to believe? And that's a ministry. But like the idea that like there are reasons out there, there are questions that are so good, good questions and there are good answers. And so why are people not? Making these available, basically. And so that was the beginning of my interest and apologics. But I kind of kind of petered out and go, I kind of read some basic books. I read C.S. Lewis. I read Lee's trouble's case for Christ. And then the funny thing is it really began to become a passion in my postdoc at Yale. And I got an email from a high school friend who said, oh, are you still religious or something? Because I don't know, he knew I was a Christian. So like, are you still religious? Because I have a friend who can talk you out of all that nonsense. And he went to Yale. So you guys should connect online. He has a blog. So he'd love to have you talk to him on his blog. So I said, OK. So I go to this blog and the guy was very friendly. But we had we sort of kind of posting comments on his blog and exchanging thoughts. And the funny thing was, at one point, then he recommended that I read a book. I think it was like, you should read one book that I recommend and I'll read one you recommend. So the book he recommended to like undermine my faith was Robert Price's The Incredible Shrinking Son of Man. And he was like, this book would completely utterly destroy your faith. And so for those who don't know, Robert Price is like one of the like, I think without exaggeration, he's one of the two mythicists who believe that Jesus was a myth. He's one of the two mythicists in the world with a PhD in the relevant and irrelevant field. Hmm. He might be the only one who actually is an academic. The other guy's Richard Carrier. I don't want to say for sure, but I think that he's certainly one of like the he's the best known one. But I remember so he's like the most reputable Jesus mythicist out there. But I remember reading the book and reading passages aloud to my wife and just giggling because they were so ridiculous. Like it was like it was like reading like a 9-11 truth or conspiracy theory, like some like blog written in comic songs, you know, with flashing fonts. Like at one point he started talking about how Samson is actually the sun god because Samson has his hair braided in seven locks. Like the seven rays of the sun and Samson's hair is red like the red sun and Samson's but it's just going on and on. And I was like, this is this is crazy. And this is the book that recommended to me as like the the book, the one you have one magic bullet to deconvert me and you'd recommend this. So what book did you recommend? Oh, so if I had to recommend the best. So the funny thing is I thought, gosh, what was the the most challenging book that I read? As a Christian, the challenge of Christianity. It's good. It's a little bit silly in retrospect, but I think it's probably the God delusion. But in retrospect, it was because there's like literally like a second book I read, atheist book. But I remember I set up until like 3am reading it. And when it's late at night, you get all just like your lack of sleep and your emotions. I remember being like, gosh, this is challenging. And I went to bed in the morning and was like, what was challenging again? Like, I was like, wait a minute, I got to sleep deprived. Because in retrospect, like when I actually thought back and reviewed the book, I'm like, this is actually not a very good book. But emotionally, he's a good writer. Duncan is a good writer. And he says some very like forceful things. But I think but if I had to recommend a good book, like that really, I think is a good job of outlining the case for atheism. I feel like that I thought I listened to a lot of William Wayne Craig debates. And I always recommend the one against Peter Milliken, the Milliken Craig debate, because Milliken is a very smart guy, is a very polite academic debate, the really good job defending skepticism on atheism. And in terms of books, gosh, that's OK. That's OK. What did you recommend to the other guy? So you read you read the Shrinking Son of Man. What book did you tell the other guy should read? I'm not sure. I'm not sure if I did actually recommend a book to him. I might have just been that he had one for me. I'm not sure if we actually exchanged books at the time. I remember reading that was how I definitely read Price. And then I think I read Dawkins at his recommendation. And now I have a whole shelf of like I read. I mean, actually, I stopped. I it's going to it sounds crazy, but like I stopped. I haven't read like a Christian book besides the Bible in probably like four years. Now, that's not fair. No, that's not fair, because I have read I have written Christian books. But like I did my books I read now are like 80 to 90 percent. Either like non-Christian, atheist or critical theorists who are all or not Christians. Because one of the reasons is because I really want to not live in an echo chamber. So I think I've had Thomas Sowell has been recommended to me so many times. And I don't read him. I haven't read him yet. Mainly because I suspect that he will simply confirm what I believe. And I don't need that. I don't need someone to tell me what I already believe me. I want someone to challenge me with things I don't believe. Then challenge me to say, are you sure this is true? Here's some evidence against it. And so, again, I will read him. I think it's not really fair. I mean, I'm not I think by all accounts, he's actually a good scholar. He makes very strong arguments. He's a brilliant guy. And so it would really be unfair to not read him simply because I agree with him. But I do try to do my best to not just read, have a balanced reading list, but actually to intentionally read more people I disagree with, those I agree with. So at some point, when did you start your blog? Hmm. I got I have a website. I got the website like. Oh, I want to say like eight to ten years ago, but then I migrated it to a blog about two years ago, a year and a half ago. So I just transfer all the files over and kind of it looks it just made it look like I had. I learned HTML and CSS for this website. So I learned HTML. So it looks just really poor. It looked really poor. And so when I finally just updated it to a commercial format, it looks looks prettier now. OK, but the content is mainly the same. And what's your now your your blog? Now you've done a ton of stuff on critical theory lately, but your blog isn't devoted to critical theory. It's devoted to apologetics. Yeah. And there are other random things on there. Whenever I write something interesting, I put it on the blog. So there's stuff on homeschooling, a few articles on homeschooling. There's a. I my friend Michael's gotten me into like some D&D like, like, you know, not the role, but they indeed, you know, like tabletop board games, basically. And it involved like wizards and elves and things like that was kind of like fantasy. You know, so not the role playing, but like the rolling dice thing. So I have like I put my PhD to good use. I've calculated a bunch of probabilities for like strategies for all these games mathematically. So I wrote an article. So anyway, the blog can be the potpourri, but mainly it's apologetics and then critical theory stuff right now. OK, I want to find that. I want to find the game stuff because that sounds like fun. I grew up, I grew up, I was I used to play these Avalon Hill strategy games with a friend of mine and played Dungeons and Dragons and in high school. And so and I still love still a board game. It's really simple probability theory, like really simple. But like it just people haven't done it before because but so I, you know, like, you know, I've got I've got Matlab on my computer. I'll just, you know, crunch these numbers and then put it online. People, you know, they want to know what's the probability of like these attacks succeeding or what? It's all there. But anyway, this is my spare time. Do you think people become Christians because of apologetics? How does that work in your mind? I mean, one of the things people always say is, well, God, you know, you can't argue someone into the kingdom. And I say, yeah, you can't preach them either. And you can't love them. And you can't, you know, I mean, you're talking to I'm a Calvinist here, you know, in one sense, we can't do anything to get ourselves into the kingdom. What about someone else? Right. God draws everyone into the kingdom. And what's the answer then? Well, the answer is God uses means and the means are apologetics, preaching, teaching, you know, acts of service, love, mercy, compassion, martyrdom. And so it's just what it's a really bad thing to say is that God doesn't use acts. Well, God uses whatever he feels like. And he has ordained apologetics as one of the many ways to bring people into the kingdom. And so I think that's just a simple answer. Well, what do you think? What do you think appeals to you about apologetics? I mean, it's a it's a rather unusual hobby. It's not that unusual, but it's a message of passion. And I think it's appealing for many reasons. I I'm two levels. One, I just think it's our job. I think it's it's what God has equipped me for is to think carefully and critically through these questions and to help people help give good answers. That's what I feel like not to, you know, not to be arrogant. But I feel like in a sense, God's made me for that. In the same way God makes like, you know, God make it. Made Eric Liddell fast. God made it makes a pot to hold water. God makes certain it's not that I'm special, it's that God's special. And God, this is what God's given me to do. So I'm just doing my job. It's not to exalt myself. It's just this is just what God I think God put me in this place to do this right now. But intellectually, I would say also, I don't I cannot honestly think of a more intellectually challenging and worthy pursuit than apologetics, because think about it. You to be a really good apologist, you have to have a rudimentary understanding of almost every subject. I mean, you have to understand some history. You have to understand, obviously, critical thinking. You have to understand history. You have to understand a little bit of science. You have to understand the ethical theology. Right. So there's almost I mean, I'm a STEM guy. If not for apologetics, I would be do nothing but math and science. And I wouldn't care about humanities. But the fact that I want to be able to defend the faith means that that's why I read history and why I do why I get into like critical theory right now. But it's really broadened my horizons. And again, you have to be you can't do everything, but you have to be conversant in a lot of things, things way outside your expertise. And I think again, I'm not you don't position yourself as an expert, but at least you bothered. And I think that is really an amazing task. So how on earth did you wind up reading so many books about critical theory? You know, this is interesting. So I'm not sure when it started. So I think around, I guess around the time when I was at Yale, so May 20. No, no. Sorry. I came to North Carolina. So I don't know. Remember, in 2010, I began noticing people kind of drifting theologically. And it was always in what I thought back then was a progressive political direction. So these were Christians professing evangelical Christians who sort of began adopting progressive political views. That's how I read it at the time. And now I don't know if you look at my blog, look at my Twitter feed or whatever, like I am not political. I do not talk politics. I have my views on politics. You know, I'm a conservative. I keep it secret, but I do not talk about that very often because, like, again, for me, politics is downstream of theology. And so obviously, I think it has our theology as implications for our politics. But if we're going to talk about anything, it's going to be about the gospel and about theology. And then I kind of am willing to let God sort out where we fall in terms of particular issues. So again, I'm just apolitical. So when I saw people drifting, when I saw people moving politically progressive, I just thought to myself, oh, they're adopting some new views about politics that I guess I don't agree with, but I don't care. I'm not big into that. You know, I vote in presidential elections, but I'm not again. That's not my thing. But then I noticed that that political drift was accompanied by theological drift, which I didn't care about. I saw people that were becoming more and more progressive theologically to the point where some people even became atheists and virulent atheists and would denounce this right wing evangelical religious right, blah, blah, blah. When I'm like you literally like five years ago, you were an evangelical Christian who was getting politically moderate. But so I didn't I didn't I couldn't connect the two. I just talked to myself, OK, well, I don't know. They just OK, they somehow became. I guess they're correlated. I don't know, but I couldn't figure it out. But then as the years went on and I saw this happening more and more and I at the same time began paying attention more to what's happening in their culture around us, to know what is best described as the woke movement. People getting woke. And even at the time, even three, four years ago, I wouldn't have described it in those that language. But something was off, something I couldn't put my finger on, which didn't seem quite right. And I around that a few years ago, I still didn't have a name for it. But I remember that Jordan Peterson took off like two or two years ago, three years, whatever it was. And I watched new clips of him. And I'm not I'm not a huge Peterson fan. Like, I think he's fine. He says some interesting things. And I'm not a fanboy by any means. But I was paying attention to some of the things he was saying about what he was calling postmodern neo-Marxism and all this other stuff. And and I can not pay attention very clearly. But then I don't know how exactly it happened. But I think a friend of mine is a Christian from the UK. Said, watch this video. And in it, Peterson was talking with some other professors about a book that he'd read called Race, Class and Gender. And the remember, he quoted this book as saying the idea that this I'm going to quote this, I have to memorize the idea that objectivity is best achieved only through rational thought. The specifically Western and masculine idea, one that we will challenge throughout this book. This is a Pritchett Hill Collins and Anderson's Race, Class and Gender is an anthology. I heard that quote. They're talking about the book. And I was like, I got to read this book. So I went and bought it online. It's 500 pages. It's a it's an anthology of writings on all kinds of subjects, feminism, Marxism, you know, economics, you know, LGBTQ issues, et cetera. And when I finished the book, I said I posted on Facebook that this is the most important book I've read in years. Because it made me realize that people were not. Why was there a connection? People were adopting a new worldview. People were adopting this ideology. And it was and it was incompatible with Christianity. And it led to political positions, right. They were progressive. But that's not the problem. The problem lay in the idea, the ideas they were embracing. And the symptoms of that war for progressive politics or they were expressed in politics, but they went way deeper than that. And that's when I began to break what racial racially as I could with four kids of homeschooling. But I began voraciously devouring as many books on critical theory as I could and trying to understand exactly what people were saying and trying to educate myself. And the other thing that happened providentially was that around that time, I met my friend Pat Sawyer, who has a PhD in cultural studies and was writing his dissertation on cultural foundations, which basically is applied critical theory. So we met around that time and actually we met before that. But I began asking questions about critical three because that was his special expertise. And I remember him saying at the time, this is so funny. I remember him saying, he's like, well, I began saying, I think I'm starting to see this in the church. He's like, what? I said, evangelicals are saying some of these things. And he's like, no, no, no, no, no way, because there is no way an evangelical Christian could believe these things that I'm writing my PhD. There's no way it's so obviously not Christian. And he actually we actually had he got upheated, but we had like an actual sort of like disagreement over whether it was. He's like, you can't. There's no way you're just wrong. And then like six months later, he was like, I have to apologize. You are absolutely right. He did not have his finger on the pulse of evangelicalism. And so now we've been collaborating a lot because he's a so. He's come to see that once he starts pointing him to certain sources, he was like, this is absolutely critical theory. Yes, absolutely. And so then we've been collaborating on trying to equip Christians to understand what critical theory is, what's good about it, why it's so attractive to people in our culture and even in the church and then also, but then why it's so fundamentally antithetical to Christianity. So we don't want to caricature it. We want to present it accurately. But we also want to really caution people that you can't embrace this as a worldview, because it's just it's just on so many levels. It's going to undermine some basic connections you have as a Christian. Now, when I. When I talk about this with some people, one thing that people will often say to me is that there are many critical theories out there. Which critical theory are you talking about? So I get that a lot. So so so what is critical theory and are there multiple of them? Is there something that they all have in common? What are we talking about here? And why do we even call it critical theory? That's such a you know, can't they find a better word than critical? That words already way overused as a. OK, so OK, so this is that this is once it a headache. But in defense here, imagine someone asking you like, you know, what's wrong with feminism? Right. Or what's what? Tell me what feminism is like in one sentence. Right. I just can't. I can't. And if you start criticizing feminism and it's clear you're talking about like modern day intersectional feminism, then it's OK. You're talking about all things that you label them. You're talking about a subset of it. Right. And so, yeah, we should try to be specific here. I use terminology carefully. As you'll see in a second, there is no one label being used to currently describe these ideas. There's not one. They are undeniably part of critical theory. But you know, you can use the hashtag not all critical theorists. There are critical theorists out there in the past 80 years ago and maybe today other words that aren't using the term the same way. But I think critical theory is what you're seeing all over the place today. That is critical theory, whether it's comprehensive critical theory in general. OK, you can argue it's not. But let me briefly. Here's the history. Karl Marx is basically the origin point for all critical theory. Everyone agrees that's true. Now, it's not his economics. It's not his ideas about economics or money or capitalism. It's ideas about power. So he was the first guy to sort of critical theorists will say that he was the first guy to discuss how power power sort of circulates in society to to recreate, reproduce systems of oppression and subordination exploitation. Right. He does this with economics, does this with classes. Right. But he's the first guy to say, why do we how does power work at a structural level? Then he had other ideas, too, though, like things like false consciousness that were also going to play a very important role in later critical theory. So he was the first critical theorist, but the term was not coined until the Frankfurt School in like 1937. This is a group of German philosophers and sociologists that that has had developed an institute in Germany. And they they coined the term critical theory to describe what they were doing. And they were trying to apply Marxist theories more broadly than just looking at economics. They wanted to see how things like the culture industry or mass media could produce systems of domination and exploitation. So how can how can those other things like in our culture reproduce systems of power? So you're telling me critical theory comes from white people. It well does. Yeah. White Europeans. It does. Definitely. Oh, it's colonial. It's colonialism. That's right. Well, all right. That's it. So where does it go from there? Here's the thing. The Frankfurt School is like the 20s when they began the 20s and 30s. That's like 80 years ago. So some people think that like the critical theory refers to the Frankfurt. And it can't. The problem, if you see critical theory capitalized, capital C, capital T, that usually does refer to the Frankfurt School. Right. And their disciples, right. People like Habermas who came later. But then since that time, critical theories have proliferated. So they've spawned entire disciplines like so Bradley Levinson's book Beyond Critique will list like post modernism, like Foucault and Derrida as critical social theorists. Right. The critical social theory is the term that's sort of more broadly used to describe all these areas. So second way feminism is a critical social theory. All of it. Critical race theory is a critical social theory. Queer theory is a critical social theory. So all of those entire disciplines fall under the umbrella heading of critical theory. Broadly understood because now why is it just, you know, semantic? No, because all of those disciplines are looking at how power operates to produce systems of domination from which we need to be emancipated. That's the sort of the three. How does power work? How does it reproduce oppression and and subordination and exploitation? And how can we free people from those those phenomena? And then specifically, though, the subset that I think is prevalent among sort of the woke movement. It's hard to characterize. People label it with different terms. People call it critical race theory a lot. The problem with that term is that it's not just about race. Right. Critical theory is about broadly can be about gender and sexuality and queerness and the social and so and postmodernism. So it's brought more than just race. People call it, you know, neo Marxism. That goes back to Antonio Gramsci writing in the 1910s. But but it's a weird connection between him and the Frankfurt School because his mentor went and talked to the it's complicated anyway. The bottom line is the phenomenon we're seeing today is absolutely rooted in critical theory. If you want to call it social justice theory, if you want to call it critical social justice, if you want to call it something else, you can be my guest. I think I call it contemporary critical theory because it is a form of critical theory. And it's the most relevant contemporary form we have today. People go to a campus today. People are not quoting Horkheimer. Right. They're not quoting Walter Benjamin. They're quoting people like Robin D. Angelo. They're quoting people like Robert Eduardo Bonilla Silver. They're quoting people like Ibrahim X. Kendi. Right. The anti-racist movement is in many ways rooted in critical theory. The modern racist movement. So the point is just that I don't want to get hung up on the terms you use, but I think it's really silly to deny this is in any way form of critical theory. OK. So so you had the sentence, how power how power operates to produce systems of domination or oppression to which we need to be emancipated. So would you say that that's sort of the kernel of the idea that many of these offshoots have in common? Yeah, I think that's a that's a fair way to summarize it. And Levinson is says what has three three sort of core themes, which are like power, oppression, and then like and the third way. It's like power, like domination. Sometimes it's referred to some of the terms used. And then emancipation, how these systems of power impact our agency and our live experiences as individuals. Like we're all we're all part of the social. We're all part of this system of social. You would probably say the domination. But but we are we are we are we all have a social location. Right. We're all part of society that will inform our experience. Right. So where we're situated socially will affect our experiences, our knowledge, how we conceptualize ourselves, things like that. It's part of critical theory. And. Why do you think? Well, I think it's I've I've actually I've got a lot of thoughts on this. I don't know if we'll talk about this and get to these and you can ask. I'll give you a chance to ask me questions, too, because I do have a ton of thoughts on this because I I I came to this stuff not reading any of your books, but just watching people and listening to people carefully in the church and began to notice this is new. Yes, is there. There's how how my understanding of how what the gospel was and how it worked. And I'm watching this. I'm thinking we're talking about different things here. Yeah, there are different goals. But anyway, I want to I've got you on the line. I can I can think my own thoughts any old time. I'll give you a chance to pick my brain. So it's very interesting that you saw people who were evangelical Christians getting more progressive politically. And see, see, my story is that I grew up in a racial reconciliation church in the 60s and 70s. And so my politics had always tracked with the African-American community. Yeah. But one thing a lot of people pay very little attention to is that especially the older generations of the African-American community are very socially conservative. Yeah. Yeah. They might vote for Democrats for a whole bunch of historical reasons. But how they live their lives and the values that they espouse and all of this has been quite conservative. Yeah. You know, many of them come out of the South. And so they're, you know, they're right connected with white folks in the South in terms of the values that they would espouse. But yeah, they'd see things from a very different perspective, obviously, because of racial history in the United States. And I grew up I grew up very much as a part of that story. But I'm curious to I'm curious to probe a little bit more about why you think and people that were friends of yours, because this isn't conscious. I don't think this is conscious for people. I know. I think, you know, what I've seen is that people often because of a lot of anti-racism programs that have been going on for quite a while because my father, you know, was very much a hand in getting that stuff going in the in the 60s and 70s. People become especially white people become aware of what life looks like if you're black in this country. And, you know, obviously, Christians would be concerned about this and the injustices that that many have that many people have suffered from are increasingly more aware of the the the subtleties of racism that if you're white, you don't usually see it because it's not directed towards you often. But if you're black, it's a it's a very present thing. There are places you don't go. There are things you don't do. There are places you stay, things you don't say. I mean, all of this stuff you learn to live with as a certain, you know, because of a certain history and in a certain place. So people then you see there you see there a political transformation, let's call it, from probably more conservative, let's say, if they grew up in a church in a conservative community and then become and then you begin to notice something else is going on. What do you think's happening? I mean, do you have any ideas psychologically or maybe sociologically what what's happening with people there? Well, so I don't like to speculate about motives and sort of the interestingly, that is very much a part of critical theory, this sort of postmodern approach to the sociology of knowledge, where you say, well, here's why you believe that. Well, you know, that's a very dangerous game to play because let's figure out whether the beliefs are true first and then we'll figure out why people might believe those things. But I want but I really because I'm wary of that whole line of just what's called vulvarism, you know, avoiding the truth and focusing on motives. Let's focus on the truth claims themselves. I will just say that I think there is a sociological component. So people do get involved in these groups that are they share certain values in common. And oftentimes the values will be a certain set of political values, either right wing or left wing. And then that will form a community that gives you social feedback, positive feedback, and then you'll start embracing their other ideas as well. So if you find yourself in any community, right, we're in your left wing, it sort of mutually reinforces their groupthink and for better or worse. And you can get involved in good communities that are that are, I think, committing biblical values. So I think there's an aspect of that. But I think I'd like to focus on just the ideological aspect where what's happening is people, like you said, will subconsciously begin absorbing these ideas without knowing they are. For example, this is a classic example. This is actually this is a surprise to me. So when I gave talks on critical theory, I have a section I devote to racism and to racism in the U.S. today, racial disparities, racial advantages that exist today based on data experiments. So it's not speculative, it's data. But when I first gave that talk, I talked about white privilege. And I define that term to mean the unearned advantages that whites have over blacks or people of color as a whole on average in general. So and then I supported that, I defined it that way. And then I supported the claim that they do have this privilege using data, using studies, using all these different factors. OK, but here's the thing. So I use that term. Now, I had an inkling of the fact that I should be careful to find it so carefully. However, I eventually stopped using the term. Here's why. Because when I looked really carefully at Peggy McIntosh's paper, Peggy McIntosh popularized the phrase white privilege in like 19... Oh, gosh, what's the year? 88. And a paper called like Unpacking the Knapsack. Anyway, when she defined that term, she did not define it the way that I was defining it. In her definition, white privilege, it one, it's this huge term that encompasses all kinds of different things. Things are immoral, amoral, and they're completely heterogeneous. So, for example, she would put things like you have white privilege because you don't get followed around in a store and accused of stealing things. Right. That's a privilege. OK. Then she also on the same list say, and you can find a bandaid whose color matches your skin tone. That's also white privilege. Now, here's the problem. One of those things is due to sin. One of those things is not in a perfect sinless world. I don't think that we're going to have bandaid that literally have every hue color on the ring. And more than that, white people are in the majority in this country. So businesses are going to have to pick a color for their bandaid and sort of pick the one that happens to the naturalist people. So the point is like, that's not a sinful thing. It might be annoying. I get that. But it's not like it's this evil, wicked system. We have to overthrow it. So that's one thing. She conflates these very different categories. She also talks about how privilege is invisible. It's transparent. You can't see it because you're socialized into this system of white supremacy. So you're blind to it. And you have to defer to the voices of the oppressed people, people of color. And she actually compares it to how men can't see their male privilege because she's a feminist. So the point is, she has so her term white privilege is embedded in this entire way of thinking, this entire ideology. And when I realized that, I said, I can't use this term anymore. I'll use a different one. I'll use other advantages. That's fine. But the term was being embedded in this entire, essentially this worldview. What's happening today is people are picking up these terms, these phrases, like intersectionality, white privilege, white fragility, colorblind racism, things like that, or structural racism. They'll hear these phrases. They kind of have a sense of what they might mean or they even, they interpret them through their Christian worldview. They say, oh, I know what that must mean. They use those terms. And they hear other people using those terms. They think they're meaning the same thing. And then after like months, years, they begin subconsciously, these ideas begin to work their way to how they start to see, they realize they don't realize it, but the way they're using these words constantly begins to change. And they begin to take on the actual meaning of the terms, right? Like, example, I always use, take the phrase reproductive justice, right? I might hear that phrase and I might define that phrase to mean the right of a woman to have children. If she wants to have children, that's reproductive freedom. Right? That's what I mean by that term. Right? But if I start using that term all the time and, and, and, and, or my pastor, I use that term all the time. And there are these people in my congregation sitting around and hearing that term. I'm using, I'm talking about Christians just stand up for reproductive justice and freedom, women's rights. I keep saying those terms and not defining them. My congregation is at best going to be confused. And at worst, they're going to be like, Oh, Oh, I heard that term. Who used that term? Oh yeah. Planned Parenthood use that term. He must mean the same thing. And what will happen is you'll get this slow gradual drift where people begin imbribing these ideas through the language that's being used and not even realizing the, the foundational beliefs that undergird these ideas, these language. So that's what I see happening a lot. And then of course, you have these social groups that form around causes like anti-racism that I think because you've been united around a cause, they do combine people with very different theological beliefs. And so you have this tug towards the mean, right? You have some, some average and if you have people that are conservative theologically, people that are progressive theologically, well, they're, they're kind of both regressed to the mean a little bit. And so you're going to have the conservatives being pulled in theologically I'm talking about being pulled towards the, towards the progressive end. But I, and so, you know, so that, that, that, that's sort of a just general reasoning, but I would say even more deeply, these ideas really are poisonous in the sense that if you adopt them, they tend to spread out. It's like putting a drop of ink in a glass of water, right? They start small, but then you begin to expand. So an example I would use is an idea, oh, this is actually, it's from postmodernism, but contemporary critical theory draws very heavily on postmodernism. And it's, it's ideas about truth and power. So a classic example, I just wrote on it today, actually, you saw the essay, critical race theory. One of their core themes is that, that claims of neutrality and objectivity and universality actually hide the, the goals and the agendas of the ruling class. So we say, well, why, you know, why should, this is actually a real example. When you say, why shouldn't so-and-so go to this school for college? And you say, oh, their SAT scores aren't high enough. But people will say, so, oh, that seems objective and neutral, but then critical race theories and other people, but they'll say, wait a minute, that standard itself is rigged because you created that test in order to keep blacks out. And then you appeal to the test as an objective measure of who can go to college. Now that's what they'll say. I'm not saying that's correct. But they will deconstruct these claims of object objectivity and neutrality and the rule of law and rights. They'll say those are really disguises that hide the, the self interest of the ruling class. They are used to justify unjust power arrangements. Okay. Now here's the thing. When it comes to race in history, that's, I think, pretty reasonable, right? And there are examples of Supreme court cases where companies would appeal to objective rules that they created with the express intent of discriminating against blacks without saying it. Right? So the examples is Duke energy, a Supreme court case Griggs versus Duke energy, where Duke energy created a test for hiring that hadn't existed before. They created it like a year after the civil rights act was passed. And suddenly, lo and behold, there's a new test you have to pass. And lo and behold, only whites could pass it. So lo and behold, they have only whites working these jobs. And the Supreme court was like, you can't do that. That's clearly you're trying to keep blacks out. That's racism and you can't do it. So that's a completely legitimate use of questioning these supposedly neutral standards. That's a real example. Let me, everyone say that's fair. Here's the problem. Let's say you accept that reasoning, not as a sort of conclusion based on evidence, but as an assumption, as a presupposition. And it happens subtly. But now you begin to say every time someone appeals to objectivity or neutrality, I'm going to probe and try to unearth the real motivations for that claim, the real power play behind the truth claim. This is Foucault. So you start doing it with race. You claim to be appealing to the SAT, but really the SAT was created to create social stratified classes in the US. And so we're going to now dismantle the SAT. Okay. But you say, well, that might be fine. Well, what about doing that with things like gender claims? What about the Bible? The Bible says that only men should be pastors and elders. Oh, you say the Bible says that objectively, but that's just your opinion. That's your way of maintaining your power and privilege. What about the Bible says homosexuality is a sin? Oh, you say that that's your interpretation of the Bible. That's your objective. But really that's a power play to reify your heterosexual privilege. So the point is you can embrace these ideas narrowly, but how long before you begin implying them broadly, how long before you start deconstructing not just the racial laws or racial history, but gender and sexuality and religious exclusivity and name the problem. This is the creep of postmodern thinking that is so deleterious to everything. Frankly, that is just one example of how some of these basic principles can spread from a narrow application to a much broader ideology or framework. Is there, I mean, you don't have to watch this for too long to appreciate the fact that, and C.S. Lewis actually talked about this in a number of ways in different, you know, you can, this solvent burns through everything. Yeah, it's corrosive. Whereas, you know, you can say, well, the people that created the SAT, they might not even, they maybe weren't even intentionally trying to exclude these other people, but it is in fact so built into them, they're running that program whether they know it or not. And of course, once you turn that solvent back towards the people who are employing it, I mean, you don't need to be that smart to say, oh, you're just making this point to so on and so forth. No, no, that's the trick though. So here's the thing. So Helen Pluckrose calls critical theory, whatever you want to call this movement, she calls it applied postmodernism, which is okay. You can see how there's a lot of postmodern thinking like Foucault and Derrida are very influential in this way of thinking. But here's the problem. Critical theory, whatever you want to call it, contemporary critical theory, is not purely postmodernist. Why? Because, and this is, they'll save this explicitly. So Pritjana Hill Collins in her recent book, Intersectionality as Critical Social Theory, she critiques the postmodernists because their project is purely deconstructive. They want to dismantle everything. And she says critical theory can't do that. Critical theory has to be self-reflexive. We have to, and she interprets that term reflexivity to mean we have to step back at every point and say, is our deconstruction, is it working for social justice or not? If a system is standing in the way of social justice, then we deconstruct it. But if a system is not standing in the way of social justice, we do not apply this universal solvent to it. So this is the trick. What do you say, if you say to a critical theorist, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, what you're doing is you're accusing me of making a bid for power, but you yourself are making a bid for power by doing that. You're trying to get people to ignore me and follow you. So why can't you be critiqued in the same way? What they can say is because I am working for social justice. So I, and here's the thing, we didn't talk about this yet. Within critical theory, there's an asymmetry built into critical theory between oppressors and oppressed. Oppressor groups like socially dominant groups, that's men, whites, heterosexuals, the rich, citizens, and then subordinate groups would be women, the poor, people of color, immigrants, the poor. So there's a social binary. And people in the dominant oppressor groups tend to be blinded by their privilege, whereas people in subordinate oppressed groups tend to have what's called double consciousness. They have more, they have access to the truth through their lived experience that is unavailable or less available to oppressors. So because of that, the critical theorist can say what we're doing is not a power play because we are, one, we're working for social justice when you're not, and two, we have, through our lived experience, we have access to these truths about oppression that you're blinded to, right? So you can't play the game with them because they'll say, well, no, no, but we're coming from a position of epistemic authority because we are part, or either we're part of these groups ourselves or we are listening to them. So even if you're a white male, an old white male, right, but if you're an ally to a white oppressed people, then you can speak for them and then say that, well, you know, I'm telling you what this perspective is, and I have, because I've sat at the feet of and I'm deferring to their authority, therefore I have, I can make this pronouncement, this, this, this, I can discern that you are still captivated by this social, this ideology that's been informed by oppression and subjugation and the ruling class's ideology. It's called a hegemonic, a hegemonic discourse. They can see through it, but you can't. So the point is you can't play this sort of jujitsu trick that, you know, that people like Tim Keller love to do. Tim Keller will point out, you know, Nietzsche says all truth-cleaners are power plays. Well, so is that. But you can't play that with critical theorists because they will say, well, this is not because we're relying on the epistemic authority of oppressed groups and we're working for justice and you are not. That's a, that's a, that's a differentiation between me and you. And, and what do they say is social justice and how can it be known? This is fascinating. So again, in Collins's recent book, she actually says all about, well, you know, we have to constantly be evaluating whether our, our projects work for social justice. And then she says, now granted, it's really hard to define what social justice is. This is amazing, right? But she says that in her book. But if you, and if you, it's not uncommon that these books, like there's a book, another anthology called our readings for diversity and social justice, right? They use that term social just like dozens of times, right? It's in the title. They don't define, no one defines that term until page 483, right? That's the first time the term is defined. So the point is they're using this term all the time and never, they assume that everyone knows what it means. That when they find, when one author finally defines it, she says that social justice is the elimination of all forms of social oppression, where oppression is defined in terms of, again, this hegemonic power. Who has, who is imposing their ideology on other groups? Who is the ruling class? It's the whites, men, heterosexuals, the rich. They're imposing certain norms and values on culture and that imposition is oppressive and we have to undermine and dismantle those oppressive norms and ideologies. And when we do, once we achieve a state where everyone has shared power, then we've achieved a state of equity, which is social justice. So, so at that point, it begins to look again, more like traditional Marxism in terms of their long evolution that even the state will dissolve because, you know, the, you know, everyone will have that will share the means of production. But this is, this is a, this is a distant transformation of that. So the funny thing is that, so one frustrating thing about critical, again, contemporary critical theorists is that they're very practical. And this is actually maybe is building the critical theory since its inception is that they focus on what's called imminent critique, meaning like critique of things as they are right now in their historical contingency. So they're not talking about, they don't set up systems of like analytical theories and ways to analyze what is good and just for all time. They don't, not into that. They're saying what is imminently, practically the thing to do right now? What does our society look like right now? How did it come to be and how can we transform it for the good? That's how to lay out these universalizing theories. So you ask them, what's the end game? I think I can, you don't come across that very often. They will generally say things like, well, we want to achieve a sort of equity, but exactly how that will look. They're not, they're not like Marx. Not like, oh, one day we'll achieve a classless society. They don't say that. They're just saying one day we'll achieve a set of equity. It looks like power being shared, but they're not going to lay down. Here's how we know it's happening. Here's how they don't really say that very often. So there's not some deep universal theoretical perspective on what justice is. They're saying, here's what we ought to do in terms of race or gender without prescribing. I mean, as a Christian, it's kind of frustrating because you're like, well, gender means something. What does it mean? And they say, well, gender means something. We would say transcendently, gender is a transcendent category, right? It's an essential category. Whereas they would actually probably deny that completely, but they also say gender is socially constructed and the process by which gender was socially constructed is historical. It's bound to our current 21st century American context. So we can't make these crazy, centralizing statements about what male and female are across all. That's what is that Christianity? Well, that's yeah, but they don't make those kind of claims. Have you read any, there's a sociologist, yeah, I think he's at Notre Dame right now, Christian Smith. I've heard of him, but yeah, I haven't read him. He wrote a book in the 90s called Soul Searching, where he interviewed teens and youth from across the religious spectrum to try to discern, you know, what do they think? Are children of Baptists? Do they have Baptist moral sensitivities? And they tried to figure out religious and moral sensitivities from people. And it was from this work that the much more popular term moralistic therapeutic deism came from. That's high-nome, yeah. Because what he discovered was that across the board, it didn't matter if kids were raised by atheists, by Baptists, by Mormons, by Muslims, by, I mean, by Presbyterians. It didn't matter. All of these children basically had the same intuitive moral framework. And one of the elements of this moral framework was that morality is fundamentally self-evident. Now, this obviously, if, you know, someone like you hears that, you begin to say, well, if that's true, why are there so many different competing and moralities that can't get along and agree with each other? But that doesn't happen because in a sense, moral intuitions are unquestionable because you just, they're also ironically historical for these children. And now, obviously, these children that he interviewed in the 90s are, in fact, well into adulthood today, and the likelihood that their fundamental orientations with respect to these ideas are unchanged is quite low. So it's that, that's very interesting to me that imminent critique. I'll tell a little bit of, you know, so I began to watch, I began to, so in the Christian Reformed Church, there was a huge fight in the 70s, 80s and 90s about whether or not women should serve in church office. And the Christian Reformed Church ended that feud with a political compromise. That basically said, we'll leave it up to each local congregation and then different classes, which are the regional bodies. If they, if a classist votes to seat women, elders and pastors at their classes, they may do so. And once a majority of classes have, you know, allow this, then synod will see women office fairs and so on and so forth. And watch that whole thing go through. And then of course, in the last 10, 15 years, during that time, there were, you know, many, many calls that, you know, some people, because the Christian Reformed Church always, at least at that point, was always sort of looking to the Netherlands, had seen things happen. And the Netherlands were saying, first it's going to be women, then it's going to be gays. And of course, in the end of the 20th century, no, no, no, that'll never happen. It's totally dynamic. And then of course, the Christian Reformed Church, along with many other denominations, are having the conversations about LGBT. And so I was sort of expecting, I was sort of expecting things to line up as they did with the women in church office fight, where they're going to have battles about certain Bible verses. And the way the Christian Reformed Church ended the debate was they said, well, you can, you can make a case, a theological case for permitting it and for restricting it. So Christians, it's, it's adiaphric. Christians can go either way. Now, it's a far different, it's far more difficult to make that argument with respect to the LGBT issues. And so it was, I was just watching this develop in the mid, in the mid teens, and I was listening carefully to the argument and I began to notice the arguments for inclusion began to take on a different tone. And I was looking at this in the context of the rest of society and I began to, I basically came up with the term progressive liberationism, which, because when I was listening, I was saying, it seems to be what, what God is most interested in is that I am freed from constraints that bind. And then I came up with this term, the secret sacred self. My, I, there's a secret sacred self deep within me. This, this is somehow disconnected from my historical person. And I can get in touch with the secret sacred self by, you know, basically listening to my feelings, you know, in sort of a Star Wars way. And, and then once I discover who that secret sacred self is, it is, it is therefore God's job to, to allow me via history to manifest this in my life and therefore finally to realize, you know, I began noticing the realize my destiny. I began noticing you had an entire, you had an entire path towards redemption. But this, this entire path towards redemption bore very little similarity to traditional theology that talked about sin, that had things like mortification, self denial, so on and so forth. And I began to watch this and began to think, well, this is, this is very interesting. And, and then began to see how, how this, this new gospel of progressive liberationism was, you know, the Bible was then being reinterpreted in these terms. And, and that's when I began to, and of course, later in the teens, the woke stuff began to emerge. Yeah. And I began and, and I was also very, you know, obviously, I've lived as a minority in, in for the brief, except for the brief time I lived at Calvin College. I've lived as a minority in pretty much every community that I've lived in. And in Patterson, the church fair, we lived and worked in a, in a, in a black community. I was an overseas missionary in the Dominican Republic. White, white privilege was often paying more for things there. And, and then here in Sacramento, California, live in a neighborhood for which it's neighborhood when I moved in was majority black. There's, there's a lot of movement, but in this, in this area of town, there's no majority population. Yeah. Racially, it's, it's quite diverse. But, you know, I began to, began to watch this stuff come up and, and my attention was if you, if you say to young people that a specific, a specific demographic group is the sole source of all your problems and you continue to reinforce this, you are, you are going to sow a, a real problem down the line, the likes of which has been perpetrated repeatedly throughout history, because it's a very easy thing to blame some other group for your problems and misfortunes and to, you know, and in fact, it may be the case that these other people are responsible for your problems and misfortune, but adopting a, a posture of a victim is not going to help you, you know, and now obviously I, I, I see that the political agenda is towards some sort of revolution, but the difficulty that these would be revolutionaries have is they're, they're never going to be able to construct a positive agenda because, and I think as, as you laid this out, this is a, this is a wholly reactive agenda, because they cannot necessarily embody justice. They can only, they can only point out injustice and the, the, it's, it's a very intuitive individual, it's a very intuitive individual test. Do I feel oppressed? Yes. Therefore, injustice, and then you trigger the, you trigger the narrative. I don't know, does, does that sound, I don't know if... The funny, well, this is a, this is why it's so interesting to really dig into the theory, because it makes things make much more sense. So here are a couple of things I would say. You say, well, it's all about, do you feel oppressed? But it's not. So despite the fact that contemporary critical theory would be all about, you know, lived experience, people's lived experience, you don't invalidate them, they have authority, speaking their lived experience. Remember the book you're talking about, thank you for sharing your truth. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But here's the fun, here's the interesting thing. You ever wonder why when a white, rich white male says, I feel victimized, people just laugh it in and like, give me a break. Well, you blah, blah, blah, you know, but wait a minute, you just talk about how lived experience is incontrovertible and it's sacred. But so why is his lived experience not? And the funny, the answer is because of the asymmetry, because the social binary, because the assumption is that some groups, the dominant groups are these groups and it's important to do. And so lived experience and, and that the dominant groups are, are objectively blinded or tend to be by their privilege and the subordinate groups objectively tend to be cited. And so when a white man feels oppressed, that a critical theorist will just tell him that's false, objectively, you are not oppressed. But why? Because a priori white males are not oppressed. And interestingly, my friend, Pat, he is an academic and presents on these kinds of topics at conferences. He's actually doing this in academia, but he actually just presented a paper on how white supremacist groups actually use lived experience in this way. They will say to a poor white person, don't you feel victimized? Aren't you constantly told white people the problem? And they will prey upon poor working class whites and, and, you know, foment this dissatisfaction, this sense of victimhood, and they will appeal to live experience. So his point is, is, is, is in a subtle way pointing out that epistemology is dangerous, but, but it's not just, you can't just get around it by saying, well, a priori you're not oppressed. Well, says who? You have to appeal to some objective reality to say whether a group is, or a person is actually oppressed and their feelings just don't, aren't going to do the work. That your feelings don't carry that kind of authority you need to say they are actually oppressed. But it explains why, my point is just this, it explains why you'll hear lots of talk about lived experience, except when it's a lived experience of an oppressed person, oppressor person. The last thing is I say is that for all the talk of lived experience, the funny thing is what happens when a woman or a person of color shares their lived experience, which goes against the narrative. Right, right. So, so a black conservative say, or, or female conservative, or, you know, a feminist like Christina Hoff Summers, who's a feminist, but is completely rejects that whole feminist narrative, which she's a self-identified feminist, they would, they would disown her. But what happens then? The response is you have what's called internalized oppression. So your lived experience doesn't count because you are still, you are showing that you are still partaking in this supremacy of whiteness and maleness. You've so been so immersed in this hegemonic discourse of the ruling class that you've basically been brainwashed. And so you say you've never experienced racism, sexism, whatever, but you're just, you know, either deny, you're in denial, or you're just blind to it because again, you're not, you're not woke yet. So that's a, so this is why it's so funny. So once you understand the theory, this is, I'm just saying theoretically, this is how they'd explain it. Right. It's such explanatory power. Don't you ever wonder why you'll have, and not to say I don't pick on a race per se, but don't you ever wonder why you will find like progressive white men talking down to black women, you can sort it like about how they are wrong about race. I've seen like white progressive like calling, I can search names and saying like, you don't, you should get race. I'm thinking like, what happened to lived experience? What happened to like, and once you understand the theory, it makes sense because the white progressive is, is woke to reality. Right. And, or the male progressive or the male feminist, they are woke. And then they're trying to, my friend Alisa Childers was saying that she had a whole conversation with, with men on Twitter when she was saying pro-life and they were discussing with her present how they should refer to her. Does she, and she has hit a lawn. She has internalized misogyny because she's pro-life. So here are two men who are pro-choice telling a woman who's pro-life why she is talking to her and saying, this is why, this is why she's, she's still, she's experiencing Stockholm syndrome. So it's, it was for me as a scientist, I place a lot of value in explanatory power, predictive power. If I have a theory that can explain otherwise inexplicable phenomenon, like how on earth you get men saying women's voices are so important and then shutting up women who speak with their voices. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What happened? Well, it makes sense because what they want actually, there's a Congress one, it was a Presley recently talked about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Remember she said, we don't need Muslims who don't want to speak with a Muslim voice. Right. What does that mean? Yes. It makes sense now because actually in a coffee, Kumasi in beyond critique has a chapter on critical race theory and the concept of a voice is one of the key concept of critical race theory. Voice says that the voices of the oppressed people, they speak with their voice, that that's a key concept because they have authority and it's critical to hear their voices to understand racial oppression. But you can speak, you can be a black woman speaking without a black voice because you have internalized. So the point again, I'm not, I know it sounds, I don't want to come across as you know, this, you know, Sean Hannity, Rush Limbaugh, I, it's not my concern. I'm just trying to explain why it's, it's internally consistent. Once you understand the theory, all these practices, this behavior, it makes sense. I'm not trying to justify it onto the condemn it. I'm just saying it fits with the theory. No, I, I, I, I watched that clip and I saw it and I even used it in a sermon and I think I confused some people because the problem is that unless you understand what she's saying, that black is no longer actually a something that connects to, let's say even skin pigmentation or even, I mean, it's, it's finally a confession. And I use that word theologically. It's finally a theological confession. And, and that's where I saw this and I began to see this is an entire religion. This is an entire worldview. Yeah. Have you seen the pieces coming out? There have been several of them recently on Pete Buttigieg and how he's not really heterosexual. Yes. Like he, he's, he's, he's, what's called performative. I actually look at the term they use. I, it's, it's like, it's called it's performativity. But the point is he's performing heterosexuality even though he's a gay man married to another man. Right. So that, I don't understand how you can look at a man who's in a same sex marriage and say he's not homosexual, but it does make sense if you understand the theory is that he is, he is embodying the values and norms of heterosexual normativity. Right. He has the white picket fence and the whatever. And so that, that is enough to say that he is not embodying the transgressive, the subversive norms that he ought to be embodying as a member of an oppressed subordinate group. So yeah, but yeah, I'm just, I'm saying is just, even if you think I have a terrible bigot and this is all garbage, isn't it just interesting? I think I just, I would, if I were to total secularist progressive, I would just find it to be, have good explanatory power. Suddenly things are coming to come into focus more. Like this is what I believe. Now I understand why I believe these things. I'm not even, not even critiquing it. I'm just saying it, it's like a puzzle. It fits together suddenly. Why do you think, why do you think this is, I, so I, I talked, I don't know if you've seen it. I had a conversation with James Lindsay on my channel a long time ago because I had, he had made a comment about, made a comment about something that struck me interesting. So we had a conversation and, oh shoot, where was I going with this? Why do you think, well then, then he put something on Twitter yesterday and I made a comment to him, which I basically said, you know, because I had a comment, I had a conversation with him and what I didn't know before my conversation with him was the kind of the, so the rise of, the rise of atheism or the rise of new atheism and you know, Scott Alexander thinks about 2006, it really got going and then what happened, you know, with the whole elevator, elevator gate and all of that were atheism plus. Basically there's a split in the church of atheism between and so you've got Peter Bogosian and James Lindsay and they're, they're with their, and Helen Pluckrose, they're sort of the, the vanguard of modernistic traditional new atheists, if we can call them traditional new atheists on one end who evidence-based theory and they're concerned about the structure of science and all that and then, and then the other side, which again, I don't know if you, did you read Scott Alexander's piece on? I may have, I think I've read some pieces like that, like describing the split in atheism, yeah. Yeah, well, well the irony, the irony that I found was that, you know, Sam Harris, Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins are of course on the old side of the split because, you know, status tends to do that, you'll tend to get stuck in your, in your tribe. So this, this, it occurred to me, this new, this, this new amalgam, whatever we can call it, seems to me to be, will likely be far more effective at de-churching people than the God delusion and new atheist efforts ever could be. I don't think it's going to de-church anyone actually. I think, I think, no, I think although I've seen, like I said, I've seen people that have become atheists, what I've seen more personally is people will simply find progressive churches. Now of course, progressive churches eventually die, which is historically what happens, like, intellectually, but in the short term, people don't just become atheists, they just begin to find their way into more and more progressive churches that will, that because, because, you know, frankly, because they have gradually embraced a new worldview and so they need to find a new church that will be consonant with their new beliefs. So I think, yeah, I think, I think I see a far greater number of ex-evangelicals for now. I mean, obviously evangelicals aren't the only Christians. I'm just saying, talk about theological conservatism versus theological liberalism. They're, they're finding their way into theological liberal churches that are in many cases like very borderline, whether they can even call them churches anymore. I mean, there's something, you know, Unitarians are not Christian churches at all, you know, and growingly, I think you're seeing people going that direction. Well, well, when you, when you begin to, I mean, as you follow the logic of this worldview down, I mean, you really don't need a God. No, no, no, you don't, but there's an entire, there's an entire tradition of liberation theology which many churches embrace, which is out there. And so if people are trying to find a church that fits their worldview, their new worldview, they're planning. So yeah, I don't think that's, and of course the other side of that is those churches are disappearing because like you said, they don't need a God in the long run, but in the short run, in 10 or 20 years, people just find that, you know, the local Episcopal church enjoyed it because they talk about justice constantly. They talked about social justice and environmental justice. And so you'll find you'd be very comfortable there. And they, and, and, yeah, well, I think it's all, this is speculative. So take it with a grain of salt. I think what happens is you have evangelicals with conservative beliefs, but then who also begin embracing this language of social justice or what this really critical theory, and then they feel uncomfortable in their conservative evangelical churches, rightly or wrongly, but they can't quite fit in, but then they join a much more liberal church than even they are comfortable with theologically. But because they now find solidarity politically or in terms of these other ideas, I think what happens is that actually they end up their theological beliefs are now being driven by their political beliefs or by, by, by, put it this way, their theological beliefs about things like the gospel, Jesus, God, those beliefs are being driven by their beliefs about say, we would say are, are sec, not secondary, but the consequence of the gospel. So there's, they've, they've reprioritized. So whereas we would say that theology is the bedrock on which orthodoxy is the basis for orthopraxy and orthopathy, right? They flip that now. So now they have orthopat, or they have, they would say was orthopathy and orthopraxy justice and caring about the oppressed here. And then those beliefs are dragging along the theology. So they, they, they follow their way into the local Episcopal church because there they can find people who care about justice and there they're going to find people that, that feel a certain way. And then well, their, their theological beliefs maybe don't match that church's, but gradually get dragged along. Actually, my friend, George Yancey is a sociologist and he has been studying as an academic progressive church and progressive evangelical churches. And his conclusion based on sociology, not theology, because he's not saying this is a Christian, he's an evangelical, but he says that conservative evangelicals sociologically find their unity around theology, whereas progressive evangelicals, they find the unity around politics. Right. That just, that, that, that just sociologically, that's what he's found. Right. And so I think that's what's happening is that what happens is that people are being pulled along into these churches that are, and it's, it's, it is also both the, it is both the symptom of and the cause of their further drift from, I think, orthodoxy. See, I think, I think there's, I think that's true. And I also think that in some ways, certain kinds of evangelicals are in fact more susceptible to this because part of what has been happening for a long time is that the more gnostic a religious, an evangelical tradition gets, the more free space in the sense you have in this frame. And so you can, you can be very woke, you can be very woke while you're alive and you have, you have heaven to, you have heaven to go. But I think you have heaven after you die. But I suspect that the, the wokeness will continue to, in other words, in other words, well, this gets into a lot of my stuff, which is a little a field of this, but in other words, there's, I was, for example, I was just, I was just reading, I'm working on John chapter four, the woman at the well for my adult Sunday school class. One of the things that I, you know, thought a lot about in college when I grew up as a Christian, I went to college and thought, well, if I want to stop being a Christian, I can stop being a Christian now. And so I want to think about this thing. And then, and what, so I start reading the Bible and I start reading the Gospels and I, I begin to notice that the kinds of things I see Jesus saying in the Gospels are very different from the kinds of things I hear in churches. And I begin to think, well, why is this? And, and so if you look at, say, Jesus and the woman at the well, the story really isn't about Jesus trying to make sure that this woman goes to heaven when she dies. I mean, that, that framework, you can get to that framework from John four, but the gospel of John is dealing with a lot of very interesting frameworks all the way through. And so, and so then it's like, well, well, what then is the relationship between this world and the next? And if you've, you know, a number of evangelical churches have a number of evangelical traditions and evangelicalism is in my opinion, not so much a theological tradition as a sort of a marketplace. They're definitely, if you look at the, you know, the Bebington four, I mean, that's perhaps a theological way to look at it, but I, it strikes me that this particular wave is probably going to the, it's, it's, it's, it's taken a lot of the mainline church already, at least the dominant voices in the mainline church. If you drive down, if you drive down a pastor church in Sacramento, it's very clear to see what side a church is on, because if they're an affirming church, you can't miss it by driving by because they got, they got signs and banners and they got everything. I mean, it's like, it's like some bizarro Billy Graham thing where you've got, you know, Billy accept its rainbow flags. So, you know, I think, I think as, as this thing goes through, we're going to see a lot of the theological poverty of a tradition exposed by the fact that the church doesn't quite know what to say to people about, okay, so what does, what, what, what does Jesus, what, what, what are you supposed to do before you die? If this is about hell avoidance? Yeah. And I don't know, there's just way too random thoughts for this conversation. You don't watch my stuff nor, nor necessarily should you. But anyway, we've, I've, I've bothered you for about an hour and 45 minutes now pestering you with my questions. It's only fair to give you a chance to, you know, to, if there's anything you want to say, or any questions you want to ask me or anything that we, any place you would have liked to have seen this conversation go that it hasn't gone. Yeah, I think I always like to say in my talks, I always make sure to include a section on race and racism. Because I think that that is frankly, the way that the vast majority of evangelicals are being drawn into these ideas is through, I think a rightful shame and just burden for racial reconciliation. And they want to see the hate racism or they're, they're probably not guilty for it. I think, I have, I think even the Christian 20 years ago and all the evangelicals I've ever known personally are just incredibly gracious, kind, loving people. And so I don't think that many evangelicals are out there literally thinking like, I, you know, I have to mortify my desire to hate black or white people. I don't think it's happening. I think, I think they look at our history and they say, this is a disaster. They look at our current politics, look at Donald Trump and say, man, man, you know, even if they voted for him, they say, this is not a good guy. You know, and they say, want to do something. And they see that black Christians are hurting and they want to see healing. They want to see justice. They want to see, so then they're sort of casting around for solutions. And so I always want to say to them is you're not wrong to feel that way. You're not wrong to want to see racial reconciliation. You're not wrong to care about things like, you know, millions of black men in prison. You're not wrong to care about huge wealth disparities. You're not wrong to look at slavery and lynching and just be horrified. You're not wrong to look at your church from, you know, 50, 60 years ago, probably had a lot of just out and out racist in it, right? It's a very good chance that it's true. So it's not wrong to, in the biblical sense, to look at the church of the past and say, we repudiate that. Like we do not want to repeat the sins of our fathers. We do, you know, there's no doubt that there are present Christians who participated in lynchings, right? Or, you know, so we are right to say, I want to look squarely at the past. I want to reject it utterly. I want to find a way for us to live in, you know, in love and peace with one another. George Yancey says, he says, you know, we can't control the past, but we can create, try to create a world and a church, specifically talking to Christians, we can create a church that our kids, we want our kids to live in. That's what it's about. It's not about like repenting for the things that you didn't even do. It's about what do we, what do we do to our kids? So I always want to mention that and say, you, all of that stuff is good and right. I'm no way trying to get you to stop talking about race and stop talking about it. But also, in addition to saying that, I want to just caution you that people telling you that critical race theory and critical theory broadly, it's the way it's going to lead to the promised land. That is not true. And in fact, it's the opposite, that critical race theory is, if anything, creating more and more tension and anger and mistrust and suspicion because of the way it conceptualizes race and gender and sexuality and a host of other things. So I just would, I definitely don't, there's definitely, there's two factions. There's like the woke faction and the anti-social justice warrior faction. Like in these, like the blue team and the red team. And it's happening in the church and, you know, people, people on the, you know, frankly, people on the red team, they love my work. They love the fact that I, you know, I, you know, I try to dismantle critical theory, but I definitely don't want to make this about the tribe that we're in. I want to make it about the Bible. And I'm just trying to point out that what we're embracing and we're seeing in our culture is deeply corrosive, the Christian faith. And so you don't have, you do not have to embrace wokeness to care about racism and to repeat it and to work for racial healing. You do not need to go there. In fact, if you go there, it'll make it worse for you in many ways. That's why I love, I always want to add that in my, in my talks. Well, my problem is that, so when I grew up in the sixties and seventies, the, a big part of the response to white blindness as to what it's like to be an African-American, a big, a big response to that was live with people. And, you know, so in the, you know, the North Side Chapel, the, the church that my father helped start, I mean, a big part of that church was a church which was multi-ethnic. It was black and white. And that's what multi-ethnic meant, although there were, you know, there were a few other folks from, from other groups, but basically American conversations were black and white. And my, my fear now is that this one term, you know, similar to what you said about white privilege, that the terminology has now been so completely co-opted that I don't have other words. And, and I, you know, it's, and I think, you know, part of what I've seen in, and I don't know this in detail, but part of what I suspect and fear is that the, the offices and organs that had been put in place in the sixties and seventies to help churches deal with the, the continual problem of racism. And, and, you know, it's, it's important that, it's important that people not, first of all, defining racism itself is not an easy thing. And that's a whole other conversation. And, and it is important to, to not imagine that somehow in America today that you can't, that, that there aren't many, many people who continue to harbor, you know, old racist patterns of thinking and biases and continue to act on them consciously and overtly today. I know way too much to imagine that that doesn't happen. And, and that part of what happened in the sixties and seventies is that a lot of those people, in a sense, went into the closet and were socialized to learn to not let anybody know what they really think about other racial groups. And, and it is often only, usually when you're, and sort of like middle class and, and upper class people, especially have been deeply socialized into this. And it's much more often at the lower socioeconomic reaches of society that you'll see people with less to lose just in fact say what they think. But to imagine that this doesn't go up is, is just being naive. But the, but, but I fear that much of the, the good work that was laid in the sixties and seventies has, has simply gone this way rather reflectively or sort of on the way there. Because when I listen carefully to, to the language, and we have the same problem with the white, you know, white privilege language that you use. The language is all sort of lining up. And then this, this particular group of people are now the prophets, the pioneers, the, the people who see more deeply than say, you know, say others that were writing before the nineties, let's say. And it's interesting to me because I recently read a, a really fine, actually an award-winning biography of Malcolm X. And many of these same issues are very much at play as we're at play in the civil rights movement. Yeah. And so, you know, my concern is that for, for people who are suspicious of this new hermeneutic, let's call it to borrow an old phrase from an old battle, people who are suspicious of this new worldview, it's really difficult for them to find a lane. Yeah. And for them to find each other, because in a sense, much of the language has simply been appropriated by this particular group. And so now they're left without a language. Right. And we're in, we're in the kind of culture war where you have the dynamic that if you don't line up with, you know, it's basically culture gang warfare. If you don't line up with this gang, you're presumed to be part of that gang. Right. And which makes Barack Obama a white supremacist president because you follow this language and you begin to say, we're just living in crazy town here. You know, Barack Obama is a white supremacist president. That's just, that's just nuts. But it makes sense if you understand the theory, right? That's right. It makes sense if you understand the theory. So I, I think I've got deep concerns about this for, and I think long run, I don't see this, I don't see this, this house as being able to finally stand. But I think in the long run, I fear that those, it pretends to support will actually be the losers in the long run of these efforts. Yeah. I don't take the, you know, the sort of long term cultural shape, culture shaping view, I think that some Christians take, which is not wrong, but I'm more focused on the individuals because you know, this, I think that sort of wokeness fad, it will burn out. I think it's a fad. I think it will burn out one day. I mean, we went through periods like the sixties, seventies, right? There are these revolutionary periods that just happened. They do burn out eventually, God willing, but they're casualties. That's the thing. Like you say, well, then why worry about it? Because, you know, in 20 years, everyone will sort of forgotten wokeness, okay? Or maybe, but there will be real souls lost because of, you know, embracing these totally unbiblical ideologies. And so I think the solution that I've come up with in terms of what I do is that when I give these kinds of talks, I try to show people that there's another way, right? Which is, I think the biblical approach is that you can reject wokeness and critical theory and still reject sort of the red tribe, total, you know, totally unconcerned with racism, whatever, whatever the caricature is. I don't find, frankly, again, personally speaking, I don't know any Christians, I don't know any evangelical Christians who just don't care about racism. Just like, yeah, I don't care. Yeah, racism is okay. No one does that. Okay. I said this is my little experience here. I'm speaking from experience. I'm just saying, and actually, that's a good point, though. I think a lot of it's contextual. I think that I've been an evangelical Christian in very cosmopolitan areas. Well, the irony is that the wokeness places on earth in the wokeness places on earth and in the US, that's where the churches are going woke and decrying racism. And where they need at least they need to be worried about the dangers of wokeness. Whereas in the churches out in the deep south that are maybe nominally full of nominal Christians and cultural Christians, who probably do harbor a lot more racism than they do in the cosmopolitan, multi-ethnic cities, in those, say, rural areas, just stereotyping, I understand. But in the areas where you have this huge amounts of maybe unconverted nominal Christians who probably do harbor a lot more racism, just culturally speaking, there the big bugaboo is wokeness. And you have to see, as Lewis talked about, you have people both running to the wrongness of the sinking side of the ship. Like, you know, you have these people running when the ship's out of the sink, they're all running to the, they're running out with fire extinguishers. When the ship's on fire, they're all jumping into the, you know, they're all, you know, they're pouring more fuel on it. So what I think we need to do is the people that least need wokeness are embracing it, the people that most need wokeness are rejecting it. I think we should look at our own congregations, each of us, and say, what does our church need? And for example, I met a friend in New Orleans, he's a pastor, he's a, I think he's Puerto Rican by birth, but he's adopted. But he was, you know, very conservative guy, he's a wonderful believer. We got talking after my talk on critical theory. And I, in that talk, I shared that one of some of the data, all the data shows that about 16% of whites are against interracial marriage. That's numerous surveys. And that one of those surveys showed that 28% of Republican, white Republicans, 28% think that interracial marriage is immoral. And that to me, I was just like, what on earth? Like, you know, I'm half Indian, like, I don't know a single person, you know, that would, well, I don't want to have a question who's opposed to interracial marriage, and he's not white. So, but everybody, so, you know, everybody else like this is off the, but after the talk, this guy, Tim came up to me was like, he ministers in a rural Arkansas town, like 3000 people. He's like, oh, around where I live, 550%. And so the point is just that what is unthinkable to me is completely normal to him. And of course, he doesn't, but my point is that, like, I think that we have to get wiser about how we contextualize these ideas to our congregation. I do not think that a pastor in the middle of Manhattan needs to be preaching against racism every Sunday. Probably not. In fact, he probably needs to be preaching against things like LGBTQ affirmation, right? Because that's a really cutting edge, dangerous, you know, triggering issue that they're trying to tear biblical truth on. Whereas the really radical sermon on racism needs to be preached in southern, you know, wherever, rural Arkansas, where there is real much more racism and they need to talk about it. So my point is just that be wary of preaching against sins that no one really suffers, you know, deals with and praising virtues that everyone already accepts. But, you know, we should kind of do the opposite, right? So that's my thought. Well, we've gone for a while. And again, I do want to give you a chance. Anything else you want to say or any questions you have for me? But I really appreciate you giving me your time. I just trying to schedule this gave me a picture and just how your priorities are correct. You will have your children will be young for a very short amount of time and pour your life into them because it's a special, wonderful privilege to to raise children and to love them and to be with them. So let me say one more thing. I always do this to probably most of the people that listen to your channel are Christians, probably most are. But if you're not a Christian, my channel, oh, great. Wonderful. What I would say is, I understand if you hear me talking about critical theory and you know, you write me off, be probably Paul too as well, but you write us off this terrible bigoted hate mongers, your conservative right wing Fox News, Sean Hannity, Manga, Make America Great. That's understandable, right? And so you hear us talk about LGBTQ issues and think how hateful we are or race and not embracing wokeness. We must be bigots in our hearts. I just want to say that for non-Christians set aside all of those issues and focus on again, Jesus himself, right? Because all of the things we're talking about right on this podcast, all of them are downstream of Jesus, right? If you'd shown me what my current beliefs are about all kinds of issues, right? You showed me that 23 years ago, I would have been a guest, right? And so why did I change? And the answer is because I realized that man, what if Jesus is actually who he claimed to be? And that thought then leads to other thoughts like, oh my gosh, what if the Bible is true and I am a sinner who needs rescue? And if that's true and the Bible is true, that's going to totally reorient my worldview. And it's not going to, I hope we don't come across as hateful evil bigots. Maybe we do. I don't know. But I just want to emphasize that when God changes you and converts you and you trust in Jesus, it doesn't turn you into, it shouldn't turn you into a hateful evil person. Because why? Because you realize you are a hateful evil person. You're already one. That's the crazy, crazy paradox of the gospel is that it's in realizing just how wicked and hateful we are and that we've received mercy from God that makes us humble and loving. And it's a reason why, you know, I, you know, but funny irony, before I was a Christian, I totally looked down not on, you know, people of color or blacks or women, but other people. Definitely people that were not as smart as me, people that were not as moral as me. I was totally not woke, but I mean, I was progressive and liberal in the sense of being like, you know, but, but I had that horrible seed of pride and hatred in my heart that in God's eyes is just as bad as all these other, you know, non-awoke sins. So when I'm being a Christian is when I realized that actually all those things are equally bad. That being woke is not the only thing that's, that's, that God desires. God wants you to care about not just the press groups, but about purity and holiness and humility. And so all I'm saying is that if you hear one thing, hear that the gospel of Jesus rescuing sinners is what transforms people. And if you hate all of my views on these things, don't think about them. Think about what, what is Jesus actually saying and is it true? That's what I'd leave everyone with. Okay. Well, thank you, Neil. I would, what, maybe, maybe if we, if we ever talk again, we'll talk about how, and speaking as a Calvinist, how one of the things that I, so one of the things that I, so when I started, started this, this thing started, I decided I need to learn the rules of this new religion. So I decided to read Everyday Feminism Everyday, which is the book. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Huh? Yeah, sure. I started reading it every day. And I thought, wow, this is a, this is a burden of the law like the apostle Paul talks about. Anyway, anyway, thank you so much, Neil. Thank you for your heart. And I, I, what I really appreciate about what you're doing is you're reading all these books and, and you're blogging and you save me a ton of time. And I actually quite, I have followed, I follow your blog fairly closely because people will, when I'll, when I'll talk about this stuff, again, I didn't have any of this language before. I was just saying something weird is going on. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You're reading the books and distilling it. And I, you know, I, I think, I, I, I think you're trying to be fair in terms of your reading of this to say what it is. And I appreciate your efforts. And I appreciate the clarity with which you have broken this stuff down. And I think you're doing a real service. So thank you. Yeah, thank you, Paul. All right. Well, you have a good evening. What's left of it? All right. Good night. Good night.