https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=a853NuEW_ck

 All right Well, it was it was really it was it was fun meeting you in real life over there in San Jose Absolutely. Yeah, that was a good time Definitely it would have been I can see where It could have calmed down and you could get down to a smaller group that want to keep talking when you're not bound by time Yeah, and I was shocked at how many people were there that was a solid group I Wasn't surprised at all. I just had a meetup in the last two successive weeks I had meetups in Southern California and the last one we started at 7 We were in this clubhouse till 10 and then at 10 we went back to John Van Dam John Van Donk's living room and we were there till quarter after 12 and Didn't still have to drive an hour and a half in Southern California traffic. It could have gone to the wee hours of the morning People people were enjoying the conversation that much so it was lots. That's awesome. Yeah. Yeah, I wish I was Closer and could partake more regularly of them of the meetings Yeah, it's it's been it's it's really been it's really been fun There are there with our group in Sacramento many people have to confess just how much they love that group just because conversation is is is Predictably really good and yeah, that's that's unusual That's unusual especially for for groups that get together and There's no you know, there's no agenda Yeah, finding those types of spaces is Very difficult. They're rare They really are they really are and so when you have them you really value them. Yeah Absolutely. So so what would you have on your mind to talk about today talking about good conversation? Well, um, I had a couple things I Figured that I would continue to Well, um, I had a couple things I figured that I would continue some of the story although a separate Narrative line that was kind of running concurrently with this other stuff One of the things I noticed watching the replay of our last conversation is I kept referencing that time period is like oh when I was young And I thought it was strange because I'm obviously still But that decade was Hmm particularly long right like remembering back when I was 18 feels like a really different person and just like the mode I was operating from was so That's like pleasantly naive A negative version but just kind of like oh Let's wander around and go check out weird things and have a good time and see if I can find something Well, I would have met, you know time is this really weird thing where You know if you're at home and your normal routine going to work time seems to just zip through And if you make a trip you get into a new space. I mean, it's it's a psychological dynamic That you're experiencing all these new things I would imagine that whole decade of your life must have just been so packed with new experience that Yes, on gated time. Yes well and it's weird too because it it kind of flip-flops back and forth between like getting into a routine and then You know you get these quick little zips of time And then You know you get these quick little zips of time and then these really big events that Slow everything down they stand out so much more brightly in my memory. Yeah Yeah, so I guess I guess I'll kick right into it Yeah, okay, so I think we left off last time at cult 3 which was the guy in Idaho I'm actually gonna go I Just talked to my friend yesterday to the one that I went there and to Hawaii with and we had a good conversation but we were reminiscing about that time in Idaho and just how very silly it was but uh Yeah, so I'm gonna go back in time now for a moment. So After coming back from Hawaii, I came back to the mainland with the girl that I met there and We we initially moved into my dad has like a little Almost like an apartment loft above a Separate garage he has at his house. So we were we were living there for a few months and And then eventually we we moved into a cabin up on the Olympic Peninsula Up in Washington And it was a crazy that by itself was a crazy little it was a one-room cabin built by this As far as I can tell totally nuts hippie back in the 60s We lived in this one-room cabin. I mean, you know 20 feet 25 feet by 25 feet Yeah, yeah, he he lived in it with his wife and six daughters They had no electricity they had no running water. He had the most ridiculous contraption of pipes like literally hung by Fabric from the trees running from a creek into the house so that they had some Work with I don't know how he did this and he lived like that for I think it was five or six years and The family did a homesteading thing they had a whole garden they cleared a bunch of land in the front of the property it was a 10 acre piece of property and For these five or six years he they lived in this cabin and he built this like literal castle Up at the top hill of the problem I mean it was the most ridiculous building you've ever seen it by no means could you get building codes to build this nowadays? Huge like five-story basically tree house with a very strange but So, yeah, we moved into the little cabin that he had stayed in originally and By then it had running water and Electricity so it was a bit easier to live in although still pretty difficult So, yeah, we were pretty isolated we were in squim is the name of the town and it's pretty much a retirement community so there was like Literally three people that we knew in their 20s So we were pretty isolated we were kind of out a little ways from And then the story starts to get really weird at this point So as if it wasn't weird enough weird already. Yes. This is weird in a different dimension. So It was mostly going okay, you know, it was pretty difficult living like I said I was living in a very very very very very very very very very very very very very very very very very Difficult living like I said, I didn't chop enough wood in the summer So in the winter it modern person sure not you haven't been trained by other people who have to live You make all the all the typical survival mistakes and the net is gonna have to bail you out. So go on. Yes Yeah, I Didn't even get a bay. I just had to work stupidly difficult to keep it functioning It's basically the bailout so every morning I'd wake up at about five or six this this cabin literally just had Ply plywood for walls. There's holes in the floor. So the cold air just dumped in and This was like the coldest winter in 40 years up there something it got down into the the teens Which is not common for that area Our Giant wood pile was out front the unchopped wood it rained and then froze and I don't know if you've ever had to deal with wood that has been soaked through and then frozen into an ice block But I mean it is indestructible So every it took about a large round maybe a round and a half To have enough wood for the day to keep the place warm I'd get out of bed at about six o'clock in the morning from the nice cozy electric blanket In the light, yes, we had electricity. Okay. Yeah And and kind of had running water We had running water most of the year until the winter and then the pipes froze So we went about two to three is probably about two months solid with no water in the winter So we were taking sponge baths from the Heating water on the wood stove and You know every time you had to go to the bathroom You had to pull a sled with a bucket out to the creek and fill it up with water So you could put it into the back of the thing Tank Yeah, oh the wood chopping yeah, so six o'clock in the morning I'd get a little fire going from wood from the day before go out there It would take 45 minutes of pounding a wedge which with a sledgehammer Just so that I could not have to hold the wedge So it would be about half an inch into the wood after 45 minutes of pounding on this thing And then it was pretty easy from there once you could stand it up I could pull out the large sledgehammer and go to town on it So I chopped wood for about an hour hour and a half every morning and then I go to work I was working in a bird food place ridiculous like garden center, but focused around feeding birds and it was crazily successful the entire you know Community yes exactly I Mean Crazy at pulling in three grand a day in bird food this Absolute and just silliness But but I would move all the the bags of bird food So I was you know slinging 20 pound bags all day and then chopping the wood It's a pretty tiring way to go about things. Well survivable. Yeah, and This continued on decently, you know, there were some issues until we got into a car accident It was raining and a guy he was coming out of the casino near our house and Just pulled out that it's a tiny little two-lane highway he pulls out from the stop sign and then just stops in the middle of the lane because he saw us coming and He's in a full-size truck. I'm in like a 91 crown Vic I Ridiculous all solid steel, you know 6,000 probably not that much but 5,000 pound vehicle We hit him. I break the brakes locked. We just slid right into him at about 50 miles an hour And I got shingles strangely enough from that car accident But we were mostly okay, you know, no I had bad whiplash my neck I still can't look down for extended periods, but nothing, you know, nothing super bad But it was after that that thing started going off the tracks So the the girl who was totally normal really nice good-hearted person She started going crazy so and Kind of kicks in later You know, it was a really bizarre when she finally did go and get diagnosed They actually didn't have a diagnosis for her They thought it might have been some bizarre mixture of schizophrenia with bipolar disorder, but it Escaped normal categorizations. How old was she? She was at that time 25 And I was 20 Which is pretty late, yeah, well kind of they say like 27 28 is usually the latest a person will develop that type of thing if they're going to So, yeah So, yeah So this was really bizarre and it ties into my experience with cult for which I haven't talked about eventually, which is why I'm telling it, but She started having all kind it It was really strange because what it felt like is she got this tremendous burst of of You know nervous and not like nervous as in but literally your nervous system And she was pulling things For lack of a better word. It was like psychic Like she was telling me things that she couldn't possibly have known and they were accurate Which was bizarre, right? You know where to put that? I don't I don't know so Reporting what I experienced And then that you could almost feel like little Wiggles or you know, like if you're imagining a straight line Something would smack into it and it would start to kind of warble off of this this This Path if you will and Those warbles intensified, you know, she started having really intense past life memory experiences Which was also very strange because Watching her have them was triggering it in me as well particularly Ones where I was also in the stories and it's a really bizarre sensation you can't you know, the easy explanation is of course that your Mind is latched on to something and it's manifest like a dream Awaking dream basically and it's creating a whole scenario around it very well could have been what it was the the bizarre part is how intensely real it feels and how the depth of the emotional Experience that it brings forward So So I'm dealing with this. I'm still keeping the shop in the wood going to work She quit her job. She was working at a dairy farm and just couldn't do it anymore and again, we're isolated we don't have you know people around us to help kind of provide a Sense of normalcy or a buffer or anything, you know, yeah Well, it's interesting because it's I mean we don't we seldom realize how critical The people around us are for our own equilibrium Yeah, so if you're in a relatively isolated circumstance with a woman who is has the early signs of schizophrenia And or bipolar. Yeah, that's gonna do something to you Yes, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah and so actually I wanted to use this to Explain an idea that I've been thinking about which is What I've been calling axial possession so so There's and this is relating to Largely that name just came from watching Verveckis videos talking about the axial age. Yeah, and You know the word axial is interesting it's actually talking about axis like adding a You know Z dimension to your X and Y grid. Yeah, but I thought it was interesting too. Just because it Phonetically has that similarity to axiom Right. So it's There's a little tie in there that that might be useful a resonance. Yes So the way I've been thinking about it is that technically if you're using like mimetic possession being the larger category And if you're using it in the way that I think it was Dawkins that came up with The word mean But this axial possession would then be a subcategory of types of mimetic You know behavior, but I find it useful to use the more colloquial Meaning of meme which is usually a little lighter You know kind of like how we view memes on the internet And I think it's a little bit more interesting to use the word Usually a little lighter, you know kind of like how we view memes on the internet or or those types of things Yeah, just so you to kind of differentiate the two The way I describe it is like if you've got a constantly or a grid with a bunch of data points, right a Meme then when a new meme enters what it looks like is a is a different constellation Between those data points so you're linking them in a novel way And it's creating some new picture that you haven't you know haven't seen before Whereas axial possession would be suddenly realizing that there is a Dimension to these data points that you were blatantly unaware of before Hmm so right you're taking your 2d image your familiar framework and suddenly there's a new Direction to it. Yeah, what was a 2d picture is actually a three-dimensional picture. Yeah, right Yeah, I could give an example of that I think the you know I was reading Michael Pollan's book on on psychedelics and he he it's actually in Pacific Northwest He's dealing with a guy who is super into mushrooms and this guy can basically rewrite the story of history the history of civilization via Mushroom spores and you know that acts as an XO You have all these data points that we're very familiar with this guy comes along and says did you ever consider the role that fungus plays? in civilization and it's like Yes Storyline hiding beneath the story you're familiar with exactly changes the context of all your familiar data points exactly Yeah, yeah. What did you call it again? That's an axial I've been calling it axial possession because possession that's it I use the word possession because it right Colonization might be a more familiar like how you use the word but It's kind of like we don't have really control over it right it kind of enters and then it takes us over it's yeah, you know so I use the word possession just because that generally is what it feels like Granted you know Well will reverse and you know, we'll rationalize it to ourselves to make it within our our power again Well, once we call something something it helps us play with it If you don't if you don't have a label for it or a name for you You can't really manipulate it and try it out. You might change the label sometime But yeah There's a reason that that label sticks and I can I can very much understand where you're going with it So that's what I wanted to see if I could try an illustration on you to see if I had the concept that concept Yeah, yeah Cool idea Although now I'm probably gonna take it into weirder territory. Okay We're still kind of playing with in the realm of the mind, yeah in a sense, so I want to Force it a little deeper into our Phenomenological experience. Okay Another way right another way of thinking of the the oh I lost that thought darn it Okay, anyways Oh Just another way to think of axial Functioning in the sense would be jumping meta layers So you're it's again. It's that like you're moving in a dimension. You didn't know was part of of Situation. Yep. Yep Now the way I've been thinking of our contextualizing this and this is how it ties back to the story I was telling is that right mimetic possession is is generally in the mind. It's a new idea That restructures how we're thinking about things Whereas axial possession feels more like a switch in the experience of reality itself so it's it's it's a It's a change in how How we're perceiving reality before we're making sense of reality So What's interesting when you meet? people Right, it could be lots of different figures in this case for me It was it was watching her experience of these realities that I was Realities that I was unaware of but the peculiar thing about it was that the feeling emanating off of her What overpowered my sense of reality Right. It was like she was perceiving something more real than what I knew Reality to be you might more familiar metaphor might be a figure like Christ, right? It's not so much what he's saying or Doing necessarily granted. That's how we interact with it now through the book, but It's almost like his experience of reality is so overpowering That people cannot help but like fall into how he's experiencing reality. Yep. Yep Oh charisma. I mean, that's essentially the definition of the word charisma. Yes, absolutely Absolutely Yeah, that's interesting it's like a epiphenomena of this Phenomenological thing we're dealing with I don't even know what that is cues were picking up from others Well, I just finished the video I just finished right now, you know Thinking about Jonathan Haidt who's kind of the adult in the room and Jordan Peterson. Why does Jordan Peterson take off? Well, the word we'd say is charisma the Jonathan Heights a very brilliant, you know The wonderful thinker but when you listen to him talk, he's measured. He's calm. He's yeah He's you know, Jordan Peterson. He sets the world on fire because yeah, that's just how he is. It's crazy Yeah, well, it's charisma and a deep feeling of of on honesty, I Think honesty is right. We're city authenticity. Yes What he's describing you can tell he's experiencing it. Yes. It's not ideas that he's playing with it's like He's trying to translate what he's actually experiencing and how he you know, right has a different feeling to it Yeah, lack of a better word. Yep Yeah, so that's what I was experiencing with this situation where literally my Experience of reality was starting to dissolve under the weight of Her experience of reality and this was having like actual very real phenomenological effects on Me, you know So the story doesn't get much better from there This it keeps escalating That's usually what happens with these situations Yeah, I you know at at one point I'm spending ten hours a day on the days I could just explaining the the rudiments of human interaction and You know little detail like why are people responding to me this way and just mapping out Basic What we normally assume and just function on Which was probably actually a great Useful exercise for you. You are You are nothing no But it did seem to have the effect of like grounding er of keeping the symptoms Yep from flaring up too much. Okay at least For a while because I mean we're talking about a year long period here or a little less than that, but Wow Eventually it starts going too far off the rails I can't handle it and keep a job going You know, I'm driving it. She's having heavy-duty Suicidal ideation. I'm driving her to emergency rooms. I'm taking her to therapists basically like Someone help me. I don't know what to do with this situation I Tell them I eventually tell my dad who's down at the southern border of Washington Just out of Portland, Oregon Some of what's going on and ask him if I can move back in He says yes, so we go down there and things just keep getting wilder. She goes to live with your father What was that? She goes with you? Yes. Yes. Yeah her her family lives on the East Coast So there wasn't much of a support structure there We know what's happening kind of So, you know at one point she like called them at three o'clock in the morning just like yelling and screaming at them for You know all this stuff she had memories come up of she grew up in Saudi Arabia Her dad worked for an oil company as a data analyst and She had a memory come up that she was abused as a as a child by the the guy that worked in the house and So her mom apparent I think was a therapist So when she told her this story the mom immediately cast doubt on it which It didn't go well. Did not go well. It didn't go well and I I didn't handle I mean again I'm 20. I don't have Yeah, I'm like trying to do everything I can you know at one point I called her mom up and was like what the you know, what is wrong with you? Like how that's not you're a therapist better than just let out go you're full of that's gas lighting like 101 I said I'm saying it much nicer now I was rough. So their parents knew of the situation. They didn't know the extent of it. I Had you know, I should have Looking back if I was more mature I would have Reached out to them sure and like this is beyond what I can handle I need you your guys's help like something's wrong, but you're a kid Yeah No idea what you're dealing with. Yeah Yeah, plus I'm going through it, you know, I'm in it like a much more manic state than my Baseline as well. So it's you know We move back in Eventually the voices start she's now hearing voices. It's moved out of the realm of just memory she thinks she's talking to ghosts and and something Yeah, so we move back in with my dad at one point we have a friend of ours try and do an exorcism And this is like after going through six therapists like we tried energy healers Just And Then finally the voices turned on me so they had turned on her a while ago They turned on most people in her life and her support structures. Yeah, and then they finally turned on me She left went and rented a place. She got in contact with her parents. They helped her pay for it and stuff and then I didn't see her for a Couple months or something and I'm wondering like, you know, what is happening here And then I get a call one night at like 10 o'clock at night saying she's lost in Portland and can I come pick her up? So and something is clearly really wrong at this point, you know She didn't even know how to locate herself I was like giving her directions on look for the green signs on the corners of locks and tell me what they say I Go and pick her up and I'm just trying to like Be very calm and in as inviting as I can and ask questions and she's like locked up like almost a Weird mixture of terrified and almost not there at all And I don't know if she's now on psychiatric medication or what the deal is I take her back to her house I don't hear anything again for several weeks and then and I get a call from Actually, I think it was longer I get a call from her family at one point and what had ended up happening is that she believed she was the antichrist and Thus she was trying to kill herself by jumping in front of cars Because she thought that if she didn't kill herself then the rest of the world would end oh So that's yeah, yeah sad Sad story. Yeah, it was it was rough So And her family flew out at that point they took care of her It took as far as I could tie, you know, I had very little contact with her after all of this But you know now she's married and has kids and seems stable and well good Yeah, she recovered they can I mean they pretty decent they can do a lot with schizophrenia if people are willing to be treated Yeah, yeah, absolutely. Well, and I think like a big part of it too was actually like Having a family and being surrounded by your family that really reinforced here that can help her That's right. That's right. It's the story outside and the story inside and getting those getting those right together Yes, that's a big part of what we experience as sanity. Yes. Yes, absolutely Yeah, when they don't that dissonance becomes a Very chaotic at its potential it becomes very chaotic. Yeah. Yeah So Yeah, that's how that story went and I say this because mostly I'm familiar with this if you're going by by Indian traditions, so like Hinduism They would have called this a premature Kundalini awakening. Hmm. So their whole mythology is you've got the basic life energy down at the Base of your spine two inches below the navel The whole spiritual mission is moving this energy up through the body and out through the crown So Generally, you know and then they build up huge religious systems basically purification systems so that you can handle Raising this energy up through the body When you haven't done that then what happens is all of these funky bits and blockages and and fears and all those types of things that are hiding in your body get pumped full of this basic life energy and they start manifesting as actual experience or All those types of things Now you can take whatever you want from that it was useful for me in contextualizing it. Oh The point though is that when this happens, it seems like people default to one of two position Keep moving my head away from the microphone. Sorry One of two positions which is either they're the Christ or they're the Antichrist It's interesting. Oh But in losing I don't know why it's cutting out. So the Christ or the Antichrist that's where you dropped out. Yes Yeah, which gives it a very particular character And Yeah, what was useful for this experience is that I saw the same thing happen in cult for where you have this burst of energy where and it feels very true and Then something little a little hiccup a bump in the road because there's so much energy behind it It just goes flying off the tracks So where was called for you were in here living with your father in southern Washington and Yes, so then yeah, let's continue that storyline and then we'll it'll branch all the way to Cult for so I spent the following year year and a half extremely depressed. I was working at a coffee shop Basically just Miserable After about a year I started like okay, I should continue on with my life I Started rock climbing they opened a gym in our town and I was like, oh that'll be fun and that was really helpful I met a you know group of friends finally and and started interacting with a little you know culture and having a good time and getting physical exercise and Started coming back to life and moving on and then This is then in that that time frame is when I went to cult three So I had started rock climbing I was getting back into stuff and then I was like, you know, my friend hit me up We went off to Idaho to go try this thing After cult three I came back still at dad's and then I got diabetes So I was rock climbing a lot I Suddenly the symptoms of diabetes are pretty Overtly obvious you start peeing like way too much I Had no energy every time I eat anything that had Carbohydrates in it. I would fall asleep like I couldn't physically stay awake and I was in this state for like four months before I finally took Blood sugar test. Yeah, my face was sunken in and like it was you just have no water in your body, you know, so And your body is using fat and muscle as its energy source because it can't use sugar as an energy source so I just dropped all You know, I've always been pretty skinny, but this was like skeletal And then I went out to breakfast one morning with my dad and after eating I was falling asleep and he's like You know, I had told them before like I think I might have diabetes So we went to the Walgreens and picked up a blood sugar test kit my blood sugar was 750 Yeah, I mean yeah we so we go to the emergency room they they draw The blood they do the arterial blood which is horrifying to have done I don't know if you've had arterial blood drawn, but they have to go Down into the middle of your art like your arterial bloods running in the core of your tissue And it's wrapped in nerves. Oh and it's really hard to get at because they don't know if they're getting at it They're just stabbing repeatedly hoping they get into the thing Yeah, but anyways Yeah, my blood is literally like Molasses there's just no water in it. It's got so much sugar in it that it's like syrup, you know really thick I Wait 130 pounds, you know, I'm I'm 511 so that's pretty Yes They've pumped me back I spent a week in the hospital they pumped me back full of water I literally just inflated like a balloon, you know Soaking up all the water and Got me on insulin. I'm type 1 diabetic Which is Really weird for it to come up at 23. Yeah, that's pretty weird Yeah Used to be called juvenile onset diabetes. It's autoimmune disorder where your Immune system kills the beta cells in your pancreas and thus you can't produce insulin or its opposite glucogin So, yeah, that was like a pretty strong setback That was right after I got my first shot That was right after I turned 23 I went through that and in December of that year That was in October I was diagnosed so just a few months after Basically as soon as I had gotten it to where I could control it On my own easily and somewhat familiar with it is when I moved down to Santa Cruz Yeah, so Move down to Santa Cruz I Start up a little wood shop, you know, I'm a crap Craftsman, I guess you could say I make knives bows like archery equipment clothing Etc I get that going That was after taking a class for making guitars, which is what this guitar in the I don't know if you can see it on the video no, you can't So that was like again my my answer to homesteading was like, okay, well I'm not gonna be able to like I have no interest in Leaving the homestead every day to go work eight hours at a job and then come back and try and keep that going So I'm trying to figure out how can I earn money at the? location I Do that for a while Rock climbing a lot And Yeah life pretty much stabled out for for the most part and I was feeling good and doing good and I ended up getting A job. Oh, yeah, this is the next area With a jewelry company that makes wooden pendants out of pine cones They're very well known in the New Age Circuit and the festival they sell all their stuff at the big music festivals And that was that was a great job really, you know, it was just like a group of friends hanging out in a garage every day making Pendants, you know is pretty fun And that continued for a while I started to get pretty burnt out on the work because it was extremely repetitive I was responsible for for putting the epoxy coating on them They're very pretty I just googled them right now and oh really yeah third eye pine cones. Yeah They are yeah And Yeah, I guess this whole time I kind of you know, I had veered, you know I was never really a religious person granted I Flirted with a bunch of them. I certainly done the New Age thing of like let me go learn about all the world's religions So I can be semi religious without having to interact with Christianity, which still had a bad taste in my mouth So Finally, you know after a while I'm getting pretty burnt out they send me to a festival to go check out that end of the business and You know, I still had all these idealisms about the New Age and like oh well this is where people are really trying to you know figure stuff out and synthesize all these things and come up with a answer that you know works for everyone and people are honestly like Trying to grow themselves and dive deeper and all these fantasies of what was happening there and When I went to the festival that illusion broke very rapidly and And yeah, it was absolute garbage just Garbage happened. What I can't even It wasn't even anything in particular, you know, it was it was a bunch of things It was one. No one was authentic. No one was honest. It was literally just a cool kid competition, but based around vaguely spiritual things instead of like You know, whatever else else cool kids compete over to be who the coolest, you know is a The coolest you know is a popularity contest Yeah, and then the drug use which I did I don't actually have a you know at that time I smoked way too much pot And Was interested in had played around with psychedelics and stuff But like, you know, they're roofing themselves to have a good night and just be you know, like It just I fell asleep at four o'clock in every morning to the sound of the worst 90s freaking beach party announcer voice You know playing bingo for all the people coming down off their drugs You know like right next to us at one point You can hear someone win a sex toy and they're like putting on a display at the like just He hedonism is Basically what it comes down to and I again I'm not like against people exploring and unpacking that stuff, but there was nothing It just felt gross for lack of a better it just felt really gross Taken as a whole thing and that's not to say I didn't have fun and you know all that stuff. Yeah So That did a number on me You know, it really broke all the fantasies I had about what was happening there. Oh, wow, we're almost out of time So I got back I got a friend request from a guy named Well, I won't say his name actually keep people from Going looking for him Got a friend request request from the cult leader of cult number four Just randomly right as I came back. Yeah You know, I added them and started having Goofy conversations. This was an entirely URL cult at the time was not an in-person thing And then I had a really intense set of experiences so then And again it gets weird I don't and again It's so strange for me because I came from such this atheistic Perspective of this extremely secular perspective and then it's just like the intensity of the experiences over and over again just Put me in in a place. I didn't know what you know how to make sense of anything. Yeah. Yeah, which is Strange because atheism is supposed to be just flat, you know, just yeah secularism Yeah, you've got your axial. What did you call your axial? Possession in 30 direction. There's so many more dimensions. Yes. Don't know what to do with any of it, right? I Try and so I start what I went into a phase I call burning very hot and this has happened to me a couple times Throughout my life, but it's an enormous sudden burst of energy and I can see very clearly and I Can see too clearly I've had the experience of walking around and feeling particularly like I could feel people subconscious and again, this isn't like It's literally just what it felt like, you know It's literally just what it felt like, you know, it could totally have been my projections or whatever. Yeah I'm going through this and it's difficult for me. I'm getting information I don't want and don't know how to turn it off and the only thing I can think of to do is to Submit so I start praying for hours a day not even like Please help but not words just submitting myself and being in the position was the only way I could get any Rest from it. Wow, I didn't feel like it was literally driving me insane, right? This continues for a while about a week or two of trying to deal with this experience and Then one night when I'm praying and it keep in mind, you know, I'm still not a Christian I haven't I haven't looked into it really I've opened myself up to it I'm not as jaded as I used to be at this point. Yeah, I'm praying one night and literally a being of light Enters my room I Like in the prayer position submitted to it. Yeah, and then it touches me on the forehead And again again like I'm sober totally sober, you know, yeah And then when it touches me it feels like this huge amount of emotional processing happens huh, and It digs up weird memories from my childhood, which I'm still not sure what what they are but and Suddenly, I don't have this problem anymore and my diabetes goes away Wow, oh And the weird part too is it tells me it touches me on the forehead and then says get up stand Like get off your knees, right? Right, right, right, right This is like something right out of the book of Revelation right Way too intensive an experience. Yeah, you know and I couldn't defend myself from it, right? I couldn't be like, oh that was a crazy drug trip. All right back to the And for the next two months, I'm trying to figure out what stand-up means What does it mean to stand? Yes, and write this kind of constant realization of all the things I've submitted myself to And I'm I'm like an inferno at this point and it's weird life starts responding to me differently You know like And it's weird life starts responding to me differently, you know, like so many of the synchronistic events and people interacting with me differently for no seeming reason and but then Right, but it starts to waver. It starts to get funky and I'm testing my blood sugar through all this and and It starts to go haywire So for two months diabetes was Literally gone. Wow I don't know how any of this works. I'm just reporting the event as I experienced it. Yeah and Then it's yeah, it starts to waver and I start getting spikes in my blood sugar again and I noticed that it often happens when I'm in particular when I'm interacting with things in a particular way So I start trying to change I'm using it basically as like a guide Like am I in my am I where I'm supposed to be or am I going off the track? Yep, and then I'm doing this I try and take over the company the pinecone company Burning very hot. I'm not saying I wasn't pretty nuts at this point because I was but still stable And This was that was like okay The only way I can make this work for me is if I'm at the top of it where I have enough time to Do other things I want to do but I can't keep coming here and sitting in this room Yep, doing this thing all day every day. Yep so I What's crazy is it almost worked? Which is mind-boggling to me. They literally almost were like handing me a company And then I got sent away Basically because I threw a Temper tantrum when my blood sugar spiked because they are trying to like slow me down, you know And another you know when your blood sugar spikes, it's very hard to regulate your emotions Not that it was that crazy of a temper tantrum or anything but you know So they're like go take a week off and like go sort yourself out I never came back That was the end of the job Which was fine. That's what I was, you know Well what I had accepted before taking the actions was like either I'll go find something new or or whatever Another month goes by and my diabetes comes back full force and it's more than just that this entire new way of Experiencing how my body is in my relationship to it and what existence is collapses back into its old form and and I'm extremely miserable at you know, like you got a taste of Heaven and then it's suddenly pulled away from you and back to this Yeah I'm pretty mentally stable again as a as a benefit Not again not that I was ever right unstable in that period it was fine But yeah and During that whole time I was interacting with this this cult and that was a big part of it for me with this stand-up Was like oh this guy came so I could tear him down. Just what I was familiar with is tearing down cult leaders and That didn't didn't work with this person. Hmm, you know even at my full Ability I couldn't tear him down. So when I collapsed I took it as a sign You know, I'd gotten kicked out of the job and I took it as a sign as God basically saying go follow this guy around for a while and I'd again I didn't know if the point of that was to tear him down or to join him So I was always had this dualistic role with it, but we are also basically out of time So this might be a good spot to stop the story. Okay. Well, we'll have to do it again I wish we weren't out of time. Yeah. Yeah, there's gonna be a lot of people like what happened to Nick So wait, so yeah a nice different part of the story that were Well, it's it's Somebody interesting aspects to your story. I mean the mental the mental health story You know, I've just had plenty of opportunity to be with people in those Spaces and it's yeah their story is Just so common. Yeah But but also oh, yeah life is a strange thing. You've had a very interesting life Nick Hasn't been dull That has not I would have I wouldn't have minded a bit duller of a life But you don't really get to choose. No, you don't did some things that helped it get not dull, but Yeah Yeah, I wish I wish we could wish we had more time, but I've got got another one coming So so let me know send me an email or something. Maybe we can we can because the queue is all filled up for March and starting to fill up in April already, so maybe we can get in at some point because I want to I want to Get out of caught because we talked about the cult a little bit at the meetup in San Jose. I remember that so Yeah, we're into that but for those who are just listening on this they're gonna be like what happened what happened? I know that there was a lot of there was a lot of good response to our first conversation. Yes Yes, see what happens, but no, I'm no I'm we are out of time. But yeah, we pushed it right to the edge there And send me an email and we'll schedule we'll schedule the rest of the story. Okay. Okay sounds great Okay, good to talk to you Paul good to talk to you. Bye. Bye. Bye