https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PqL4tjqLACA

 just because sometimes I don't record it and then people afterwards say, do you have a recording of it? I wanna look at it again. And that way, if you and I both think it's worth sharing in public, we will, otherwise it'll just stay private between us, so. That sounds great. Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? I'm 30 years old. I live in Mill Valley, California. I live with my fiance. I'm pretty ill all the time. You don't look ill. Thanks, thanks. Yeah, I've been, I was pretty healthy my whole life and then I got ill around two and a half years ago. And that's been my whole life ever since. It's every single minute of every single day, it's pretty much. Oh man. That's really hard. Yeah, yeah. So, but yeah, I've been watching your videos a lot and a lot and of course Jordan and everybody, but I just thought it was strange the way everything lined up like in my life with your videos, Jordan, everything just kinda came together and then when I saw your videos, I was like, I could not believe what you were talking about. Read Meer Christianity and I mean, it was working on my brain so hard and then all of a sudden your video popped up and I had never been to your channel and it was like CS Lewis and Jordan and I was like, I mean, I was dying to ask Jordan about CS Lewis, I was like, who is this guy? Like, I gotta know about this guy. Like, I'm on CS Lewis train right now and Jordan was kind of the start of it for me. But yeah, he's changed my life for sure. But I was lucky enough to get to talk to him two times, which was kind of strange, it's because I screwed up on the timing of it. He called me and it was weird, it was like Jordan was on my cell phone and I was like, what, this is so weird. He was nice enough to schedule another meeting so yeah, I got to talk to him twice and he was just so weirded out, he was just, well, so I guess the reason I emailed you is because I have a lot of issues, I've had a lot of experiences that I cannot explain and I think even Jordan's explanations of them, I think are kind of, I think you noticed a kind of a flaw in his thinking is the kind of stoicism that he kind of espouses and I noticed that right away, I did it before I got sick, I had to get sick. And then I'm half dying and watching Jordan's videos sitting on the couch, I'm like, well, this is all good and fine but what if you literally can't move? What if you can't think? And to me, that was a huge hole, I'm like, I can't carry my cross, you know what I mean? I'm done, man, why? And I'm not just some guy who's on his computer and he doesn't like his job too much. You know what I mean? That's right, that's right. This is serious for you. It's really serious and so when he's talking about chaos and order, and he uses cancer as an example in multiple videos and I watched those videos before I had cancer and I didn't know what he was saying but when I got cancer and started going through that thing and everything started going bad, it's like something happened where I felt that I was in kind of a Christian world all of a sudden. And in my mind's eye even, that suddenly heaven and hell were real considerations that they were not silly things. Angels and things like that were very real. And so I heard your talk with... Jonathan Bageaux. Yes, yes. I really like him but I really disagree with kind of his, well, he just said angels, these guys in the middle of the nation, they kind of just think that these are physical beings and that's so silly and I'm like, you cannot discount that at all. And I'm not saying one way or the other but my experiences have been so bizarre that this kind of, well, it's all just psychological is just I think a real reduction of what we're talking about. No, I was surprised by my conversation with Jonathan. I don't want to read too much into it but I also got that same impression and so if we talk again, which we probably will at some point, I want to pursue that more with him because especially have someone who's lived and worked in Africa. Now, maybe he didn't work so much in terms of Christian ministry like I did with Haitians and the Dominican Republic but I don't have any problem assuming the ontology of the spiritual world. I just don't find that far-fetched at all and I don't see why I should. Yeah, I feel the same way. Well, do you want to share more about your experience? Sure, sure. And again, if you share something and this isn't something you want to share publicly, we can just not share this video at all or edit it out because I don't want that getting in the way but I also by experience know that often I have conversations with people, I might say something that you think, oh, how did he say that? And then you can go back and look at the video tape and it's just easy. Okay, cool. Yeah, I'll definitely talk about it. Well, I've had quite a few experiences. I've been hospitalized, oh man, I've been hospitalized probably like seven or eight times in the last two years, really seriously bad and but this one experience I had was, well, I had cancer and so I had Hodgkin's lymphoma, which is, I had almost, I was basically stage four. So when I was getting in, I was basically dying. I was kind of living in and out of the dream world. I was being misdiagnosed every other week. It was just hell. And so when I got into chemo, my chemo sessions were 12 sessions over the course of six months, one every other week. And I took to bat very bad to chemo, about the worst anyone can possibly go. And there's no reason why, I was healthy, kind of relatively. Except for the cancer. Hodgkin's, they call, I mean, people look at, they go, well, that has a good great success rate and so you'll be fine. And that's the one they saw. That's what everyone told me. That's the one they saw. And I said, whoa, okay. And so I got, immunotherapy drugs and all that stuff. And on the, it was right around the ninth treatment and I had become pretty, badly mangled from the chemo. But I was doing it. But it was really bad. And so my doctor came to me and said, there's the shortage of drug. There was the shortage of drug when we started and now it's come back. And so we can put this back into the chemo cocktail. And we feel that that would probably be, that could improve your chances by one or 2% of success. And so, and I knew that the drug was very dangerous, but it's administered all the time, but it's called Bliomycin. And, but I had this feeling. I said, something's gonna happen with that. But I just shoved it away and went. And my fiance took me and, sorry, I'm sorry. I went to the infusion. I got the infusion. Fusion takes about four hours. And I would take, I was such a bad case that I would have to take so many drugs, you know? And so I was probably on like, I think 15 to like 17 drugs when I would leave the chemo. I was crazy on drugs. So they give it to me. I think they go, well, we're gonna, we wanna make sure you're okay because you're kind of a weird case. So they do that. They watch me for 45 minutes. Nothing happens. I look a little weird, like unusual. I get in the car. We're driving home. It's about a 45 minute drive from San Francisco. And all of a sudden I'm just talking to my fiance. And I just feel everything shutting down. And so I look at her and I say, I say, Sally, drive to the hospital right now. I'm not gonna be able to talk in a few seconds. And she looked at me and said, what? And then I just went unconscious. I feel it coming. Oh yeah, because I could tell that I was no, I couldn't speak the words. I could have the words in my head, but not in my mouth. And my legs started, my legs started going boom, boom, hitting against the car door. Like I was having really bad tremors in my hands and legs. So then I pass out. And she's like, you know, this was really sudden. This was like, I was stopped having a normal conversation within a minute. I was unconscious. When I was unconscious, I saw a tunnel. At the end of a tunnel was, it was black around it. And then at the end of the tunnel was two doors. In between was a teal divider. I don't know why I remember that. And I was going towards it very quickly. Like I felt like I was rocketing towards it. And then she slapped me and I woke up. And she shook me and she said, stay here, stay here. And I said, huh, where am I? And she said, we're going to the hospital. And then I went back out. And then I went back to the tunnel. And so I'm going back to the, and then she's hitting me again. So I keep waking up and she's just grabbing me and slapping me the whole time. So then I'm starting to come to, but then I'm, it was like, it was, the tremors had become so crazy that I could not move. I could not speak. I couldn't do anything. She put me in the, they got me into the emergency hospital. They were awful. They didn't know what to do with me. And I was sitting there. My, some of my family, my dad came. My dad, my brother and my fiance were there. And I just, something was in the room, you know? And I thought I was going to die. And I knew that no one was going to help me because they didn't know what this was. It was so rare. And I was hallucinating really badly. And I just knew it was, it was either I was going to live or I was going to die. I felt that energy. The weight in the room was heavy. And so my dad is looking at me and I could tell by the way my brother and my dad were looking at me that they could tell that. And that was shocking. That was shocking that they were that scared, but then they couldn't admit it. So they were walking. And so I was sitting there, I'm looking at them and I can't speak. And so I got all these thoughts and I'm going, well, maybe I'm paralyzed. Maybe I'm just paralyzed because I can think. And then out of the left side of my vision, this is why I talked to Jordan is in the wall, this insectoid type figure breaks out of the wall with pincer type things. And I don't know, I'm sure you've seen Hieronymus Bosch's painting. Yeah. Like those type of demons and they were blue and they were insect-like. And there was probably like three to five of them and they were crawling out the wall towards me. And they were about this big, you know? This big, you know? And I'm looking at, and I was just, and I said, what the hell is going on? But I couldn't speak. And my everything is shaking and everything. And they look like they're coming at me and that they're physically interacting with the wall. Then at the same exact time, I look up above me and there's this light. And I see these Native American men on horseback and it's like, you know, from like an old photo or something and they're on these beautiful horses and they have this torch, one of them has a torch and they're just riding in this circle in this carousel above me. And I looked at my dad and my brother and they were all fake. That's what I felt that they were. Your dad and your brother were fake. Were fake, they were denying that this experience was sacred. That their son and brother could be gone and that they weren't men enough to just go, oh my God, this is so horrible, let me just be with you. You know what I mean? They couldn't do that. And so, but then I see this, the Native Americans and I'm going, oh my God, and I'm horrified. And then I, but as soon as I saw these men on horseback, I immediately said, that's my mother's brother named Tommy. And he killed himself in the 80s when he was 28. I felt for some reason, I have no idea because he was so small, it was hard to know. I couldn't make out the exact faces, but I went, Tommy, that's Tommy. Tommy's gonna save you. Tommy saved your life. And I just sat there, I said, why do I think this? And everything, then the demon slowly went back into the wall, they kind of rolled back into the wall and they just, the Native Americans kept spinning and then it slowly went away and then I lost my speech for, I lost the ability to communicate for 48 hours. You know, they thought I was disabled. You know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And then the neurologist comes back and he goes, this is, I've worked on this for hours. I've never seen anything like this. This is unbelievable. You got, you have a fatal case of serotonin syndrome from a drug that almost it cannot happen. It's a 1% of 1%, maybe even less than that. And definitely could have died. And then slowly my speech came back and that episode was the worst episode I've had. I've had one other serious, well, I've had multiple other serious hospitalizations, but I had one chemo that went really bad where I had to be hospitalized and it was horrible, but it wasn't like that. And then another one where I did have serotonin syndrome from Zoloft, from prescribed antidepressants and I hallucinated again and I saw a very strange vision of in the paramedics car. This wasn't fatal. This was just, I was having tremors and the whole thing and I was hallucinating and going unconscious, but I knew that I would hope that I wasn't in a fatal kind of area there. And, but I saw these dogs, these, I felt this spirit in the paramedic car, this God was looking out for me and I didn't know why. Like, because I shouldn't feel that way. I'm not safe. Nothing about the situation is safe. So why? I'm a kind of nihilistic guy. You know what I mean? Like that's kind of my mind trains kind of being a cynical pessimist. And so when I saw kind of God, I was like, well, I've been reading the Bible, you know, and I have been kind of asking, well, is this true? You know, how does this connect to my experience? You know, that's really what I've been trying to figure out because I tried to figure out the question of evil. I mean, I was like, I had lost my marbles a little bit, you know, I, so, but just really quickly in this, the vision that I saw, the second vision, I saw the spirit and I said, well, if this theology is true, then where is Satan? And then I, and as soon as I said that, and I was hallucinating, I saw these Rottweilers running after me in this weird frame. And there were these little chaotic dogs. And I heard a voice and it said, there he is. And it was little dogs, and then it went, and it just was obliterated in this kind of weird fire. I know this stuff is so out there, but. I mean, let me say something about your stories because in our culture, people don't tell stories like this because, they don't tell stories like this publicly because there's a stigma attached to it. But as a pastor, people have experiences like this and they're like, you know, so then pastor, well, you're not supposed to tell, so then they sit down and they tell me a story. And like, you know, something like you're telling me, they're often different, but wow. So, how have these experiences changed you? Well, they, everything about me has changed. I went from pretty, well, I was an egocentric artist, I guess I would describe myself. And someone who was always looking for truth, but wasn't actually seeking it, loved to talk about ideas and loves to talk about life and death and not actually experiencing it. But yeah, so. Talk about getting what you ask for and not wanting it. Yeah, yeah. Well, but the most important thing it's done for me is it brought me to Christianity. That is, to me, that was the whole point. It was either, I either continue and I die, or, and not that Christianity is some contract to make me live, it's kind of the opposite. I found that when I thought I was gonna die, people around me thought I was gonna die. I didn't care about anything that I cared about before, that everything came off and all I cared about were these principles that I couldn't see. And that I found that, you know, Paul was talking about in his letters a lot. But it made me reach out to God, it made me get so angry at God, I cursed out God. I was in a ward of where, you know, I had no immunity, my immune system dropped, you know, so I became neutropenic. And so I was on this ward full of just sick children. All my friends were coming in with like masks and gloves and I mean, it was bad. And then they're coming in and they're going, well, you haven't had chemo, you could have cancer, we've got to get you a chemo, but you have the flu and you could die from pneumonia, so we don't know what to do with you. And it was just like, but, and then so I got in a real argument with God. I've always believed in God, but I've never, you know, not the Christian sense, I guess, of God. And I got so mad, I got so angry. Not about me really, it was like about being in this ward full of the sick and the dead and all these innocent people. I wasn't innocent, but there were so many innocents. Yeah. People. That God had somehow violated a contract and- Yes. Yeah. And it was so much worse than I thought, that the pit of suffering, sometimes this is what I think is so interesting about Jordan is Jordan has no idea sometimes like what he's talking about. Like in terms of death in life, sometimes I'm like, oh man, like the pit of despair is like, chaos is really chaos where you actually think physical rules stop applying. You know, I actually started thinking that way. I started thinking that perhaps maybe cups would fly off the table and hit the wall for no reason. That's the world now, the world didn't exist, rationally, it couldn't. But yeah, it put me in some weird relationship with Christianity, all of a sudden I went to the Bible because I had nothing else. I haven't had a lot of support from my family and no one around me really cares about God or anything. So I thought about all those people on prison shows. Well, you know, and it's a common thing for people to go into prison. I mean, if you Google, if you go to YouTube and search for Son of Sam and his story, I mean, it was an untreated schizophrenic, it becomes the four to four caliber killer. When I was young and living in the New York area, and then he goes into prison and they put him on treatment for schizophrenia and he just falls into a pit of despair because his theory wakes up from this illness and his life is over, he's life without parole. And then of course, God finds him. We usually say he finds God, but I think it's God finds him. And if you look at him now, he's a different man. He's a different man. So this drove you to the Bible. Now, did you have much? Did you go to church or anything? Did you have much Christianity in you? I went to a Lutheran school when I was from kindergarten to third grade. And I sung in the chapel, but I wasn't baptized or anything like that. But I'm pretty rare around. I mean, like just even having that background, no one around me, it's almost ridicule in my generation, in the Bay area especially. I went to high school and middle school here. It's like, you're literally crazy if you believe in God. So I was always on the outs that way. And then I always felt that Christianity, there was something there that there was a complexity to it. And also I liked the pastor had the kind of a goodness about him and I just remembered that. I always remember. From when you were a kid. Yeah, he was a good man. He was like, he wasn't doing anything crazy or anything. It was just, so the whole media, when I would watch the media, I remember the Catholic church thing happened and all that stuff. And I was like, well, this guy seems all right. He doesn't seem like he's, anything to anyone. So I always kind of knew, I don't know, sometimes now I think about it, it's like Christ was on the back burner. Yeah. And on some weird level, I'm like, oh, I know that's the truth, but. Yeah. And it's, I often think about the story of the apostle Paul and in the book of Acts, when he is, when Stephen is being killed, he's holding their coats. And then on the road to Damascus, Jesus shows up and blinds him, takes away his sight and sends a poor Christian over to, you gotta go pray for Paul. The guy's like, that guy? I don't want to get anywhere near that guy. God says, no, you're gonna do it. You know, God does what he wants. And he's, you know, people sometimes think they wanna, think they wanna bet God and play games with God. And I just think, you're out of your mind. He doesn't, he doesn't, if he wants to do something, he doesn't play around. And he'll take the kinds of risks that we look at and say, no, you're not supposed to do that. And he's like, who are you to tell me what I'm supposed to do? So true. Yes. Oh man. Wow. So you started reading the Bible and then, I mean, did it start making sense to you more than after everything you had been through or what was that like? It was the craziest experience ever. I kind of ran out, you know, I ran out of stuff to watch, movies, whatever. That's right. I need the media, you know what I mean? It's like, man, like, what do you do? And so Jordan kind of was, you know, he was great with book recommendations. You know, he told me to read Answer to Job and a lot of Young and all that. But when I read the Bible, I was just, well, first of all, I was like, okay, I wanna read it quickly and I wanna read it, you know, from Genesis forward. Like I don't wanna skip around. I wanna go through Kings, you know? I wanna do it, you know? And so, but I don't wanna do it quickly. I wanna see my initial reaction. And I think I read it like in a month or something. I was like, that's all I did. And I couldn't get over seeing God's perspective. That just, it wasn't like the stories or thinking about a specific story was like, wow, I'm so ignorant and egotistical that I never even considered that. Like I believed in God, but I didn't really consider God. You know? Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so a lot of those descriptions, especially at the prophets, was so overwhelming to me. And that the seriousness of it, I like. I went to one church service and I got so sick that I had to leave, but the pastor started saying all these quotes. And he's like, you know, it's not as ominous as it sounds. You know, he's saying all these like super intense things. And I was like, no, it really is. Like it really, really is. It's for people who have nothing. And I don't like this little like Disney, Disneyized version of it. It's sad to me. Yeah. Well, and you know what you describe, I think is the, in my experience, when we have health, health, security, stability, affluence, it's just, it's something, it's a game we play. It's not real. It's, we're full of ourselves, but it's the people who don't have those things that, America, America makes lousy Christians. It does. How can it not? And some of our best Christians are made in prison and in hospitals and among, you know, I've never made an atheist homeless person. Now, a lot of them are nuts. I don't think you're wrong. And many of them have, just yesterday, my wife found a guy and he was having trouble and she tried to help. I said, well, let's go help him. And, you know, we picked the guy up and he was, you know, all the stuff that I've dealt with for years. He was soused and mentally ill and, you know, brought him back to his crappy group home. And, but, you know, if he'd sit down and talk with the guy, I'm sure God is very real to him. Yeah. Yeah. But now we're surrounded by all of these things that are wonderful things. Yeah. But you had that taken away when your health was taken away. Yeah. Yeah. And it's weird being in this weird, like, well, right now I'm on my last bout here, not with cancer. I survived cancer, but it's just been a nightmare ever since. It's been awful. You know, I went to psychologists and I went to the best psychologist. And, you know, they gave me drugs and all this stuff and it's just destroyed me. I've been hospitalized so many times from it. I'm now on my last thing and this is it. I've been on this drug called Ativan, which is a benzo. For two years, it was prescribed during chemo. And now I got a detox off of this and then I'm done. And then I'm done. And it's, I'm on my, come on, three, four months now. Four, fourth month, can't leave during the day, can't get in my car. It's just destroyed me, these drugs. That's one thing about Jordan that I would love to speak to him about. I think his stuff he says about on Twitter about Zoloft, it drives me nuts. It drives me nuts. I get it for some people, but. I don't understand what you mean. Oh, he really, I think he takes antidepressants himself and he really is positive about them. And after being through the ringer so many times to every different type of drug, even anti-psychotics, I think that's a dangerous, dangerous thing to put out there for people like, I'm his audience. And I know so many people go, oh, I'm depressed, man. I don't do anything all day. I should take Zoloft. And now they feel like they're on speed or whatever and they think they're living life. And I mean, I got hospitalized from that. I, these drugs are, I cannot believe they prescribe these things. Wow. Yeah. I had a conversation with James a few number of weeks ago. He's a, he teaches psychology and he said similar things about some of this stuff to me. And I've, you know, my, again, as a pastor, a lot of experience with people with dealing with all kinds of mental illness. And what I see so often is that it's like they have this, it's like they have this shelf full of drugs and someone comes in and they're like, well, let's try this one. And give it to you for two, three weeks and well, how's it feel? Oh, okay, well, let's try this one. Well, first we gotta wean you off. And I'm just thinking, is this a science or? The church I grew up with, we had a very well-meaning lady who did all kinds of crazy things. She had a drawer full of eyeglasses and someone would come in that need eyeglasses. She's like, try these on, try these on. It's just, I mean, I think that's what they do with psych meds. Give this a shot. It's like, I don't know, do they know anything? Doesn't appear to me like they do. I think, yeah, I really think people would be so shocked about that, like all the newsweek articles and what everybody reads, when you get to the real deal and go to even to the best hospital in the world, it won't, I mean, I hate to say it will matter, but the reality, one of the first chemo's I went to, I was, I'm trying to be all positive and everyone's like, oh, you're just gonna skate right through this. You're 28 years old, it's nothing. And then I remember this woman, this Filipino woman was all wrapped up in a big blanket in one of the infusion chairs and she looked bad. She looked real bad. She had her son there and she looked at me with her sincere eyes and she just said, good luck. And I remember my dad looked at me like, good luck. And then it, shit hadn't gone downhill, it's just you, it hadn't gone downhill that, so I always remember that that's really what it is. It's like, good luck. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, well, that's been my experience with people too, people in my church who've had chemo and I don't wanna, I don't wanna downplay what our medical establishment can do, I mean, because I've lived in the third world where there isn't any and it's like, yeah, it's a really big deal, but at the same time, Yeah. You know. Yes. There's a lot there. Wow. Wow. So, so what do you need? Wow. No one's asked me that, that's so weird. Man, I just need to talk to someone to be honest because I mean, now I'm like totally crazy. I mean, I'm totally nuts. You know, it was like even before the Christian thing, but now it's like, they're like, what the hell are you talking about? But you're not alone. I was, when I was a teenager, we had two houses down from us, a family lived there and the, I remember the woman, the mother of the family, I was babysitting their kids or something, I was like 14, 15 and she comes home one day, I don't know how we got here, but she had died on the table and she had been out for a number of minutes and she told me her story and I'm like a 14 year old kid and I'm just listening and it's like, wow, okay. You know, people that, well, make a judgment on it. I can't make a judgment on it. And my, you know, again, I grew up in a place where not unlike the place I minister, where, we live in this media world where we watch people on TV and we look at them in magazine covers and we think this is a normal script in life and people who have things, experiences like you, well, there's no place for you. So we're gonna call you crazy, we're gonna put you over here and maybe you'll talk to some YouTube pastor, but, but you know, it's not normal. We have no place to frame this, so why don't you go over there and be crazy someplace else? But it's not true. There's people all over the place. Yeah. So I, you know, I really want you to know that you're not alone and you're not crazy. I know crazy, I see plenty of crazy. Not you. Good, good, I'm glad. It's everyone too, but you know, you're not the common crazy I see. So what do you need? You need someone to talk to. Yeah, and talk about God, you know what I mean? Like, man, just to pray with someone, like, I feel like I'm just so isolated, you know? And my family is, I've been left alone a lot, you know, in my life. And so the experience of getting cancer is not just about having cancer or getting chemo. What's amazing about it is all the things you learn about the people around you. And I think that's the biggest thing about it is all the things you learn about the people around you. And how everyone that you thought you knew isn't what you knew. And that's been really hard, you know? Like, my friends, I have nothing to talk about with my friends anymore. We just, I just don't. Because. I'm just too serious, I guess. I don't wanna talk about Netflix movies for the next 35 years. You know, I've had enough. I'm just kinda done. And yeah, it's just, and they're living their lives and having these wonderful experiences. And my life has been somewhat depressing. So, yeah. There's not a lot, not anyone to really talk to. And. Now, are you kind of, I mean, you mentioned earlier, you're just kinda shut in right now because of that you just have to be by yourself. Well, my fiance is taking care of me, which I'm really happy about. And I'm able to take a walk in the morning a little bit. And then about every week, I have to start to taper and cut the amounts. And then I go into a spiral and then I can't get up for about a week. And then we start all over again. And so I'm always kinda up in the air. I, we can, we've canceled our wedding five times. Yeah. So, it's awful. Wow. Wow. Did you have any church connections with anyone? No. Oh. You're my, you're the first person. Because I would go online and look at churches and, oh my gosh, like all they talk about is politics. Like I like, I was just like, I just wanna pray and there doesn't seem to be places to pray. And yeah, so I was just bummed out when I listened to even like some of the sermons and around me it's like, it's very, that's hip right now. Yeah, yeah, I know, I know, I know. Cause God, politics seems so real and God seems so not. Yeah, that's so true. Yeah. I see it all the time. Yeah, yeah. That is so short-sighted. You know, you would think among a community of people where 100% of us know we will die, we might think a little about it. But no, because we as a culture have managed to bubble wrap ourselves and well, that's gonna happen off in the future. You know, only part of the reason that churches are full of old people is that they started going when they were young. The other reason churches full of old people is because often at some point in there either their health goes bad or they're in their 60s or 70s, they begin to say, crap, I ain't gonna be around. I gotta think about this. And you just got there early. And you got there in a way that you have time to think about it. Which is, yeah, very lucky. You can process it a little bit. Yeah. Wow. Oh. You know, obviously I'm sorry to hear about your medical condition, but I'm also deeply sorry to hear about your isolation and yeah, you know, we live in a world where we can, you know, you and I can, neither of us have to leave the house and we can see each other on a video screen. And that's an awesome thing. But we're not made to be alone. Yeah. Well, I'm blessed with my fiance, you know, she's saved my life. Yeah, I guess so. And that when you said, take me to the hospital, I'm not gonna be able to talk in another minute, you didn't say, huh? We can go for a second, but I didn't know. She's amazing, she's amazing. She's been through so much. Well, I did, I don't know if he contacted you or not, but if he hasn't, I'll contact him. Can you receive visitors? Well, no, I'm gonna meet him, Mark. Okay. Yeah, I'm really excited to talk to him. And he's a great guy. When he moved, when he took the call to the church in Alameda, younger pastors need older pastors as mentors. And so I've been his mentor for a number of years and he's a super, super guy. So. Yeah, thanks for hooking me up with him. Yeah. Wow. Well, we have some more, we have a few more minutes. Is there anything else you wanna touch on? Yeah, I, wow, man, I just talked about nothing first. No, you didn't talk about, well, let me tell you. I mean, again, it'll be up to you whether or not you allow me to post this, but what you. I'm sorry I didn't let you talk at all. No, no, no, people hear me talk all the time. I do lots of talking. But your story is so important because I hear stories like yours regularly. Really? But these are, well, you know, yours are, everyone is unique, okay? Yeah, yeah. But the elements of it, the medical system cannot save you. You have experiences that in our secular culture, you lose status if you share things like this with a good number of people. Right. You have become an inconvenient person for your friends and family. Not just because of your medical situation, but also because of the changes that you've gone through given what you've seen and experienced. There's a world of people out there like that and they're often isolated and alone. When I asked you what you needed, your answer does not surprise me. I remember talking, he's no longer alive. I remember talking to a guy who was just kind of living a worldly life, had a medical procedure, and then went into a coma. And God came to him in the coma and said, he was raised in a church but had given it up, came to him and said, I'm gonna wake you up and you're gonna be different. And he was different. And he stumbles into my church first time. It was terrifically overdressed because all I'd been to was black churches. Next week he came, quite a bit less dressed up, and then we got to know each other and God had changed him from the inside out. His values were completely different. But his relationships with his family, because of the massive transformation in him, nobody quite knew how to relate to him anymore. Now unfortunately he had other medical things come up and within two, three years of that experience, he had passed away again, and which to me was just such a sad thing because he was growing in Christ and he was finding new life and he was sorting out his life and things were going and then God took him. The thing that I saw though growing up with my father's ministry was that, my father told me that again and again, God brings people to us, they're here for one, two, three, five years, and then God takes them. And it's like, it's hard on the church, I could use some of these saints to stick around a little while. Hey, God's boss, but like I said, you don't play with God. Anyone who has had any experience at all knows, you just don't play with someone like that. But we don't know. So I'm sorry, your story's far more interesting than mine. Oh no, no, that was great. No, you didn't talk about nothing. A lot of people can benefit from your story. No, I appreciate that. Well, thanks Paul. So yeah, like I said, we still have a little bit of time. So if you wanna go into anything else, we can, or if you're tired, we can wrap up, it's up to you. I can't see the clock, how long do we have? Well, it's 322 now and my next one is four. So if we stop at like 345, that gives me a few minutes to go to the bathroom and do a couple of errands and things before my four o'clock. Cool. Oh, well, I was curious. Well, I've been reading a little bit about Calvinism and it's interesting, like I've seen some of the kind of critiques about, I was curious about some of your views on predestination because I'm trying to sort these things out and part of my experience is that there seems to be a truth that I can't go to God because that's dependent on so many things that God allows me to have. And so I don't really understand the argument the other way. But I'm curious on like just what the view is on that. Yeah. Well, the first thing to say is that when someone hears Calvinism, they almost always think predestination. That is actually not from Calvin. That's more from later. So about a hundred years after Calvin, these issues about predestination in the Calvinist-Arminian fight really got engaged, but that's about a hundred years after Calvin. Calvin, for the most part, articulated the common church view of predestination that the Roman Catholic Church and Martin Luther, the only thing is he mentioned double predestination, which got all the attention and then that, a whole big theological thing just took off after that. So when people hear Calvinism, they hear predestination and off they go and it's like, well, it's kind of like the wooden slide has been worn and once people hit it, it's like, down we go. And it's like, okay, leave that over there. Don't worry about that. That's a tiny little part of who John Calvin was and what he wrote. I think the idea, well, and when Tim Keller, who's a celebrity pastor in New York City, who does a really good job on a lot of things, and when he's often asked about it, he says, well, I'll talk about how the Bible talks about it because that's supposed to be where Calvin gets it from. I think the best way to understand it is the fact that none of us, I think it's similar to, I think it's what you just said in terms of, well, how could I find God? Well, I'm running around and I'm living in America and I'm able to fill my life with all sorts of diversion. I think I'm gonna live forever even if another part of my brain knows I won't. I'm gonna manage things because I think I'm smarter than God and I can critique him. And then something happens and you change. And sometimes, experientially, the path feels like, well, I was looking for God. And I think, again, I use the example of Paul and his conversion. When you ask the question, well, who finally gets God and who doesn't? I don't know that we can answer that question. So the best answer for that question is God knows and leave it at that. Okay, yeah, and I agree with that. I'm just curious on, because when I kind of, I told my dad, oh, I'm reading John Calvin. He said, oh, what's the point? He said, why do anything? That was his response. But I keep just coming back to my experience. I go, well, I couldn't even think about God if it wasn't for God giving me that ability. That seems really tied in here. And so, yeah, so I was just, I've been thinking a lot about that. And Calvinism is not determinism. It's, but again, these are, most of us have, for almost everything in the world, just a tiny little, a couple of bytes of information that we can keep with something in terms of association. So Calvinism, determinism, that's where people go with it. So, puritism, being strict. So that's, but if you start reading John Calvin, why would he admonish all kinds of things if he didn't believe people had the will to either listen or reject? Yeah. Well. Big topics. Well, I was also cute. I had a question about art, really. Art. Yeah, because, being an artist, I haven't been able to do much of it in about a year. But there's always been this, I know that Protestants have always kind of had this touchy relationship, which is weird because I really like a lot of the Protestant artists. I think they're really strong. But, how do you view, I guess art and culture in a Christian, I mean, almost like the first Reformed movie, how do you live a Christian life in this world? Well, my tradition, the Christian Reformed Church has traditionally, but not exclusively, been a fairly plain church tradition. That's changing now a bit. I think it grew out of, and actually, talking to Jonathan Pigeot and all the conversations that I've been doing, I've been thinking more about this lately. There was an instinctive hesitance to be careful about physical images because of how quickly we bond with them. And especially having lived the cross-cultural life I have, so you look at, let's say, and I'll know if we post this, I'll catch comments on this, but so what. You know, if you look at Jesus up on the top of the dome, you can't look at Jesus and not see the color of his skin. And just issues are gonna be raised by that and potentially stumbling blocks. Now, people will rightly say, yeah, but the Bible does image God in language, and that's true, and all of these things are representation. But the commandment, the second commandment, not to make graven images of God is amazingly perceptive in terms of how quickly we try to appropriate something that God makes and turn it into us. So in other words, if God were a baker, would we say, would we make a cake and then say, here is your God? I think a baker would say, I make cakes, I'm not a cake. An artist would say, I make art, I am not art. So to me, but I do think that God gives gifts, and actually if you look at the biblical accounts of the tabernacle and the temple, they were filled with art and representation. So I think churches should be places of art. It's just that when it comes to, when it comes, we've gotta be a little bit careful about images in terms of just how powerful they are with shaping people's imaginary, and therefore shape by shaping, they limit. And God clearly has a problem with us limiting him. And in many ways, theologians and pastors are the worst violators of that, because so often with our books and our sermons, we limit God. And if you're gonna take something from Calvinist sovereignty of God, it means God does what he wants. And shut up, people. Just shut up with a joke. Alicia, hand over your mouth. Yeah, I've kind of noticed that with like, even some of the pastors that I've seen online, like I've listened to John Piper, and it's like, I'll see his sermons and I'll go, whoa, those are crazy, those are so good. And then he'll be asked the most ridiculous question like about like hairdos or something random, you know what I mean? And then he, but I understand that he has to answer it. But then I'm like, but this is just his opinion. This doesn't really need to be like, get out there, but I guess everybody's looking to him. It's part of the idolatry of celebrity. And same with the Jordan Peterson crowd. It's a natural phenomenon, and it's always been with the church. A lot of the church fathers, they were celebrity pastors, but you gotta be careful with it. Yeah. Because we're all just people. Yeah, yeah. You don't have to fill the time if you're tired, man. It's okay, it's your time, it's up to you. I never get to talk about any of this stuff. My girlfriend's like, oh man, John Piper. Yeah, it's so funny when I started the meetup, when we went around the room, one of the most common things was, I try to talk to my girlfriend about this, or my wife about this, and they're like, just shut up about it, okay? I know you listen to your weird videos, Jordan Peterson, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I don't wanna hear about it. It's so true, it's so true. But she likes him now, she likes Jordan a lot. She went to the San Francisco little, speaking the 12 rules. Did you go to the simulation one too? No. Oh, okay, was that that one? That was a good one to miss, better to go to the other one. Okay, yeah, I was really blown away by that. I think we have a women, I was like, there's someone in there. Yeah? Yeah, it was really cool. Yeah, yeah, unlike seemingly on the online version, I've probably got 95% of the people who contact me are men, which is cool. I don't have a problem with that. But there are women out there, and I see more and more of them in the comments section. Yeah, I think it'll change. Yeah. That's awesome. So, I feel like the other, I just watched your other interview with the, I really liked that Eastern Orthodox young guy. Oh, Adam? Yeah, I liked him, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, it's been fun how the channel has developed. And I didn't, when I started this, I didn't have any idea of, well, I'm just gonna talk to people online, and I'm gonna post the conversations. I had no idea to do that, but it just, I talked to Peterson and I posted that. And Josh, who gave me the time, he had posted one. So I thought, let's just post, let's have talks with people. And I only post about half the talks I do, but maybe less. But a number of people have written me and said, oh, the conversations are the best part of your channel. And I think that's right, because here's your story. And again, I mean, your story is pretty special, but everybody's story, I mean, it sounds so cliche. It sounds like Barney the purple dinosaur. But people are amazing. And what I look at, what God has done in this world, and think, I know God loves stories because he's made billions of them, no two of them the same. And I think, and part of the reason I do not, I'm not with the materialist, and I do not in any minute believe this is all there is, because I'm thinking, God made this flood of glory. He's not gonna waste it. And that's why, even though on one hand, I believe, obviously, the illness and the sickness and the suffering that you have endured, this should not be. On the other hand, I don't think God's gonna waste it. Don't think he's gonna waste it. I'm clear with that. Yeah, there's a weird sensation that when everything is going wrong, but then this connection to God, I got this sensation after cancer that everything was as it should be, but I didn't know why, because everything seemed so awful. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Hard, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. I've had the experience in, really hard times in my own life, when it was in those times that my communion with God was the sweetest. And so often in the other times of my life where things are easy and comfortable, where I'm a slacker. But it's like, boy. Hard to put it into words. I don't wanna go back into that pain. Everything in me says, and when I'm in the foothills of those kinds of times again, it's like, everything in my body, I don't wanna go there. But part of me also knows that if I do go there, God will be with me in it. And it doesn't get rid of the pain, but I'm not alone in it. And God is enough. He really is. But my suffering hasn't been anything like your pain. And I know that. Oh, yeah. What I always think of is a gulag. See, you know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh. I'm blessed, man. I'm doing great. You're suffering and they're administering it, but they're not trying to kill you. Oh. We're really trying to help you. We're just gonna make you outrageously sick and feel awful and it might kill you, but maybe it'll help. Yeah, it's very strange. Yeah, I feel blessed with modern medicine, but I also hate it. And you think it's, well, I guess, I think it's more just the pride of it. There's something about it that with doctors or a lot of them that I've experienced, it's like, if they see anything out of their experience range, it's simply, it didn't happen. It can't happen. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But there are also wise doctors out there that I've met doctors before who they understand their gig and they know how limited they are. And I mean, Francis Collins became a Christian and has done a lot of writing on origins and science and those kinds of issues. But reading some of his stuff, how he, yeah, he became a Christian because he saw, he saw people like you in the hospital who, from his secular point of view, these people should be miserable and maybe thinking about doctor assisted suicide, but he saw them and said, something else is going on here. It's like that, it's like a story that I read in one of my sermons, one of my favorite stories about Mabel, who is a woman in a terrible nursing home and her face has been eaten by cancer and the place smells like urine and she's lost her sight and she can't smell and she can barely hear and she can't taste. And a young seminarian goes to visit her and gives her a flower and she says, she basically thanks him and graciously and says, no, give it to somebody else. I can't really see it or smell it. And he starts to converse with her and he learns that she is enormously happy and he's like, why on earth are you happy? Well, I have Jesus. What do you mean you have Jesus? You're sitting here in this terrible nursing home, nobody ever comes to visit you and no, and she says, no, I'm very fortunate. He's like, and so John Ortberg tells it in the book, The Life You've Always Wanted, in a chapter. It actually comes from another pastor, but it's true. You see it, it's not common, but you find it and once you see it, you take off your shoes because you're on holy ground and you stop being an idiot. Or at least you'd sometimes stop being an idiot for human beings. Well, Nick, thank you so much for sharing your story. Thanks, Paul. Thanks for talking to me. We can talk again. Yeah, we will. And I hope my friend who is church is just down there in Alameda, I'm glad you have an appointment with him. And let me pray for you. I never close these things with prayer. When I visit with people as a pastor, I always close with prayer. But would it be okay if I pray with you? Of course, yeah, I'd love that. Okay, let me pray for you. Lord, in the book of Romans, in chapter eight, you tell us that when we don't know the words to use to pray, that the spirit groans. And we hear Lord, in the same chapter that creation groans and it's waiting for your children to be revealed so that creation can be liberated from decay. And Lord, I can't answer questions of why or how or should for Nick, but I pray Lord that you would be with him. And Lord, I do pray for his healing. I do ask Lord that you would heal his body. But more so Lord, I pray for his soul and his spirit that you would be with him. And Lord, I pray for you to be with him. I pray for his soul and his spirit that you would be with him. May he have a tangible sense of your presence in his life. May he understand that you will never leave him nor forsake him. May he come to believe that he can trust in you with whatever comes down the road, whether it's at the infusion center or the doctor's office or whatever the coming times bring to him. And I pray Lord that you would give him opportunities to share his story, to share what you've done in his heart and to know that he's not alone. Lord, we believe that there's a cloud of witnesses. And Lord, in that cloud, there are millions whose names are not remembered in our textbooks or on our monuments, but you know them all. And so I pray Lord that you would give Nick a sense that he is surrounded by the saints and that as CS Lewis noted in Screwtape Letters, that the church is a, down here is a muddled, stumbling mess so often, but from the other side, as we see from the Book of Revelation, is an army of myriad upon myriad who have been washed by your blood. So I pray Lord that you would bless him. And I ask Lord that you would heal him. And Lord, I pray that you would let his story touch others, those who are living on their own, those who feel isolated, those who can't tell their story because no one will believe them. I thank you Lord for his fiance that has been caring for him. And I pray Lord that you would give her strength. So Lord, hear my words. As I pray them in the name of Jesus, amen. Thank you. You're very welcome. Well, we'll talk again. You have the link. And hopefully one of these days, who knows maybe some of my meetup folks will say, we gotta do a meetup over in the Bay area. So, there goes. And I'm sure some will see this video and say, hey, hey, you know, so we'll see what happens. Okay, awesome. Thanks, Nick. All right, take care. Take care.