https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=J6i3EwfhMlQ

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm now starting to treat the the two talks in Vancouver I said I wasn't going to treat them in terms of replaying the video until they were released and Jordan Peterson has posted them My question is did anything really happen in Vancouver? There were a lot of things in these talks that I are nice jumping off points to do a lot of commentary on But at the end of the talk Brett Weinstein more or less says well I think we got a lot done here and Jordan Peterson has made similar noises I don't know that Sam Harris has quite said the same thing because The only thing Sam Harris sees that needs to be done is for religion to go away That's Sam Harris's big deal Jordan Peterson is trying to figure out how Religion has played a part what we can do and to a certain degree Brett Weinstein is in that same project But Sam Harris isn't in the project his mind is made up and His his table set and you very much get that impression through this the way that I've likened these talks to some to some people who've asked me are that it's kind of like two people are to two kids are in a room and There's a set of blocks and Jordan Peterson is setting up the blocks in order to try to build something try to construct something And Sam Harris just keeps knocking them over and saying religion rationality Well-being or or suffering and and I don't think Sam Harris actually does anything throughout the two evenings that they spent talking in Vancouver and I think to a degree if you if you don't want to listen to the whole two hours all you really have to do is listen to the last ten minutes and Everything that they talked about is there Sam Harris does what he does throughout the entire time and Jordan Peterson towards the end here will give a really nice tiny little summary of Everything that he's been doing so let's let's jump in and And we'll just listen to the last few minutes and I'll give a little bit of commentary and I'm debating How to address the whole thing so Let me ask you this I hear from you What might be a kind of confirmation bias where I hear that you know we've got a mixed bag You've got supernatural claims these supernatural claims We all agree have effects on the way people actually behave and you're quite focused on the negative And you tend to discount the positive which might be an artifact of the fact that we're talking about the present and therefore Maybe something that's not well matched to these stories or it might be From the idea that you have the sense that there is actually a bias that these belief structures Do and have always produced more harm than good And also my sense of the positive can be had without those structures See again here, so Weinstein is basically summing up summing up What Sam Harris has said for the entire two evenings? What Sam Harris has said for the entire two evenings is that These beliefs do more harm than good that Is Sam Harris's point and he makes it again and again and again and again and again and again and again He doesn't construct anything bigger So now brett has just set him up and we're gonna hear sam do what he does through the entire both evenings so the if you're talking about the the The contemplative experience, you know, like is it possible to to feed to wake up tomorrow morning? feeling like meister eckhart right feeling like you're just Inseparable from the pure capital b being that is Consciousness right and and there's no separate self there right a self transcending union with Everything you can perceive right? I think that can be had without any kind of religious dogmatism That's just a matter of paying close enough attention to the nature of consciousness So the contemplative so if you want to be a contemplative if you want If if you wake up in the morning say, you know I really want to feel like i'm at one with the universe just go ahead and work really hard at meditating or do some psychedelics And you can have that feature. He is not answering a question about Any ontology he's just saying this is what we can have because ontology is already set Life is the baby is one baby in the bath water. We can save the ethical life is another baby We can save you don't have to presuppose anything on insufficient evidence to argue about what is right and wrong Good and evil in in the 21st century. And so you don't need religion to have These things that religion used to give us you don't need Anymore you don't need religion to offer ethics. You don't need to religion to offer The contemplative mystical experience if this is what you're looking for You don't need religion. In fact religion does more harm than good. This is sam's point He makes it again and again and again Is it fair to call that a hypothesis that not just for some people but for everyone the Level of well-being can be enhanced through Rational interaction with the questions that dictate what we do Is that a hypothesis? Well, that's a hypothesis that the one additional fact that we that Makes that more or less moot is that on certain points? even if we felt that Really believing the fiction were what was it was advantageous to people? Depending on which fiction you're talking about. There's simply just there's too much evidence against it. You can't you can't decide to believe something For which you have no evidence simply because of the good effects It the good experience it will give you or you imagine it will give you So so in other words sam sam just as basically religion is done It's done we can derive the benefits that it offered without it Because it's unbelievable. There's no point in believing it. It's just done I mean, that's that's why pascal's wager never made any sense. You can't say the only way you can believe something to be true Really true not just metaphorically true is to believe that if it weren't true You wouldn't believe it you stand in some relationship to its truth such that that is the reason why you believe it now You can't say you can't be telling yourself You know, I have no evidence for this thing But I know life would be better if I believed it to be true and so therefore I really believe it's true You don't think people do that all the time. I don't think they do. I think they do things much more like we're talking The metaphorical truth we're talking about we act as if Things are true without forming any strong propositional claim I Now when we when I get into this One of the things that I observed over watching this a number of times is that there are two different senses of as if There is there's the sense of kind of the gun loading Illustration that they make a number of times in this I and this is what sam harris is addressing here. I mentally know Or I think I know that the gun is is not loaded But i'm going to act as if it's loaded and in fact this sense of as if is exactly what sam harris has just finished saying It doesn't really work But but so now we're going to separate action. We're going to be playing this role over here But we know it doesn't really do anything and in my experience some people Are very much in religion like that they go to church because their spouse wants them to go to church They go through the motions. They may have given up beliefs There's even some pastors like that who they don't believe this stuff anymore But they go through the motions because they don't want to lose their gemstone and so that's that's one sense of as if I don't think that is jordan peterson's sense of as if When jordan peterson says as if he's meaning pragmatism so when jordan peterson jordan peterson says I Act as if god is real He is making a statement about pragmatism about action he's not making a statement fundamentally about I don't want to use pragmatism again, but about but about just going through the motions because this this somehow is practical Okay, there is that sense in peterson's but but but in the sense that sam harris is using what if and if you listen carefully To the two every time this what is it this what if or metaphorical truth idea comes out through them Again, one of them one of them is sam harris is saying, okay I I already checked in the gun and I saw you check the gun and there's no bullet in the chamber But i'm still going to act as if the gun is loaded because that is best practice in terms of handling firearms And and I won't you know, I won't point a gun that I know See, this is where you get into this question of what do we know and what we don't know and what do we mean by the word? No So so this is this is where this is where harris goes into this and that's fine. That's fine That has its own utility I mean you see that has its own utility. So I know the gun isn't loaded but I act as if it's loaded I have to put one and two on everything that would be probably as if two As if one would be jordan peterson's where he is when he is asked if he believes in god If you go back to what he says about belief, he will say belief is acting out An axiom so when jordan peterson says I act as if god is real He's still keeping a little bit of an open agnosticism and an open ontology but There's quite a bit more robustness to that as if as if one Versus in a sense as if two of the loaded gun or unloaded gun This is basically I mean we all suspend disbelief when we go and watch a movie And that's exactly where brett is going because brett is picking up this this this fictional as if nature that harris is talking about and so brett goes there and we sort of entitle the movie maker to Um to set the ground rules of the space and if it's harry potter then there are magic magical things that can happen And if it's some other story, maybe there aren't so we all have a mechanism whereby we know we can suspend disbelief and It's interesting to me that you Seem not to imagine that people are doing that with respect to Metaphysical beliefs that have implications for what the right actions that they should take are Why wouldn't it be the case that that same sort of mechanism would apply? Well, it does apply but there are people who are clearly doing much more than that. I mean, so i'm not If if that's all people were doing Under the ages of religion. I wouldn't spend much time worrying about religion. I mean that's to some degree That's what people do You know as you say going to caring about things that at bottom we really shouldn't care about so The world cup is on right now and we we you know literally billions of people care Care down to their toes What happens to this little ball as it traverses a lawn, right? And if it goes into the net It really matters and if it fails to it really matters and it always matters if we hit the target sam Now That is not a throwaway line Peterson is a psychologist. He is talking about meaning Now he's going to qualify it in a moment, but this is this is something we have manufactured to care about right? No, it's something that speaks to us. It's quite literally and back again. This is peterson He said this is something that speaks to us unbelievably deeply this when we're playing sports and playing a game We're not just playing sports and this is where I'm already getting worked up. This is going to be longer than I hoped This is where there's a certain sacramentalism implicit in jordan peterson's Schema that he lays out that you might be on the field kicking around this ball But this wing this means way more than See this Demythologized again if you listen to note in a network this lowest common denominator Aspect where Where sam harris just says we're just kicking a ball and peterson saying no, we're not just kicking a ball and psychologically the Why do we tag these teams by nation? Why do we track them that way? How do these communities invest? in these teams see this is peterson's point about All life is religion because this is how human beings are and we don't escape it by looking at a two-dimensional flat Screen by saying these are people running around kicking a ball No sam you've not gotten the point over the first two nights at All and that's why I say in a sense right here at the end Is the whole thing? The game this is a game that people are playing but some people take it in Taking it Further than you that then seems truly rational Is part of the fun that's but but the people who can't turn that off metaphor soccer's a metaphor Yeah, but they're but they're and again My friend over at note in the network He's running through metaphor and he has some if you if you need to fill up a lot of time with some content He's reading a lot of books in there that are pertinent to this and that's why I've been I've been following note in a network quite quite carefully in this because he's been reading william break and and um northrop fry and Nietzsche and he's doing maps of meeting on monday, so i've really been enjoying uh note in a network's site There are people who either you know, there are people, you know The fullback who kicks an own goal and then goes back to his, you know, south american village and gets murdered, right? He's surrounded by people who are taking the game too seriously. Yeah. Okay. I agree Yeah, okay And right there there exactly is in a sense where sam harris is functioning on two dimensions And jordan peterson is functioning in three because to follow sam harris's analogy We would have to say soccer should go away soccer is immoral because some people take it too far And what jordan peterson's saying there's a hierarchy of values that that soccer is something permissible enjoyable and even in fact something that is Something that is Functionally important for all of us because soccer isn't just about running around on a field and kicking a ball and having it go through Go into a go into a rectangle. That is not what soccer is. You cannot You cannot Boil it down to this now sam harris might come along and say well you can get exercise in other ways You can go for a run and you can get exercise in other ways You can get thrills in other ways you can sit and meditate or take drugs You can get thrills in other ways, but because some people take soccer too far It's clearly got these negative side effects and we ought to get rid of it again. This is the whole talk Peterson keeps coming back at harrison saying But sam you you only see in it doesn't say it this way you only see in two dimensions You've got to understand you don't understand what soccer is and when we say soccer is a religion. We're not Merely saying that are supernatural aspects to it, but I dare bet if there are no atheists in foxholes or at least That's a cliche. I get it. So if you're an atheist don't take offense People pray fervently during the world cup all over the world. Why because they are invested in it Well, why now you might look at that say well, that's irrational all right, so Be a rationality elitist if you want to people aren't going to stop and like I said before Jordan peterson is setting up blocks and he's trying to build something sam harris just keeps kicking him down and now he hasn't Come out against soccer But basically what he does through this whole thing is say we should people shouldn't play soccer anymore because some people take it too far and again, it's kind of like the It's kind of like the the person on the playground that says you can't play battle ball or dodge ball or tag anymore because Someone's going to take it too far and it's going to become irrational. It's like sam You don't understand what it means to be a human being you don't understand three dimensions Yeah, there's a hierarchy of values and and if someone messes up on the soccer field They shouldn't be killed for it. Okay, this isn't the hunger games. But why do we know that? there's a hierarchy of values here and peterson gets that but Sam sam just doesn't seem to get it And so my problem with religion is that so much of the time we're meeting those people and we're and we're yes And we're not criticizing those people. We have no place to stand to criticize those people How are you not criticizing them? You've spent four hours criticizing them. That's your entire career Is criticizing them? What more do you want? That's really the question I have for sam harris's project while jordan peterson is trying to set up a schema and then try and figure this out Sam harris is kind of like a naggy just keeps complaining you should y'all should stop this. You should stop this you should stop this Okay Should we put it into law? I think sam harris would say no thankfully But this is where he's treading Okay, and this is why even though he furiously rejects facile comparisons to atheist communism There's a reason people go there just like in a sense there's a reason that religion is abused People because we're so attached to the game Fair enough. Look, why don't we Peterson at this point is tired fair enough, you know, I It's I I almost get the sense from peterson like i've tried and tried and tried He's gonna try again in dumblin and in london and we'll take a look at those things too But in terms of vancouver one and vancouver two He's tried and he's tried and he's tried and he's tried and again peterson keeps setting up the blocks and saying sam Look, look how i'm setting this up sam just says boom No Okay, why don't we do this why don't we each take three minutes to sum up so I think yeah we are there we are At the end of time. So why don't you each take three minutes sum up and then we'll call it good. Yep. Okay Sure, okay sam went last you want to go first here? Okay so There's lots of things about which sam and I agree Now when I start treating the whole thing the the first part of the first one Like the first 20 minutes is good, but pay attention to how Why it's good because peterson is Taking sam and he's not kvetching at every little point. He's just saying let's build this schema together Can I show it to you sam now in this next little bit? Which I think is some of the best little clip of jordan peterson if you can actually it's like maps of meaning if you can Pick apart all the words you can figure out exactly what he's saying and quite frankly, it's brilliant But the devil's in the details, of course No, I i'm very Sympathetic to his claim that we need to ground our ethical systems in something solid and Demonstrable that's the first point he makes at the beginning of it My problem is i'm not sure how to do that When that's the project peterson is trying to work through and trying to show sam The progress he's making but sam doesn't want to see it because he's allergic to religion I don't believe that you can derive a value structure from Your experience of the observable facts your singular There's too many facts You need a structure to interpret them and there isn't very much of you And now when he says there isn't very much of you It means you only live a little amount of time and there's way too many facts. And so there's always an interpretive structure So part of the reason part of the way that that's addressed neurologically is that You have an inbuilt structure It's deep It's partly biological. It's partly An emergent consequence of of your socialization Okay, so the structure what he's talking about structure the structure is built into us it's partly biological and if you And note in a network is reading migilquist with the two hemispheres of the brain and goes through that well So it's it's partly In our structure, but it's also partly in our society in our culture and our socialization It's out there in that space that we've constructed this There's no clean room for human beings a human being in a clean room would not be I gotta be careful with this We'd not be recognized as a human being And you view the world of facts through that structure and it's a structure of value Okay, so this is his main complaint against harris you view the world of facts The monarchical vision is not what you imagine it is because it's already filtered It's filtered by this structure that you are dependent upon to apprehend These things you're calling facts Now that structure value may be derived from the world of facts over the evolutionary time frame So we've developed these value systems over the evolutionary time frame So that's why I said initially little u is insufficient to actually Productively engage this world of This if imagining the world as a space for objects like sam harris does But it's not derived from the world of facts over the time frame that you inhabit and it can't be You don't live long enough to develop this yourself you inherit So much of it, but the thing is you don't see what you inherit because again Our conscious self is this tiny little thing and our brains are quite a bit bigger you've got the rider and the elephant That's jonathan jonathan heights Peterson is just nailing it here So the problem I have in with our discussion so far isn't Really any of sam's fundamental ethical claims because I do believe He doesn't have a problem with sam's ethics partly because he and sam and you and I share an enormous amount of ethics Because of the structure and culture we have inherited If there's a distinction between The hellish life and the heavenly life say the life that everyone would agree was absolutely not worth living and the life we could imagine As good and I and that's and that's sam's framework that we'll go into when we start diving into early vancouver One do believe that we should be moving from one to the other The question everybody agrees better is better than worse Okay is Exactly How is it that we make the decisions that will guide us along that way? And I don't believe we can how do we make those decisions? We don't even know how we make them and and that's why Everyone agrees better is better than worse, but they have very little Understanding of where they've gotten these categories from or how to measure them And make them without that a priori structure In fact, I think the evidence is absolutely overwhelming that we can't and I mean also the scientific evidence so now this this a priori structure and i'm gonna have to talk about that because I'll just be honest with you A priori when he uses a word like that a lot of people because we don't want to look dumb. We just say Oh, yeah, of course Do you know what he means by a priori? Do you understand what the structure is because actually he spent a fair number fair amount of time trying to figure out That's his goal is to figure out what exactly this structure is. That's maps of meaning. That's That's his life work is to say what is this structure? The difficulty we have is that we can't see this structure because you need the structure itself to see The structure you're looking for It'd be like if you're holding a magnifying glass and say I can't see the magnifying glass because you're because you're looking through It well, you can't find it and c.s Lewis makes the same point in his book miracles We sit here and we don't notice the window pane. We're looking through when we're looking down at the shed in the garden but the window pane is there and And I would like to go further into the devil that's in those details Right peterson has been setting up blocks. He's been building something. He's been trying to build something with sam harris He's been trying to build it and say sam. What if we put things together this way? What do we learn and sam will go a little on the site? Ah religion kick it over I I can't accept that that's religion Oh, okay sam and and what exactly is religion? Well, it's supernatural. It's dogmas that you have you don't have sufficient evidence for Who's deciding the sufficiency of the evidence sam you we all decide the sufficiency of the evidence for ourselves? but This is where the monarchical vision game gets betrayed Because sam's monarchical vision of the world is not mine because we've taken subjectivity out of it and it gets back to some thomas nagel's observations and so that's my situation at the moment Four hours he's been trying to show this to sam. Well, let's see if sam has learned anything Because that's a really I mean there's jordan peterson's project Right right Boiled down to this tiny little thing now the poor guy's tired at this point And I think he's frustrated and you heard that when he was responding to harris because Harris just doesn't get it. So And this in a sense of saying sam You you you And this in a sense of saying sam you you Facts objectivity la la la you and I who agree on so much Over four hours can't get on the same page Well part of these Conversations and now we've you and I've had I think four conferences done two podcasts. This is our second live event And thank you for doing this by the way, this is hey Peterson's being very gracious because sam just keeps knocking over his his tower blocks It's an honor to do this and it's It comes with risks for both of us to do this I mean the I as I think you can sense We don't have precisely the same audiences Oh now The subjective is involved when it comes to status and hierarchy We haven't been seeing much status and hierarchy Through the it's you know, aren't we just Objects in space all of you are sort of rooting for one or the other of us to some degree Uh or for the spirit of truth and yes Spirit of truth Well, here's here's two very religious words and sam must be tired too because he just lets them go by And but clearly the the conversation is the point right this is not though this conversation had Tell me in a world of objects in space why the conversation is the point and and this is peterson's point all along Sam we're human beings We live in relationship with one another And and the kinds of relationships we have with one another in all the ways we care about them cannot be measured with a measuring tape I Had the character at many moments of a debate I don't think either of us view it as a debate in in the trivial sense. It's not about point scoring. It's about making sense in a way that's consequential because we're talking about issues of great consequence and you obviously care about these things and It matters Whether we converge on the most important question and none of what he just said in that phrase is material in the least it's all relational and and my question is Where in sam's universe? Does that have the weight it must have? Where does it line up in a hierarchy? Where does it interact with the the entire universe of the soccer game that that harris has been talking about? Well it's like Well again, it's like sam is living in two sides of his head And his the two sides of his head Don't connect Christians in human life And as you know, i'm worried that religion doesn't give us The tools we need to converge what what does give us the tools? is a truly open-ended conversation and Where is that in your universe? What then you simply have to look honestly at the obstacles toward any conversation being open-ended and Religion presents those first and and most readily it's it is a At the id Religious the religious obstacles are first and most ready No He's never been with religious people they fight as much as anyone else It's not the religion that's the obstacle it's how people are so take all the religion away from them and then they'll all Imagine those there's no religion. Go ahead. John lennon. It's the most religious song you ever sang idea that Certain things have been decided for all time And there's and this is some of what i'll have to get into in the longer videos No future evidence or argument that is admissible on those points and I hear that and I think And in fact weinstein calls him on this earlier that Religions have been updating themselves all the time. And in fact my argument is often that Even those in and again, I know lots of religious people I work in the area of religion and So so there's the progressives and the conservatives and part of Conservatism is to conserve and preserve and not change but when I when I tend to look at religious conservatives, I see Myriads of ways that they are changing and not paying attention to because they in a sense They've selected some of these dogmas up here. So I've got some sympathy with you there sam but It's it's just not like you describe it within religion Now that is clearly bad everywhere in science is bad everywhere in in And again, I think surely you've read thomas kuhn science is changing all the time Now elements of science aren't changing but you got rupert sheldrake saying there's Offices that regulate the constants and rupert rightly says why would you need an office to regulate constants? Can't you just write them down once and for all? How we renegotiate our proximity to one another in society in new laws and new ideas are born all the time about how to structure institutions and social relationships because and and religions what happens in religion is that religions are always trying to navigate The interchange between that which must be preserved and that which must change and they're doing so with with intentional very long Conversations and and again, this is my Critique of peterson these conversations are not just held in books and in words They're embodied in practice and and so in a sense if you say well, I live as if there's a god and you Your life doesn't look any different from sam harris's Well at this point you you should employ the tools though a lot of the wonderful tools and observations that jordan peterson is giving us And say okay. What does that mean if I live there as if there's a god, but I live exactly identical To sam harris or matt de la hunty We have functionally the same ethic and now jordan peterson will say well that's because they're functionally religious and I think peterson's right But in a sense you might say to peterson Why was it important that ancient people Didn't just Didn't just think about sacrifice, but they acted it out Well, how do people today act out sacrifice by delaying gratification? That's how they act out sacrifice Okay How does this work? Two things happen. I mean we didn't have an internet and then we did so our old laws and our old expectations of human communication Simply don't work in the presence of this new thing right so we have to figure out we again it's a navigation problem Way more than a navigation problem, which you've been saying the whole time But again, okay, so you have the internet and that's a new thing guess who's not using the internet probably We can ask, you know the amish Okay, so what you tend to have with religion is you have All of these little experiments going on all the time. So the amish they're They're staying away from technology, but you'll notice there's sometimes a phone in the barn and they're they're making all kinds of accommodations And for a while ago, there was a tv show that showed showed the you know This little period of time that amish youth could leave the community and live out in the world and decide whether or not They wanted to live in the community and and that shocks a lot of people because a lot of people say well religions are just People using power to enforce their ideas on other people no Sometimes yes But that's not the point of it Religion is actually a way by which communities often in conversation with lots of other communities are not only Thinking about the way the world is but they're acting it out Now you might Watch these people act it out and you'll have judgments and opinions on them great But this is the kind of conversation that sam has just finished saying we need to have this open-ended conversation And we're having it. So i'm i'm happy to to listen to sam in all of this, but i'm frustrated by sam because Jordan keeps trying to say hey, these are really hard things. So let's set them out and sam you're a smart guy. You're a Celebrity a lot of people listen to your podcast. Let's let's work on this together Let's play with these blocks together and let's line them up and set them on the floor And so jordan does that for a few minutes and sam just pushes him away and says religion That's not rational and and if you've ever played a game with someone who plays games like this It's frustrating and tiring And what i'm perpetually in contest with In contest with uh, even in conversations like this is the sense that The rules need to change Just a little bit for this class of books that literally this side of the bookstore right, there's like any other part of the bookstore will then And that is so naive You don't think Religion isn't under the other half of the bookstore If you go to calvin college their entire curriculum is built around trying to discern culture This is what we do And and to sam harris, this is new and and i would have to argue If this is the education you're giving people Well peterson may be right it's a crappy education. How do we discern? There's no barrier to honest conversation, but you move over here. You got this shelf of books There you you have to hold your tongue Okay, what barriers to honest conversation have they been doing go ahead and watch dillahunty and jordan peterson There's there's so much embedded peterson gets this into his classroom He said if someone would act in a certain way in this room Everything would change why doesn't someone stand up in that crowded theater and yell fire? It's just a word he could yell fur And it would be totally different he could yell four and it would be totally different He could yell goal and it would be totally different. But if he'd yell fire Well, they could be subject to arrest why? What's beneath this system? There's no fire in the theater. All they've done is move some air in an incredibly tiny way That everyone in the theater would know This is not a space for objects. Wait it there are objects there is space But the entire setting up the theater was a forum for action And and in fact the actions are incredibly nuanced and tiny and minute And in fact sam is so deeply embedded in it He can't see it and jordan peterson has just spent four hours and brad weinstein too quite frankly four hours trying to get sam to see it and No Right there. We can't pick and choose We can't say that While we can say that shakespeare wrote some fantastic plays the best plays ever written and some are actually not that good Right. We can't say that about god, right? We have to find you do all the time On some tortured way to make the most of his diabolical utterances you just did You know if someone would say sam harris needs to be Charged with blasphemy now. This is where I said i've been thoroughly secularized I'd say no i'd rather sit down with sam harris and have himself say anything he wants about religion And i'll listen and we'll talk now sam would say well that's because i've been secularized and yeah to a degree You're right, but even secularization I would argue is a product of christianity um note in a network talks about a book that charles murray wrote and asked why when the chinese were so far ahead in technology Why did the scientific revolution happen in europe and I don't think we know that answer But I think it has something to do with this passage Of a lot of which charles taylor writes about in a secular age this passage that we have undergone to the place where So much of what judaism and christianity have Have taught has been embedded in our structures has been socialized into us that we can in fact have this Conversation and that is why we are having this conversations in countries that are Either post-christian or just in this new phase of christianity that we haven't fully Understood now I ought to be careful with that phrase a new phase of christianity. I'm using that I'm using that deliberately and a little bit lightly because I would argue the shape of the western world Is a function of christianity and this is the way in which jordan peterson keeps telling sam harris You act like a christian. Well, what do you mean? Because You know this way that we can't act in other places of the world. We can act in them here why You Right That's the thing we have to outgrow and so what i'm continually in tension with you is the degree to which Your style of talking about religion and narrative the power of narrative and and the meaning derived from it Alives that point and seems to let people off the hook on that very point And that's the that's where we need to hold the line in my view. We need to we need to Hold the line What is that sam? You know earlier in the thing they're going to do a lot of talking about stories Sam keeps telling stories and this is peterson keeps coming to him and saying you keep telling stories because you can't talk about This stuff without using metaphor Hold the line. Well, what does that mean? Is that a military reference when you when you had all of your soldiers you need to hold the line? Is it a football reference or the football reference come from the military reference? I mean This is the point sam. It's all baked in And you can't seem to see it peterson keeps trying to set up the blocks and saying Okay, let's let's see what we can learn together. Let's work on this together and let's let's take your critique of religion and let's test it And let's see what i've learned and let's test it and sam just keeps no religion That That It has to be clear to us at this moment in history that no one has to and this is my biggest frustration with the with the the secular agenda of morality is that they Where do you get the ought why must I I don't know. I I don't understand it. Maybe i'm the daft one Now I must because things go better with me and I get rewarded in some ways. Well, that certainly is true But where does the ought come from? as the right to their religious Sectarianism really I mean it up to the point religious moment in history that no one has the right to their religious sectarianism At this point in history listen to what he just said at this point in history No one has the right to their religious sectarianism And you want to keep saying What was done to the orthodox church in russia What was done to the christian churches in china and in cambodia was Unrelated to the atheism well No one has the right to their sectarianism that's what you just said And now again, you're not acting it out. You're not acting as if no one has the right to your sectarianism But you're using the words And i'd rather have you use the words then Do the other things when people have acted as if no one has the right to their religious sectarianism So what are you going to do say i'm going to take it out of the bill of rights? Dealing I mean it up to the point clearly that there's a there's a soccer There's a world cup version of it that is benign But once it gets taken I'm just i'm just dumbfounded by him in this so you So so what part of the world cup can we keep? Oh the buildings and the paintings and and peterson rightfully jumped on jumps on him at a point and harris says It's just the dogmas that we should get rid of the paintings and the and those things we can keep it And peterson pounces because he says no you you don't understand and again If you listen to william blake, um note in the network. He's reading a bunch of stuff there This is This is this is what's i've got to be done it for This is what's going on with this and and peterson says no you you can't pull this apart So so let's have the world cup but If anybody gets too worked up about it We're going to cancel it. Okay, that's why you can't have nice things and past that point we We have to figure out how to pull the brakes and That becomes a real problem if you are if you are going to dignify The foundational claims of these faiths claims like revelation and paradise and blasphemy and apostasy And these are the things that you you come up against and I'm gonna have to talk more about this and i'm running out of time I think conversation conversations like this are incredibly important because We we need to convince the better part of humanity that is possible to live the best life possible without recourse to divisive nonsense Okay. Well, how do you do that? You do that in community and I could bring in um Melanie bruster's video that I treated a while ago when she was giving a lecture about why why religion outperforms atheism and she's just pleading with atheists to Create sunday assemblies and create all this atheist stuff that will replace all the religious stuff that religious people Just seem to generate on their own naturally So sam there's your argument be a witness for your rationality And may your light shine but here what am I doing? I'm appropriating religious language to do it and Where we draw the line between divisive nonsense and reasoned and necessary discourse is what we're we're dickering over and I think There is just exactly where Sam understands that Just exactly where sam understands these two talks right there And that's not what jordan peterson has been doing jordan peterson has been Laying out a map of meaning to try to figure this out And you're not a very productive conversation partner. I think it's important that we we continue To I don't know why you clap for that so Um in closing, let me say first of all, i'm Tremendously honored that you asked me to moderate these today I'm very impressed with bret weinstein. He's a smart guy um I think he did a terrific. I think he made a terrific contribution to those two talks. Yeah, it was fantastic. Thank you It was um It was a truly remarkable experience as for what was accomplished I think it was a tremendous amount I saw And that's where I disagree. I I don't I Both of you move. I saw both of you exhibit tremendous generosity of spirit towards the other That they did they acted they acted well and I think um, this has Exceeded my expectations of what might have been possible in these discussions by quite a bit And that also I will say Has a lot to do with the fact that for reasons. I think none of us can explain a huge amount of People a huge population seems to care about these issues Why do we care about this I care about this and then I get the question why you know, i'm If I can find the time i'll spend a lot more time going through these and talking about them I've spent a lot of time. It's important why but it's important in the way, I think that the same reason peterson is important because he's He's he's working on stuff. He's trying to figure it out and as a christian I don't Claim here's what's nice about faith. I don't claim to have it all figured out One aspect of faith is what you do when you don't When you can't figure it all out before you step on an airplane Have you learned how airplanes work? Do you understand jet mechanics? Have you verified? I mean if you addressed if you walked on an airplane in the same way that weinstein and harris talked about Dealing acting as if your gun wasn't loaded you would never do anything in the world Faith is embedded in all this stuff and we have reasons now. Are they good reasons? Are they sufficient reasons? It in fact, we've constructed institutions and entire worlds around us But mostly what we do is look at each other and if you want to see people get nervous on an airplane Find one really nervous person and I was on a flight once that had to turn around and go back because the cabin started filling with with um With smoke. Yeah, people get nervous fast It was just a little smoke. It was just pulling in some exhaust from from the outside Yeah, but it was we didn't know it was a problem and uh, yeah, it was quite a scene on that airplane. So um again what you saw right in this little thing is jordan peterson just That nails maps of meaning right there just in a tiny little package says here it is He spent the whole four hours Trying to lay that out for sam harris say sam. Would you play with me? Let's play this game together and I don't think sam made much of a contribution. So So There's an initial take There's a lot of interesting stuff that gets taken on as it goes through. But again, the general pattern of it is Uh jordan peterson keeps trying to build something and sam keeps trying to tear it down. That's how it went