https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=HVaibd8KzCM

 as a kid growing up, my parents split when I was three. I have an older sister who's nine years older than me, half sister. My mother was married before, had my sister, married my father, had me, and then there was another split. And so I remember early on in my childhood, bouncing around between the two, AA and NA. So they had struggled with that throughout my childhood. And so I saw a lot, experienced a lot of situations that, and I feel very fortunate that I feel very fortunate that, I don't think I ever was, I ever experienced like a truly physically traumatic situation. There were a lot of close calls. My father got a DUI when I was in the car. My mother, not, fourth grade, she wasn't home at midnight when I'm trying to get to bed, things like that, going to neighbors houses and asking to stay over, like, and I'm eight years old. So I was a very, I became very independent, very independent, independent thinker, really struggled with authority as a kid. As would be reasonable, given the functionality of the authorities in your life, your primary authorities. Yeah. Yeah. So I struggled with behaving in school when I was young, but my grades were never a problem. So I was always, they thought I was too bored and they wanted to jump grades and all this other stuff. And I just, ADHD became a thing at that time and just have ADHD and maybe, but again, there's other things going on that no one really knew about. And I didn't really share it either. Well, you're a kid. You're gonna say, oh, the chaos in my behavior is due to the chaotic situation that I'm being raised in right now. Yeah. Yeah. The kid's gonna say that. Yeah. So a situation happened in when I was in 10th, when I was 10, where my mother kind of said, hey, I don't want to raise you anymore. I want you to go with your dad. And so I, my, and now we bring in the hero of my entire story, which is my grandfather. My grandfather was a truck driver, drove to Jersey and New York city every day, drove back to Harrisburg. He, at this point was old, obviously older. So he taught at a Bo-Tech school, CDL. He was a CDL trainer. So pops pulls up in a school bus and he was doing the train, train the guys and picks me up. And I hang out with him for the day and then I go with my dad. And it was at that point where my aunt and uncle said, hey, to my dad, if you don't get it together, we're gonna take custody of Sean. And so I was 12 and under, was kind of just in this very chaotic space with family, being told by family that my parents had these issues. Hey, let us know if you see anything, me not telling them and hiding it because I just wanted normalcy. So I was very much an adult by early, by 10, 12 years old in terms of decision-making and like maturity. I mean, I was not really involved in the stuff my friends were involved in, but I was an athlete. I was high school football, high school basketball, played football in college. Like I was in the crowd, right? And what was very different than the folks that I grew up with in that respect, because when they were wanting to go drink, I was like, oh, you guys have no idea. You wanna do that? I know where that goes. I know. I know. It's not an attractive thing. No, and I just didn't, as from a young age, the drinking, the drugs, even the, I didn't vibe with it. I thought I don't wanna be anything like my parents. Maybe I have this, everyone's addictive qualities and all this stuff that we know is partially, but it's a mixed bag. Kids worry because of course they navigate according to what they see in their parents. So they're just intuitive, not consciously intuitive, assuming when I'm my parents' age, that will be me. Yeah. Yeah. But of course you're a kid, you can't say it. I mean, you don't know it, but gosh, it is so hard. Yeah, it was a tough childhood. But, and to kind of rewind a little further, we were like, well, what are your parents in church? It's like, well, so my grandfather, my grandma on my mom's side, okay, her family was Catholic, Italian Catholic from Wilkes-Barre, Scranton, right? Grandfather was in World War II. He was in the FAA. He was an inspector for planes, Air Force planes. So he moved to Harrisburg, right? And so they were Catholic, and my dad was raised with my grandfather on my dad's side, kind of going to church every once in a while, not really engaged. And so it really all changed my grandfather, and he has since passed two years ago, but he died at 86. He was the head elder of his church for years and years when there wasn't a pastor, right? He was the pastor. And this is actually a pretty big church. So Harrisburg's first seventh day I've been to church. So one of the bigger churches in the conference in the state because it's in the Capitol. So pretty large church, a lot of kids at the time. So a good spectrum of folks. And he converted to like seventh day I've been to church when he was like 50. But before that, he was a rough and tumble guy. He was a truck driver. Something happened where he really made a big mistake and realized that he could have been basically put into prison for the mistake. And he was not charged by that person and realized like, what am I doing with my life? Basically, I mean, that's his story. And he, for like five years, just while he was driving, listened to audio tapes, went to different churches. And that was the church that he gravitated towards. He gravitated towards the idea of the Saturday Sabbath. He was always, he was a marathoner. So he was very health conscious. So the vegetarian, the alcohol, like all of that. And he knew his son was an alcoholic. So he was like, these things just kind of resonated with him. So that was the place where he found home. And so me and my cousins would go to church with him without our parents. So was I raised in a Christian home? Yes and no. Yes and no. And so while my parents were struggling with all this, I was hanging out with my grandpa going to church, hanging out with people in church. My grandfather would go to community for people who couldn't make it, would visit people in the hospitals. I mean, like everything I'm doing now is because I've seen servant leadership work. Yep, yep. And I'm someone who was not, you know, a look down your nose Christian, a legalist, you know, man cared for people. And when he died at 86, had a church full standing room only funeral with his, with me as his oldest grandson and his youth group kids that are now pastors leading the service, you know. Those eulogy virtues, those eulogy virtues and a eulogy story. Yep. And I told that story actually at the funeral about who he was to me and what he did for me and how who I am is most in part of, you know, I mean, really five miles apart. I mean, I grew up, I hung out with him all the time, even as a, you know, in high school, going over to his house on weeknights, hanging out, eating food. You know, we went to lunch every Sunday, you know, every Sunday, went to the sub shop down the street, you know, and ate subs and fries and hung out and watched football the rest of the day or NASCAR or something, you know. I had a really amazing relationship with him. And then my dad was able to clean himself up and I lived with my dad for all the rest of my upbringing and, you know, great supportive aunts and uncles and cousins and so life became more normal after that time. But when you talk about, when this concept of domicile comes up, I mean, there's a reason I'm working with homeless people. Yeah. You know, I know how close it could have been. The grace of God, what else can explain? I wasn't chosen to be born to my grandfather's family. It was by the grace of God that I did not become, because I was a trajectory. I was like, I'm like authority. I was a rebel. I thought I was smarter than everyone. I told teachers, I was very anti-authority. I believed I knew best. And if I didn't get that support for my grandfather, aunts, uncles, I have no idea what path I would have been on.