https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OQZZQDHM5yo

 with this. Everyone always says I'm busy, but Eugene Peterson, who was a Christian writer, once said that the adjective busy in front of pastor should have the same response as adulterous in front of husband. So I have a hard time saying I'm busy. So I'm not busy. How do you mean? I mean, in the sense that this is a great sin to be busy or? I think it's more like hurry versus busy. It's a great sin to have the internal experience of hurry. Let's say that because it's sort of, oh, you got rid of it. The Vatican's gone. Oh, yeah. Okay. Well, now you see my boring wall. But anyway, I wanted to honor my daughter of a friend of mine. She made this for me. And this is by my niece, but she can hardly see it. Yeah, that's lovely. It is. I don't have kids myself, and I used not to like kids at all, but I see why that was a mistake. They are very kids. Children are a gift from God. They really are. Yes. Well, yes, yes, I see that now. But anyway, so it's so nice of you to do these things, Paul. I really enjoy this opportunity to talk to you. Well, I'm really glad that you've taken the time to talk to me and to put yourself out there. And like is always the case, I record this and then I will share it with you. And if you decide that this is something that you wouldn't mind me sharing with the world, then maybe I'll share it on my channel because I think people are the best thing about this world. And so why not share more of them? Yeah, it's very special what you do. I've seen a lot of those conversations and them. Is there any? Oh, is there a mission behind the idea of the Randall's conversations? Is there something you want to aim that you have in mind? Yeah. So I've told the story before. So my father was also a pastor and pastored a small, insignificant church in Patterson, New Jersey, just like I pastor a small and significant church in Sacramento, California. And you know, I grew up and there were so many wonderful people around me who I knew the world would never know. And then I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and I knew pastors and lots of people in the Dominican Republic who were amazing, wonderful people. And I knew that the world would never know them because no one will write a biography. They might get a mention in something or another. And part of me says, well, on one hand, I'm a Christian and I say, well, I don't believe this is a real crime against the universe because God knows. And in the life, in the age to come, I think the people, the saints of this life who go unseen will be celebrated. And that's a good thing. But I want to get a jump on the age to come by at least exposing more of the small, hidden saints to the world to let the world know. Well, you've got the wrong one. I mean. Well, and that's part of why I- The sinners, the sinners of the world. Yeah, saints, we are called to be saints, but you know, I have been Orthodox for a year now, so I'm not there yet. That's right. Well, we, almost all the saints are sinners, but not all the sinners are saints. No, but it's also, I mean, even seeing yourself as a sinner in a proper way is a challenge, I think, because you can see, okay, so in Dutch, the word for sin is zonder, zonder, and it has such a heavy feeling to it, you know, nobody likes it. Probably it's the same in English, maybe about, I don't know. I don't think it's as heavy in English. And what you say really rings true to me because in the Dutch reform tradition, sin is a heavy word. And I don't think it's quite so heavy in English out there beyond the Dutch reform. So I think you probably write that it's something to do with language. Yes, by the way, just a small plug, this book actually is very nice, How to be a Sinner. It's by a Russian Orthodox theologian. It's, you can look it up, it's by Peter Botinieff. It helps me actually to get the right feeling because I think I have, for some reason, so I was not brought up in any strict reform tradition. I was very light Christianity, but for some reason, that heavy sense of sin has stuck with me. So I'm still learning. It's a work in progress. I don't think it's a bad thing to have a heavy sense of sin. It's just that we should, that heavy sense of sin should give us a sense of Christ's glory in addressing our sin. Because light things can be addressed by light things, but something as heavy of sin needs something as heavy as the Son of God going to the cross and rising from a tomb. So it's not a bad thing, but you're right. It's, you're right. Yeah, I see what you mean. Let's get into your life a little bit if we can, if you're open to that. Of course, yeah. I mean, I was preparing for that. So I'm René. I didn't even say that, but I am, and I'm 40 years old. I have studied mathematics for some reason that feels like part of my identity. So I mentioned that I took a PhD in mathematics. And so it's really a part of my identity. And I also have a facial paralysis called Mobius syndrome. So O-E, I think the German pronunciation Mobius. I think English people normally say Mobius, Mobius. I don't know. Mobius sounds right. Mobius. Yes. Is that the worst part of the, of the syndrome is just, is facial paralysis. I know it's significant, but there's no other significant long-term health implications. No, I mean, not in my case. In most cases, there isn't. So some cases people have deformed extremities, even other. Yeah. I think I don't have a light case. I don't have a particularly heavy case. I'm in the middle. It's quite rare, rare actually. How long have you had it? This is my, before my birth. I mean, it's congenital. Yeah. It's congenital. Oh, yeah. It's something that happens in the second month of a mother's pregnancy. Wow. Yeah. I've never heard of it before. No, it's quite rare. I think one in 100,000. I don't even know something like that. Something like that. Yeah. Now, maybe it's more one in somewhere, but yeah, rare, rare enough. Yeah. It's sort of, it has shaped my life. I think, although it's hard to say exactly how, because I mean, we're all still individuals. So for example, I mean, one thing I'm struggling with now is, well, we talked about children and some children, they are very nice. Other children, they stare more and some children really stare a lot. And I always got very upset with that. And sometimes even, you know, told them off or asked their parents to tell their children. And very often people will tell me that, you know, they're just kids. They don't mean anything, but that's not how I felt. And I was even more annoyed when they told me that. But yeah, I am learning this, that they are children. They are just children and they generally don't mean anything, but it's something I, yeah. So that's also part of my personality. I figure that not everybody will take it as heavy as I do. Yeah. So it's something that you have to learn to navigate. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, especially as a kid, I mean, you now as an adult, children are different to you than when you were a kid, when they were your peers. So, you know, wholly different thing. That's certainly true. I think, yeah, maybe it has to do with childhood memories, because indeed children are not so angelic to each other, of course. No, they're not. They're still human beings. Yeah. Yeah. But still then it's, a couple of days ago, I read a post by a friend of mine on some forum and he said, he mentioned what he had gone through in terms of bullying and all that. And I thought, well, he's got it worse than I did. And he's a good looking guy, you know? So, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's right. I mean, it's really, there's nothing special about it. That's the mistake I still make. I think. So it's, sorry, go on. No. So, did you grow up in a religious home or not a religious home? Yes. Christian, but very light. And I think, you know, there's this liberal strength of Christianity. There's some needles have formed. I say it in Dutch because I- The PKN? Yes. But that's very broad nowadays, I think. It has all kinds of- Yeah. Was it the HKN or the GKN? Yeah. Oh, I think H- Yeah, the state church. I can't say it in Dutch because I have an English throat as my Dutch neighbor used to say. Yeah, yeah. No, it's the same religion as our queen, a former queen and current king. They're just, you know, very middle of the road. And I don't know, I drifted away from it, mainly because I thought I was kind of affected by this idea that it is a silly story and we don't believe, you know, a well-educated citizen doesn't believe that stuff anymore. And I think at some point I started believing even weirder stuff. So, because, well, when you get to a certain- When I got to a certain age, I started wondering about life after death. And, you know, it has always- I was always agnostic. I was never- But then I decided I had to know the answers. It's not enough to be agnostic. You need to know something because you don't- The funny thing is a colleague of mine once said that it is impossible to know what's after death. So, better not think about it too much. But that's not true agnosticism. Agnosticism stops at, I don't know, and maybe it is knowable. So, well, if it's knowable, or it might be knowable, then go find out. Sorry. No, that's perfect. And you're actually giving me sermon material, so keep talking. Because I'm preaching on 1 Thessalonians 4 and 5 this week, where Paul wants to talk about life after death and the resurrection and to the pagan world. And so what you just articulated is very much very commonly human. Yes. And then I started- Do you know Gurdjieff, for example? Gurdjieff, the fourth way. Well, that's an esoteric teacher. And I got into his ideas at some point. And that's what I meant by saying I came to believe weird stuff. Because at some point, I thought, well, I have to know the answers. And this was a very intelligent person. I mean, very smart. What was his name? Gurdjieff. G-U-R-D-G. Well, I can chat it. Maybe put it in the chat. Yeah, I can. But he was an esoteric teacher of the early 20th century. Well, he was born in the 19th. And I think I spelled this right. Yeah. Anyway, so for some reason, that captivated me. And I was still agnostic, but I thought, well, he might be onto something. It was so compelling. And he- Well, he didn't write that- most of the stuff I read was written by his students. And well, he had- his ideas were kind of synthesis of all kinds of esoteric traditions. And he really- it was really authoritative in the sense that he really got the idea- sorry. He gave you the idea that he had done all the work himself. So he had gone out and went to monasteries and to ashrams and I don't know what, and to deserts. And he had collected all the wisdom he could find all over the world and then put it together in a coherent system. And I really believed it because there was so much to it that I recognized from other systems like the idea of the world as consisting of concentric spheres. And so the neoplatonic influences Buddhism, Hinduism. And so I contacted a Dutch group that was in actually- that performs that- because it's not just ideas, it's a way of So there's a Dutch group that lives according to his ideas. And yeah, and then I don't know, it was also very bleak in a way because- so Gurdjieff's ideas are about waking up. We are in sleep. It's extremely difficult to wake up. So- and actually his best students, he was very pessimistic about those- their actual chance of succeeding. So it was really very bleak in effect. So yeah, I stopped doing that. But then I- after a long time, I went back to the Bible and thought, well, if I can believe all that very crazy stuff, why can I not believe just this guy, Jesus Christ, who just is so sane compared to- so that's how I got back. And yeah, I don't know, it has been- I'm so happy with it. I found the church and it's still a struggle. Well, I told you about sin and all that. It's still- yeah, but I think it's good. So that's how I found you actually, because you were doing these Jordan Peterson talks, discussions and I thought it was- oh yeah, Jordan Peterson was another guy who was really- of course, everybody's influenced by him. So- and- but he told me, you know, get your life in order, get your stuff sorted out, you're pathetic loser, whatever. But then I thought, okay, I do feel I need to do that, but why? He didn't provide the ultimate reason, you know, because I- what if I don't? And then that's what I found in Christianity. It's really a black and white choice. You either choose the good or you choose- well, you don't choose the good. You choose to remain in your sin. I don't know. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I think you've said this all very well. I don't interrupt people when they're doing well, or if I at least hold myself back, I get too nosy and curious. So- No, I didn't say- that's why, yeah, but I'm still in the middle of it all, you know? I'm really in the middle of it all. So you said you've been going to the Orthodox Church for about a year? Yeah, a little less than a year, and I just got some received last month. So I'm only- because I was hesitant for a long time, because I wasn't sure if it's the right church, can I do it? You know, can I do this? Yeah. Yeah, and you know, when I finally got received, it was very nice, because people were so happy. Tell me about your church. Is it a big church? Is it a little church? Does they have a building? Is it a rented space? It's a formal warehouse. So it's very nice. They did it. They really renovated it. So it's really, it looks like a really authentic Russian Orthodox Church. But it has four stories, and the priest, he lives on the second story. So it's very nice. It's just, it's so cozy, because we all go after services. We go upstairs, we have coffee, and we have the catechesis. How do you say? Yeah, that's right. We also have it there, and it's a small community, and we have three services a week. So I mean, a lot of opportunity to really get into the life. Oh, wonderful. That's really wonderful. Yes, I realize that I've really been very lucky. Yeah, because part of it is even if you decide, okay, I want to, I want to investigate the Bible, and I'm curious about Christianity, I want to investigate that. Finding a good church community is not always easy. And so people will often ask me, and the first thing I'll say, well, is it, are you asking God to send you to one? Are you praying? Because that's really where to start. You say, okay, you need this. Well, say, okay, Lord, I want to follow you. I need some people to travel with. Show them to me. And sometimes you got to go through a few. But that's, it sounds like a wonderful situation. Yes, yeah, I didn't, I don't even think I did. I did it. I prayed more after I found the church. And so I wasn't sure if it was the right one. I really struggled with that. But yeah, but I do see it's, it's sorry, kind of lost the train of thought. No, that's fine. That's fine. So you found my channel because I was making commentary on Jordan Peterson and, and you stuck around and I'm sure you've watched Peugeot as well. Of course. Yeah, of course. Yeah, it's, he's, he's, he's a prophet, I think you call him, right? So it's, yeah, yeah, I treat him as such, because it's difficult to know what to do with him sometimes. It's, it's, I need, I think I'm a very, I need very, very simple. I want the things to be as simple as possible, you know, because I make them too complicated myself. So I think I could, Jonathan Peugeot has these complicated theories and so on. And also, it's not so clear, because he's a prophet. I mean, he doesn't, he's not somebody who cites all his sources and all that. So you really, you know, what do you do with that? I mean, it's, it's very nice. But that stuff about Ethiopia and I think, where does he get it? You know, where does he get it? I want the sources. If I can't get sources, I, it's very intriguing. It is. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It is, it is very intriguing. So what's on your mind today? What would you like to talk about? Yeah, well, that was a good, that is, I really, really want to congratulate you on those couple of videos you made last week or two weeks, well, you made them earlier, about the role of men in today's young men in today's culture. I really think that's, yeah, well, so you got responses in the comment section, like, welcome to the men's sphere. How do you, how do you, what do you think about that? Or is it, is this something you're comfortable with even? I don't think about it much at all. I, you know, anybody who watches my channel long enough knows that my channel is about as ADHD as I am. And I'm on to things for two or three videos, and I'm on to another thing when I'm on to another thing. But it is, it is, you know, so some of these, some of these man issues, I mean, some of them were brought home to me when I started doing the local meetup and started talking to young guys in their, in their twenties and thirties. And then when my sons came into their twenties and thirties, I could see it more clearly. So I mean, figuring out, I mean, I was never, I was never I was never good with women. Let's call it that way. I was scared to death of them. I mean, that's normal. I mean, yeah, I know. I mean, yeah. So I, you know, and I eventually, you know, was able to find a woman who was willing to marry me and settle down and have children. And that's, and that's a wonderful thing. But it's, it's a, it's not an easy thing, figuring out. And then once you're married, then you have to figure out marriage. And the issues about men and women don't end once you're married, because those, those, those dominant paradigms or archetypes out there in the culture are still continuing to mold and shape the man and the woman in the marriage. And so they've got to figure that out. Yesterday, I had a, you know, meeting with a group of my co pastors in the Christian Reformed Church in this region. And you know, the issues of, you know, women's roles in the church, what is permissible, what is good, what is not good, these issues don't go away. And these issues are tied to far deeper issues. And so I, you know, I want to use, I like using my channel to think out loud, and to get responses from back to me from thinking out loud. That's really helpful for me, because we all see the world through these, these filters and these narrow frames. And I also want to model, I mean, we asked earlier, why do these Randall's conversations, I also want to model the courage to think out loud. Because that's now I can afford it in some ways. I remember when I first started this, one of my sons was like, you know, he was, he said, you know, should I, he was doing playing around with blogs and some of that stuff. And so should I start a YouTube channel? I said, no, you're only in your 20s. I'm in my 50s. My career is mostly done. I have reputational standing and ballast. And I probably can't do YouTube for 50 years, because I'm already in my 50s. So I have less to lose. I see. Yes. Well, that's there is something at stake, definitely. And I felt that too, for like eight years now, I think that's the whole what's the culture wars say that the I mean, of course, it goes back longer. But that's when I first got into them. Yeah. That's the thing is, you're right. I think that this is something we have to figure out we have because we can just we were all part of it. So I'm part of it. So I was talking to a friend of mine about this just before we did this call that this was on my mind. And but it does come back to you, you you have to grapple with, how to say difficult questions yourself, how do I so, for example, Christ says, which I one of the things that really has always hooked me, when you look at a woman to desire her, you have already committed adultery. And in your heart. Yeah. The difference between in your heart and in your bed is a significant difference. No, no, it is. It is. But it's not withstanding. No, no, no, certainly. I mean, I can imagine. But the thing is that that's what feminists will say about being objectified, you know, and I don't like it. I mean, I have never really liked feminism. But in the sense, you have to give them their cue, you have to. It's not simple like they're wrong and I'm right. No, they have a point, even though I still don't like them. So no, no, but I mean, it's complicated. And for me, I think the solution has been well, to to look for the truth. So what's So look inside myself, what I have to fix about myself, but also then it still interests me what's wrong with the culture, because, you know, the problem, I don't think is all within me. I think we're all talking about it. So we know that it's not just us. But yeah, so the position of young men and men in general interests me. It also because it's an invisible problem, I think also. You hear all this stuff about men who are just basement dwellers and not getting direct together. And I think the Jordan Peterson solution is a very specific kind of solution that works only for some people, because it's not so for me, it's not so easy, you know, to just take on responsibility and your life will get meaning. I don't think it works that way, because not every kind of responsibility is equally meaningful. I mean, I have a job, it doesn't really feel like very meaningful, very meaningful work for me. So I could just tell myself, oh, just buckle up and, you know, bear all the loads you can. And suddenly, then it will magically, there will be meaning, but I don't think it works that way. And I think there might be very many men who are drowning or actually not being heard, not being seen. And well, I don't know, I don't know what to do about it either. But that I boy, what you just said there really gets at where I've been kind of. So lately, I've been watching this guy out of Macau, Hans Georg Mueller. And when you say men who are drowning, not being heard, not being seen, part of what Christianity offered our culture was where we started this conversation in terms of why do YouTube channel, why do randos conversations, because deep in our culture now is this, this need to be seen. And I think part of what a theistic culture offered was the knowledge broadly put out into the world that even if the even if what has now become sort of this media eye of Sauron, which sees, you know, hobbits and orcs and wizards, even if we are not seen by the big media eye of mass media, or even getting status on the social media platforms, you are seen by God and you are finally, you finally live before an audience of one. And that one is the most important one of any. And, you know, this came home to me when this this one woman started coming to my adult Sunday school class a number of years ago, she was a friend of a longtime member here, who she started coming to Sunday school. And she is an African American woman in Sacramento in her 70s, who such a lovely woman, her son had, had some medical problems, and the medical problems destroyed his kidneys. And so he needed a kidney. And so she donated one of her kidneys to her son. And I know her and her sons, and they're wonderful men. And I just cherish this this woman. And she would always in our adult Sunday school class tell me these stories of her mother and her mother grew up in Jim Crow South. She's an African American woman had no status. And she would always tell these stories of her mother. And one of her mother's favorite phrase was, God knows something bad would happen in the community. And she'd look at her daughter and she'd say, God knows. And, and this, this knowing, I know, sometimes to some people feels threatening. But it's also every saint finally performs before his or her beloved, which is the one who knows all and sees all. And that when it disappears from our culture, because of secularity is a tremendous loss. And it makes people feel insignificant because they no longer have one who knows and sees and loves and can glorify. So I think it's a vital point. That's very beautiful. I think that's exactly how I found the faith. Well, not exactly. But that is very much because that's exactly what I said. There must be many men drowning and not unheard and seen. Well, I how do I know that? Well, I felt like that, you know, and it's not like, oh, I feel unseen and I want to be seen and let's believe in God. That's not what I did. It's quite the opposite. I, when I first read Christ's words and believed him, I was absolutely terrified. You know, like Matthew 25 terrified. Yeah. So it's not like I was looking for consolation, but it is the answer to that problem has been for me because I felt marginalized. And even though rationally, I thought I should not feel that way because, you know, my life was by any objective standards, it was not that bad. You know, there's many people that have it way worse, but still I was feeling disconnected and lonely and self-pity. So this idea that God sees you, then that's what life has to be for. And it makes sense because if it's not for that, then it's for, if it's not for that, it's all for things in this life on this earth. And there's going to be a moment that you, there's going to be a moment that all your dreams have either been fulfilled or not, but it doesn't matter anyway, because you're dying or whatever. And then what? So it's, yeah, no, I don't know. It's, and you know, it's, I've always somehow known it, that there must be somebody who sees all. I can't even explain that why, because I was brought up as a Christian. So I think it does never really left me. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's true. I love the way you said that. And the realization, which I see again in the secular world, there's going to be a moment when either you achieve it or you fail it. And then so what, you know, if you're great at achievement, nobody sees if a tree falls in the woods and nobody sees or hears. Yes. Yeah, that's true. Yeah. But what you said about, it can feel intrusive. And I think that's what I felt as a kid. I didn't feel so much consolation. I felt like all these impossible standards, you know, like I didn't want God also. No, and that's very common. Because, well, there's that's, that's, I mean, you're, we are talking, we are, we are addressing themes that have been endemic throughout the history of Christianity and in many ways, many conversations about, about God in the world. You know, it was, it was Thomas Nagel, an American philosopher who was not a Christian, who I, you know, it's in his book. I think it's in his, I forget which book it's in. I've read the quote a number of times in my videos a number of years ago, but you know, he finally came to the realization of exactly what you just articulated that I don't want there to be a God. I want, you know, I want to live my life and I want the world to conform to my desires. I mean, this is, this is in many ways what's at the heart of the rebellion in Genesis three in the Garden of Eden, that, hey, wait a minute, I would really like to steer the world the way I think it should be steered. And, and what's amazing about Genesis three that few people notice is God sort of, sort of takes a step back and says, okay, if that's what you'd like, have it your way. Okay. Have it your way. Let's watch and see what happens. Yeah. We've been watching and seeing since then. Oh my, yeah. Well, it's still daunting. I think in Job, there's also this Job says something like that, right? It's, well, it's hard. I've been ready. I've been reading Job and it's hard to know what to make of all that because it's all these different characters speaking and you don't know how am I supposed to understand it. When Job's friends are talking, are they wrong? Am I to understand that they have a wrong picture of God or whatever? I was like, one of their friends, one of his friends says, what does he say? Even so God sees, even in his angels, God sees their imperfections. And I thought, well, should I, should I take that seriously? I don't know. Those are the kinds of the thoughts I have, as a starting beginning Orthodox person. Because, well, the angels in Orthodoxy are more prominent, I think, I don't know, than in Protestantism. Oh, definitely. Definitely. Because Protestantism, there's a lot about sort of, at least European Protestantism is a lot about getting rid of the middle realm where the angels are. And Orthodoxy is much more historical, so they'll be much more active and present. Oh, that's difficult because then sometimes I do my prayers and I still think that that's the difficult part because I pray and I think, hmm, what if the Protestants are right after all, you know, and I'm praying to Mary and I shouldn't be or praying to my guardian angel and he doesn't exist. I don't know. That's a bad thought to have during a prayer. Maybe I shouldn't pray that prayer then. I'd like there to be a guardian angel, so maybe that's kind of... Protestantism doesn't deny Mary or the possibility or existence of guardian angels. Really? That's good news for me. Yeah, the Protestant reformers were just a little concerned that too much attention to Mary and guardian angels might take some of the focus off the center who is Christ. So Protestantism had some anxieties it was working through in terms of the Catholicism that it met in the 16th century. So that's important to remember as Protestants and Catholics and Orthodox begin to bury the hatchet and appreciate each other a little bit more. I hope that happens. But well, for me, the most convincing proof that I'm on the right path, you know, it's all well, much is clicking for me, you know, it's like the people in the church. They are great and our priest is great and yeah. And what I hear from this is exactly what I would want to hear from you is that you have found a church that has real community and you have a priest who knows you by name and is interested in your life and that you can talk to and that you are because I think so often, especially on some place like YouTube, we would imagine that being a Christian is filling our heads with all the right knowledge. And now your head full of right knowledge is an important thing. But I you don't get that idea from reading the New Testament that it is the only thing or the most important thing. It is your life in Christ. And that is, in fact, your life in the church. And that's what you're pursuing. And so you're on the right track. Yes, that's what it is. True. I make that mistake that I'm reading all that stuff and simultaneously thinking when I've read this book, you know, I have progressed on my path, but it's not like that. It's something that is not even all my own doing. Well, of course not. But it helps me to realize that. So when I was thinking about what is the right church? Well, if God is not helping me to make that decision, I don't have any hope of finding the right church. So I must also have faith and trust in God. That's exactly right. That's hard sometimes. That's exactly right. We all have to hope for the best, I think. The just live by faith. And that's exactly what you're doing when you, when you, okay, I'm going to try this church and I'm going to invest in it. And I'm going to, I'm going to be regular in it. And I'm going to now a church is not at the level of, let's say, a marriage where it's till death do you part. But you began into the community. And I think you, I think you said it absolutely perfectly. If God isn't helping you make the right decision, then what do you have? Yeah. So I think that's exactly right. Well, that's great. Yeah, I don't know much. I don't know what else to say. When I, it kind of became a compulsion for me. So in April, I think I checked, I started checking your calendar, calendar, and then I just, it became a routine to check it because, and then when I finally got a date, you know, I thought, Oh, what am I going to talk about? Because I was, by then, I was already more, by now, I'm already more secure in my choice, you know, for church. So, but I still think it's, yeah, it's so nice also that you're Dutch, you have Dutch ancestry, I mean, that's special. So I thought I have to speak to Paul. Well, I do want to someday, I hope to get to the Netherlands. Yes. And I very much want to go and you have a very busy schedule, I think. Well, yeah, getting over, getting over there at some point. And I know John, you know, I want to go with John Van Donk. Yes, because he can, John Van Donk is just always fun to be around. He's such a good friend, but, and I want to see where Job lives. And I want to, I want to hold Job's baby. Oh, you should go. Have you met Job at all? I know the Netherlands is a small country. You should definitely meet Job. Okay, well, I'll look him up then. Yeah, well, you can find him on my channel. If you just search Paul VanderKlaai Job, there are whole numbers of videos that I did with Job early on, and he became a rather important part of the community that then sort of developed. So, okay, so if you come, when you come here, will there be enough PVK fans to hold a Dutch meeting? Oh, definitely. Absolutely. I wish you, I think. Come on. Absolutely. We will, if I get, when I get there, we will absolutely do that. We will absolutely have an event. And I don't know where we'll do it or how we'll do it, but there's certainly enough of you. So, and, and in fact, I've still got some shirt-tale relations who are in the Netherlands, because when my sister, when my sister visited the Netherlands, when her daughter was taking a semester in Spain, there's some relatives of, I don't even know if they're on my father or my mother's side, but you know, both, both sides have relatives. So. Oh, you do? Yeah. Yeah. I'm not familiar with them, but they're out there. So, and I could find them if I work hard enough. Yeah. Well, you know, I think it's also sort of inferior, if Dutch inferiority complex that we are so thrilled when somebody from the USA has any significant connection to our country, you know, but it's, uh, now it was, was really a coincidence. Well, the Dutch, the Dutch have status in the Christian Reformed Church because that's the motherland. That we do. So, well, Renee, this was an absolute pleasure. Is this something that you think you'd let me share on my channel or do you want to review it first? Well, let's take the plunge. Yeah, let's take the plunge. You know, if you, if you think it's shareable, I go with your judgment. I definitely think it's shareable. I think this was a wonderful conversation and I enjoyed it immensely. And I'm so glad you were, you're very smart and being disciplined because I tell people, I say, you know, I open them up a week at a time usually. And so they go right away. So you have to be disciplined. So yeah, yeah. Yeah. I saw one before, but I couldn't make that one. So this was the second time I saw one. Thank you very much, Paul. And I'll definitely be watching more of you. I think, may all your endeavors go well. Well, thank you, Renee. And the same to you. May God bless you and may God bless your, your church and may he continue to bless your growth in him. Well, thank you. God bless you too, sir. Okay. Bye bye. Bye.