https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=K1XM2U89drs

 I thought I'd make a short video just for subscribers. I had some thoughts today and I thought, well, how can I communicate to subscribers? And it's like, dummy, just make a video. So I'm learning YouTubees and part of this, I'm getting good feedback from people, some from subscribers, some from some of my friends in other forums, and cut the intros. People already know who you are. If they're subscribed, cool. So cutting the intros. And I'm trying, I'm starting to figure out, and here in YouTube land, this is more like ongoing conversation. And again, this is just trying to figure out this format. And I have Neil Postman ringing around in my head as I do this. Thanks, I want to say thanks for the really productive comments from so many. I had a real bias about YouTube comments, that it was going to pretty much be a cesspool. And I had very low expectations for having some decent interaction and conversation. Now that the number of subscribers hopefully is leveling off, I can read comments more easily and give some media replies. This is something I like doing. Most of my online experience has tended to be typing things and a lot of listservs. Listservs for me, some of my favorite communities are listservs. And the old email listservs, you can actually have long questions and answers. Now I don't have any listservs with 2,000 people in, so I don't know what I'll be able to do here. But again, I've been deeply impressed, humbled, overwhelmed by the attention and thought and care and courtesy in the YouTube comments section. One of the things as a pastor of a church, you get used to being the guardian of the culture. And I'm learning the YouTube comment section's own culture and its capabilities. And I'll let you know, I have no problem with negative comments. I appreciate them, I learn from them. Unproductive comments or mean-spirited comments, I'll probably delete if I see them. So in that way, I would love for this channel to have a comment section where there could be good conversation. Now maybe I'm idealistic, but hey, I'm just learning all this. Social media silos. So Jordan Peterson, so thank you Dr. Peterson, he tweeted out a video. And I know some of you people prompted him to do that, and he tweeted out the video on the office. And so I was really interested to see, okay, what's this going to do to the YouTube analytics? And I can't say I was totally surprised, but not a lot. And that's because I think that these different social, these different social medias, I think YouTube, the more I'm doing this, the more I realize that YouTube is a social media. These social medias are siloed, and while many of us will have YouTube accounts and Twitter accounts and Facebook accounts and all of these things, that in many ways people are more living in them and preferring one to another. And again, I'm thinking as I continue this adventure and this experiment, I told some of my friends that the last week and a half, I wrote a piece, if you Google Christian Reformed Church denominational derby silos, you can see a piece that I wrote a while ago on the Christian Reformed Church and how in many ways the Christian Reformed Church are like, we're like hobbits. We like our hobbit holes. And the last 10 days has kind of been dwarves coming and knocking. And I'm not always certain I want dwarves. I want dwarves, but you know, when the Lord calls, you answer. If you're a servant of the Lord, you're his servant. And so it's just been interesting. I hope that doesn't offend any atheists. I didn't mean to offend you. I'm a Christian and you learn to talk this way, and I'll try not to be offensive in that way. So and I thought of that with respect to Peterson himself, because when I first came across him, you know, one of the first things is I saw an article, a random article about this professor in Canada that had, that that was getting some flack for not using certain pronouns. And I thought, oh, that's interesting. Well, a lot of, in my experience, a lot of scholars and academics are temperamentally scholars and academics, and they're really a lot like hobbits. They want to, they want to read their books. They want to write their papers. They want to engage in their sometimes fierce battles within the ivory tower. But when it comes out of it, they, you know, just kind of keep their head downs and shuffle between them, even if inside the ivory tower, they, they rage and rail. Well, and then I saw the video of Peterson getting yelled at and, and how calm he was and how he didn't, you know, he didn't, he didn't yell back. And as a Christian, I pretty quickly, you know, connect that with, with Jesus. And so right there, I thought, well, there's something to this. And then I saw the biblical series and then I thought there's really something to this. And then I started watching and like many of you, it's kind of addictive. And, and when I find something new and interesting, I usually like to grab onto it and, and, you know, and beat it down and learn it and figure it out and get to the bottom of it. I'm a little obsessive myself in that way. And so that's when I started on this entire Jordan Peterson journey, which has been going since I guess I really started it towards the end of this summer. So, but, but one of the things I recognized was that Peterson had been talking about these ideas. He had these, he's obviously the same person and he'd been doing this for years. Maps of Meaning was published in, in 1999. And, and, and whoever heard of this guy, nobody paid any attention to him. And, and then he makes this YouTube. And to me, it really speaks to Neil Postman's point that, that, you know, mediums, mediums are their own worlds and they buy a certain things and they favor certain things. And, and even though we use them, they do, they do distort and shape. And, and that's something I always keep thinking about as I, as I think about YouTube and as, as really for me, this is an adventure and I'm experimenting with YouTube and, and trying to figure out what it is, what the community is like, what are, what its biases are, how, for example, it relates to television, how it's different from television, how are people using it. And actually over the last six to eight days, I have learned a ton. But this is, this is its own medium and it, it has its own rules and it shapes in its own way. So, one of the things I'm thinking about, so, so today I, I'm about up to 2,000 subscribers, which again, I, I, most of you wouldn't believe how small my church is. And, and I love it that way. I, I can have real conversations with people and even with a small church at the, at the end of the service, I, I, it's hard to find time to have conversations with the people I want to and, and being the pastor of a small church means I can go out to lunch with, with, with people of the church. And when visitors come, I, I give them a, I tell them, I said, if you're a visitor, I'd love to take you to lunch because I want to hear your story. I, I want to learn about you. And this is what's to me fun about church. And so now 2,000 subscribers just kind of blows my mind and I'm not exactly sure what it means and I'm trying to figure it out. But, but part of my question is, is how big, how big the group of the sorters or buckos or maybe those of you deeper into the, the Petersonian lingo can, you know, at what point will, will a good term evolve out of this group? I know there's buckos and there's sorters and there's, there's monkeys with, monkeys filled with snakes and all of this. But what will, what will those terms be? I don't, I don't think we know yet. And how many are hardcore? I've already gotten to know some of you and who are, you know, who are moderating Facebook groups and, and doing this and doing that. And so, you know, it's, it's very interesting, all the different personalities and where people come in. And, and, you know, this is a pretty nerdy thing because when I talk to, you know, most normal people who have never heard of Jordan Peterson or have heard of him once or twice and I try to tell it about it, and I try to tell it to people, I try to tell it to people. I mean, it's, again, it's like any, it's like any fandom that there, there are, there are people who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, who are, what their belief is, what they're made of, what their lingo is, what commonalities there are, you know, as a pastor, I'm, as I mentioned in one of the comments today, I, you know, I'm a generalist. I'm not a scholar. I don't sit in my room and read. I don't get to the bottom of everything that Thucydides wrote. I'm a generalist. So I, you know, I'll know something about history. I'll know something about philosophy. I'll do biblical studies, but I won't do biblical studies to the depths of, let's say, a university professor or a scholar. So I'm a generalist. And what that means is that I, I've got thumbs in lots of different pies. And so I've got all of these questions about what the demographics of, right now, I guess I'm just calling them the sorters look like, people sorting themselves out. You only see what you want to see. Oh, I had this experience today. So I was looking up, I was playing around. One of my friends said, you know, you should really look into meetup.com and look for meetups. And because again, I'm a pastor, my, I am bent towards, what is a pastor? A pastor is a metaphor of a shepherd. And what do shepherds do? Shepherds like to get sheep together and shepherds like to care for sheep. And so, you know, when I'm looking at YouTube, my main goal is not, and I know some of you are going to hear this, that should be your main goal. My main goal is not to gather a billion subscribers. That is not my goal. I would rather in some ways have a certain number of subscribers and actually be able to have real conversations because if you don't know real people and if you can't have real relationships, you don't know what you're doing. And so, you don't know people. And in some ways you don't know anything. You just know this theoretical cusp that's above it. And so what's beautiful about scale is that you get access to more people, but the downside of scale is that your access to those people is less. And you can't go deeper with them. And so there's distortion in that. So, well anyway, back to my point, this is terrible. And I, back to my point, one of the things that I noted in the beginning of the video, is that you can't go deeper with people. And so one of the things that I noted in the beginning was a reference from Matthew 13. I will utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world. And I read that verse and I thought, is that some kind of weird translation of Matthew 13? Because one of the things you get used to when you study the Bible is that there are a lot of translations and some translations have agendas and some of those agendas kind of warp it. So I thought, so you know, I open up Logos and I dive right in and oh son of a gun, it is, you know, I will utter things hidden since the creation of the world. And that's a reference from Psalm 78. And you know, here it's like, well how could I be reading the Bible and this verse never struck me in this way? Well this gets back into the only, you only see what you want to see. And these filters that we have over our eyes and our perceptions and how these masks some things and you don't see a verse in a certain way. And so of course when I saw this verse I had to look it up and I had to, okay it's in Matthew 13. Of course it's in Matthew 13 because it's a chapter of all of these parables and there's a lot of dynamics going on in Matthew 13. But anyway, this is again, people say, well why are you interested in Jordan Peterson? Because when I see that in his videos and I see something like this and it's like, yes, this is how we are. This is giving me a profound appreciation for psychology. So the last of my random thoughts for subs are some ideas I have for the future. And again, I'm, yeah, we'll see what I do, how long I hang in with this. I'm lovely at starting things. I like it getting going. I'm a terrible editor. And some of you in the comments section have been editing my language and correcting me. And again, that's really cool. Even if I learn to say Nietzsche the right way, it's going to be hard to get it into my head that when I'm excited and I'm thinking about other things that I continue to say it that way. But anyway, some ideas I have for the future. Someone recommended to make some short videos and I think that's good. A lot of, obviously from Peterson, a lot of the other video channels take little snippets of him and that's helpful in some ways because sometimes if I'm thinking about something that Peterson said. Well, if you'd asked me for a wish list, has anybody started a Jordan Peterson wiki? Because it would be awesome to have some topical points, some topical minute markers through his videos in a searchable format so that when I can think, okay, when was Jordan Peterson talking about Genesis 3? I can go to the wiki, search it, bang, and then I can go to the video and get the context. Again, part of this is because Peterson is so rambly, as am I, and divergent and he connects up so many things that it would be awesome to be able to say, okay, Peterson said this. I'm already kind of doing this on my own, but it's a huge project and so if there was a way that we could community do this, that would be great. So Harvest, I'm thinking about when I ramble through these videos, I learn a lot of things. And so after the video, I feel like I've learned something and what I really should do is take some of these learnings, put it in a short format so for some of you who don't really like the ramblings, a small little video I could say, bang, bang, bang, bang, bang. This is what I hear Jordan Peterson saying, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, done. And I think that would be helpful. Also, if you're making comments on a video I do, put in comments of things that struck you. It could be positive or negative. You don't even have to include how you felt about it because often I'll learn something and it'll be like, I'm not sure how I feel about that yet, but I think it's important. So if I say something that strikes you, let me know because that will give me a signal in terms of, okay, what are the subscribers interested in? How can I, Jesus said, the greatest in the kingdom of heaven is the servant of all. So what does that mean? Well, I, all is a pretty big group. So it's helpful for me to know what is helpful to you. And as a pastor of a local church, I see a lot of that when I preach through body language. As a pastor, I know when points are getting traction with people because their eyes are on me. And I know when they're not because they're sleeping or they're looking around or they're checking their fantasy football teams. You know who you are and I do too. So I can't tell that on YouTube because I can't see my audience. So if something strikes you, if something I do strikes you, put in a comment and let me know because again, I'm going to try to be faithful to read these comments. And this will help me know how I can be useful to you. One of the things that I've really wanted to do for a long time and right away when I started listening to Peterson, I couldn't help but think of C.S. Lewis and his book on miracles. Here's the thing about C.S. Lewis. C.S. Lewis was really into mythology and the Inklings. If you don't know anything about the Inklings, I have so many books on Kindle now that I don't have that many paper. I have a lot of paper books obviously, but so many books I bought over the last five years are Kindle. But if you've never heard of C.S. Lewis, C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Owen Barfield, Charles Williams, these were the Inklings and these were a group of intellectuals that used to get together regularly at a pub and read their work one to another. And this is where Lord of the Rings, of which I am a huge fan, was born. And this was, you know, basically C.S. Lewis became a Christian in no small degree to J.R.R. Tolkien. And, you know, and I am a fan of the Inklings. I've read some books on them. But, you know, when I listened to Peterson and I listened to his emphasis on mythology, I began to immediately, I thought of Tolkien and Lewis. And I thought, oh man, wouldn't it be amazing to have Peterson in a room with Tolkien and Lewis and these guys conversing and throwing Barfield and throwing a bunch of the others. What an interesting group of people. And so the more I listen to Peterson, I keep coming up with, gosh, I've got to figure out a way to at least in my own space have Lewis and Peterson talking. And I'm trying to figure out how to use YouTube for that because they're separated by time. But Lewis, I never really got Lewis's take on mythology until I listened to Peterson. And then it was like, click, there it is. So that's one thing I'd really like to do. And I'll try and do more commentary posting. Thanks for some of the tips and pointers about fair use. And so, you know, let me know what's helpful to you. If you like the videos that have a lot of Peterson in them or the ones where I take Peterson from here and Peterson from there because that's how I kind of process him. I listen to him over here and say, well, he said that over there. See, part of the issue is that I'm very much an auditory learner. I was, I, if I had grown up in a later period, I would have been hyperactive. I would have been diagnosed with hyperactivity disorder probably. And but they didn't have that. And I'm also, I'm also rather dyslexic. And they didn't, you know, they didn't, they didn't know these things when I was growing up. So here I have these what would be called today learning disabilities. But hey, bucko, you still got to get through school. So learn to read and learn what's right and left and, and figure this stuff out. So, so let me know what's helpful. Again, feedback is I, this is, this is a project I'm doing for my own reasons. Number one, and probably, you know, the day that I stopped learning in it is probably the day I wander onto something else. That's just the way I am. But, but number two, I also have a religious commitment to, to be your servant and, and to be helpful to you. And, and that's true whether or not you're a Christian, obviously, if, if you're, if you don't believe in God and you think God is a bunch of hooey and, and all of that, well, when Jesus says you're the servant of all, that means you're the servant of atheists and you're the servant of agnostics. And, and now I'm not going to come and clean your room. You should clean your own room. But this is, this is, this is my calling. So if you leave, if you leave questions, hopefully I can be helpful. So I wanted to make this short and it's probably not as short as I wanted to. Short is going to be really hard for me for reasons that you probably all get. So thanks for watching.