https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mSBKJGag61U

 Hi, this is Paul. Those of you who follow me on Twitter know that this weekend we have the Battle Royale between Esther O'Reilly, the Christian evangelical. She's kind of a polymath. She's into math. She's into philosophy. She's into biblical studies. She's young. One person called her the annoying kid sister of the intellectual dark web. And Adam, Adam is the guy behind Think Club and all of the little, the YouTube clips of Jordan Peterson destroying so and so. He's the artist that does the laser eyes. And Adam and I had a conversation last September. And Esther and I had a conversation a little bit before that. And Glenn had a conversation that I did a video on, on morality. One of one of Adam's big questions and big arguments is for objective morality. And in many ways, he's a disciple of of Jonathan Haidt, who, who, who says, well, you can the morality objective morality is built up from below our moral taste buds and how we develop this. And so Adam and Adam and Esther had a big talk. And I think I think Adam won. Sorry, Esther. I think Adam won. I think Adam was was pretty compelling. He had his he had his arguments together. And just in that episode, I don't think Esther fared very well. So the links will be down below if you want to watch that live stream that that Adam and Esther did. But I couldn't help but jump in. And in fact, I right after the right after the live stream, I jumped in and did a blog post. And I want to go into a little bit more detail about this conversation about objective morality. Well, let's start with morality first. And we might think it's the easiest of the two words, but it really isn't. As I said, as I said on Twitter and as as they mentioned in the in the live stream, I think we represent morality with laws. The friend of mine, Strawn Cummings, some of you might know him. He's active on Reddit. He's on Twitter. I keep wanting to try and do a video with Strawn, but he keeps backing. He doesn't want to doesn't want to go there with me yet. I'll get him on one of these days. But, you know, he asked the question, he says, I don't think actions are things. And he has a real point. We we represent actions by things and we see the we see the representations of actions in the in the New Testament. These categories are difficult to really nail down and get right. Another piece of data in the New Testament, everyone is judged by God according to what they have done. That's a very interesting thing. And of course, for for especially Protestant Christians who who wave the flag of saved by grace, camping on a certain passage in the Book of Ephesians, we don't believe that destroys Ephesians. But but everyone and everyone is evaluated in the New Testament. Everyone is judged by God according to what they do by their actions, not you know, not everyone who says Lord, Lord, Jesus has in a number of places. See, the problem with with human law and human thought crimes is that, well, that's just it. We we can't get away from motivation in terms of things. But when we start punishing people by what they're thinking instead of by what they're doing, things go badly pretty quickly. So morality as the if you just ask Google what morality is, this is what you'll get principles. See, right away they equate it with the laws and Adam will kind of go there. Principles concerning the distinction between right and wrong or good and bad behavior, a particular system of values and principles of conduct, especially one held by a specified person or society, the extent to which an action is right and wrong. So that's what morality has to do with it has to do with right and wrong and it has to do with actions. Now, why does Adam want objective morality and why does he argue for it? Well, I think this is the vision, the dream behind objective morality and in fact, behind objectivism anyway. We want it to be something obvious like gravity makes us fall and water makes us wet. Adam and Sitch had a big debate about water and wetness in an Owen Benjamin stream that they did. But we want morality to be something commonly obvious. But it's not just that we want to see it. We want its effects to be immediate and obvious and we want to employ it. We want there to be a motivational system built into us like don't walk off a cliff or you'll get hurt. We'd like morality to be that obvious, that clear, and we'd like it be that commonly known so that people will do what's right because we'll say, well, do what's right that's in your best interest. It will bring you flourishing and we want it to be objective. We want it to stand above the bickering and pettiness and division of Christians say this and atheists say that and Muslims say this. Actually in the live stream, Esther and Adam got into a little bit of, well, you've got Christian morality, you've got Muslim morality, you've got atheist morality. And Adam is really a troll for the anti-theists as he calls them and he's always baiting rationality rules because Adam basically says Christianity pretty much got a lot of this right and basically right. And maybe in atheism we'll fine-tuning it, but maybe the next time Adam and I talk we'll get into this. Do you need to be, you know, and what then is the relationship in performance? Does actually being a professing Christian help you perform better or perform better as a moral agent or no objective morality better? And Adam and Esther talked about that a little bit too. But we want it commonly discernible like ironworking and those of you who watch my videos know I love to play Civilization and so finding ironworking is a big deal in the early game. So we want it discoverable like ironworking because iron swords held their edge better than bronze swords. And those of you who know the Bible and the book of Samuel, the Philistines had ironworking and the children of Israel did not. And this was a competitive advantage that the Philistines had over the children of Israel. But we want it to be commonly discoverable like ironworking. So there's a way out there to make iron, but nobody knows it and then someone discovers it and then technology can be shared or stolen or lost or rediscovered, but there's a way to make iron. And now different people coming at the technology independently might have slightly different means of making iron, but the principles behind it stay the same and those might get refined and perfected and that tends to be the role of technology. And so actually, you know, there's a way in which technology lurks behind the morality conversation because technology is also action, but it's a certain kind of employment. And I have dealt with that recently in some of the Verveky videos that I've been doing. Now, for those of you who've been following my channel a long time know, I talk about this thing called, I call the monarchical vision. And that is the vision, that is the view from nowhere, that is seeing things how they are. And if you remember the videos I did in my commentary on Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson's talk, that seeing the world as a space for objects really, really expresses the desire that we have of this monarchical vision that we'll see everything as it is. All right. See it through and through. Now, why that name? Well, monarch is a combination of two Greek words, mono, which is something that many of you know, which is kind of singular, and archae, which is this on top authority, power, rulership. Okay. And so we want a monarchical vision. We, and you hear this again and again in Adam's talk with Esther, the goal of objective morality is that there will no longer be disagreements, that human beings can be on the same page and at least agree to common terms. So we will be one, mono, and archae, and we will rule. That's what a monarchy is. It's the rule of one over all. Now, monarchical vision is seeing everything from that unique perspective. This is called The View From Nowhere. I just found that Thomas Nagel wrote a book by that title. I know Nietzsche talked about that a bit, and it imagines that we see the world as it is, and the goal behind it is in fact that everyone will see things and agree to it, and that's in many ways implicit in the Sam Harris New Atheist Project, that via science we can all agree, and the ways that we've been able to establish agreement between people via science on certain things, nobody's hotly debating, H2O is water, we'll be able to succeed and have that uniformity and agreement over our vision of what flourishing is, I'm going to get into that a little bit later, and how to achieve it. In a sense, human technology to achieve flourishing in our cultures, and so all these great moral questions, questions about perhaps how gender relationships, or questions about marriage, or questions about when is it right to take life, or political questions, or economic questions, and all of these questions, if we all come to agreement, and we all see the world clearly, we will see morality as an object, and we will have mastery. We will be one, and we will rule. This is a monarchical vision, and again my statement is that this is something that we don't actually achieve. This is something that as a Christian I would say God possesses, but we as human beings will never possess this because of subjectivity, and so that, this is something that Jordan Peterson has really been helpful in terms of my migration of this stuff, and helping figure this out, that subjectivity always corrupts our attempted monarchical vision, because I can't help but see the world from where I'm standing, and that is why the monarchical vision is always illusory for human beings, but only possible for let's say God. Now, I want to bring another person into the conversation, a dead human being named C.S. Lewis, and his little book, The Abolition of Man, of which I've made at least one substantive video before, because in some ways Lewis says we already have objective morality, and he calls it the Tao, or traditional morality. Lewis makes the case that it is in fact objective, but I think Adam will be a little bit disappointed, because Lewis would say that this is something in fact we've had for a very long time, and in fact having it has not really solved the kinds of things that Adam hopes maybe sociologists like Jonathan Haidt, and he's not claiming that Jonathan Haidt has resolved this, but the vision and the goal of this dream of a non-religious objective morality, a science-based objective morality, would again bring we rule, rule under one vision of the world order, and that it would be common, like I would no sooner break a moral law than I would step off a cliff. Now obviously stepping off a cliff has an immediate consequence that we learned from when we were very, very young, and that our vision of objective morality would be so clear and so obvious that that in fact would reign. Now Lewis will say that actually the Tao, this traditional morality is common. Nearly everybody knows it, and in fact Lewis would say everybody in fact appeals to it. Even when they come out with their supposed new morality, it's just an extension of the traditional morality that they're kind of going around the back to say, yep, yep, this is the same thing, only now modified because of technology or something else. And he begins with an English language lesson. Now Lewis is an ardent Platonist, and I'll talk about that in a few minutes. Lewis is an ardent Platonist, and what he believes is that there is in fact an objective morality behind all of the confusion and diversity and all of the noise and chaos that we see. This is very much an axial age vision, if you've been following my Verbeke videos. Now I'm going to be talking about sacraments, and I've been talking about sacraments. What sacraments are, they are pointers in this world to the other world. And now when I say pointers, that isn't quite the right word because sacrament is the right word, but they are samples of the age to come, that's one way that I phrased it. They are material, well of course in Christianity Jesus says this is my body, and so in the Lord's Supper we connect with and in fact consume and take into our bodies that nourishes us for flourishing the new order body of the life of the age to come. It's very much Christian talk. But Lewis gets at this via a book that he calls the Green Book by a couple of authors that he names Gaius and Titius in how they deal with Coleridge's waterfall. And so what I say here again, these are sacramental pointers behind it all, or are they merely moral feelings? And I'll read the paragraph. In the second chapter, Gaius and Titius quote the well-known story of Coleridge at the waterfall. You remember that there are two tourists present, that one calls it sublime and the other pretty, and that Coleridge mentally endorses the first judgment and rejects the second with disgust. Now some of you might say, it aren't pretty and sublime synonyms, and well, Lewis is going to explain why. Gaius and Titius comment as follows. When the man said this is sublime, he appears to be making a remark about the waterfall. Actually he was not making a remark about the waterfall, but a remark about his own feelings. What he was saying was really, I have feelings associated in my mind with the word sublime, or shortly, I have sublime feelings. Here are a good many deep questions settled in a pretty summary fashion, but the authors are not yet finished. They add, this confusion is continually present in language as we use it. We appear to be saying something very important about something, and actually we are only saying something about our own feelings. And this is where Lewis jumps off on, and he says, when what Coleridge is pointing out, that when the tourists see the waterfall and one says it's sublime, the waterfall is in a sense a sacrament pointing to sublimity. And if you understand anything about Plato, something is causing a shadow on the cave wall. And it's in a sense both the combination of the sunlight and obviously some other object, real object blocking the sun, but the shadow itself. And so in a sense what the first visitor that says sublime says is, I am seeing through the waterfall to a real thing, a thing even more real than the waterfall. Now Gaius and Titius and the second person say it's pretty. Well, what do you mean by that? What Gaius and Titius are saying is that they're really just talking about their feelings. Now morality is real in the Platonic sense here, says Lewis. And as we continue to work on this objective morality question, we'll see us come back to this time and again. But the difference here very much comes into play when we talk about morality, because what you'll notice in the postmodern conversation is that Gaius and Titius in many ways, one, because people base their morality on feelings. And then some people will boldly say, well, I, morality is feelings. Now at the moment in the conversation when Adam and Esther, I thought, were maybe getting some places when Esther began to check Adam on Jonathan Haidt, because here's the question. Do our moral taste buds actually connect us with something real? Well, it depends what you mean by real. If you've been following the Jordan Peterson conversation and following the Vervecki conversation, this question of what do we mean by the word real is really what we're talking about. So here's the question. These feelings that we're having, what Lewis is going to want to say is that these feelings that we're having are actually connecting us with something real. More real than the waterfall, more real than my feelings, but it might not be material. Now Vervecki says, well, there's the relational, and I think Vervecki is right. But now we're going to have to ask the question, what kind of reality is in the relational aspect? Is it just Euclidean in terms of an XYZ axis? Or in fact, what are the axes that are involved in that reality? And when we talk about things, the waterfall is sublime. Are we actually participating in some way in sublimity through the waterfall that makes the waterfall a sacrament of sorts? Or are we simply expressing how the waterfall makes us feel? Even if you go there, you might ask the question, why does the waterfall make you feel that way? And why does the waterfall make you feel that way predictably? Very quickly, you're going to then might go into cognitive science and psychology. But I would say if you want to have a test of this, go to Yosemite National Park and be in Yosemite Valley right by the exit to Bridal Veil Falls. So people come into the valley and their tour buses from Germany, from China, from Japan, and they come down into Yosemite Valley and the tour bus opens and people step off the bus and there's El Capitan and there's Half Dome and there's Bridal Veil Falls and you can just hear the gasps. So, it's Yosemite National Park sacramental. And a sacrament of what? I would argue it's a sacrament of glory. So let's talk about Adam in the moral order. And I got into some of this stuff with Glenn and his arguments are as such. And I think they're good arguments. I think they're powerful arguments. I think in many ways he bested Esther in this little competition via these arguments if we want to look at their conversation in that way. Adam says the Germans would always eventually lose World War II because, and I'm not going to put these words in his mouth, they're going against the moral grain of the world. In other words, the kinds of moral behavior that the Germans were practicing will always be a loser and they'll always be a loser because it's somehow against what is real and beneath all of this reality. The Soviets lost the Cold War eventually because they were always going against the grain of the moral order. The things that the Soviets practiced don't finally lead to flourishing, don't finally lead to success, and therefore the Soviets were right from the start doomed to lose the Cold War. The moral order is seen and validated by group outcomes, and Adam notices the difference between individual and group outcomes in terms of this flourishing. We'll get into Sam Harris in a minute. And Adam highlights a study that Jonathan Haidt had done with respect to communes, and Jonathan Haidt noted that religious communes last longer than secular communes. Why? Well, because religion binds and blinds, morality binds and blinds. It's a big tagline from Jonathan Haidt, and again, I'm a big fan of Jonathan Haidt. I read the Happiness Hypothesis, which I think is better than his second book. Second book's a fine book too, but the first book is more interesting. The first book is much more like maps of meaning. It gets nerdier and it goes into a number of different things. Joe Rogan mentioned when he was talking to Jonathan Haidt that he had read that. Haidt's third book is interesting too, but again, his foundations are really in the Happiness Hypothesis. So if you want to understand Haidt, read the Happiness Hypothesis. Perspective, time, seeing, and knowing. Now, here's the question that Esther brought up a bit in the video, but I probably would have pressed Adam Harder on. Because the knowing judgment of the grain of the moral order, because going against the grain, that's a wood metaphor here, the knowing judgment of the grain or the moral order is dependent upon when you stand. In the 1930s, it looked like the Western approach to the world. Democratic capitalism was a loser, and that's part of the reason why the Nazis took over Germany, and the Soviets and the Marxists took over Russia. And Khrushchev told Kennedy that his system was going to bury the capitalist system. And so again, in the midst of both of those conflicts, it wasn't at all clear who would win. And the difficulty that leads you is when you're in the midst of the conflict then, your assertion that either Nazism is better or Soviet Marxism is better or Western capitalism is better, well, now these are expressions of faith. And in fact, they're faith in deeper things. In previous videos, I pointed out that Nazi ideology was built on this idea of racial struggle. That both the Nazis and the Soviets were both progressivist ideologies, but they found their foundation for their progress in different things. So Nazi ideology said that the world story is a story of racial progress. And now you can see how evolutionary thinking by Charles Darwin fit into that, because you imagine that you have species progression. And now we've toned that back, if you listen to Bret Weinstein, to a degree or another, but there's still plenty of progressivism in our culture. So the idea was, well, there are all these different races, and what you really need are competition between the races. And so now to see the Jews are kind of a sticking point for the Nazis. So you got to get rid of the Jews because they're kind of the outliers. But beyond all that, eventually race would settle out. And the reason that if you read, for example, Timothy Snyder's Bloodlands, which brutally chronicles the sad, the terrible suffering of the people in Poland and Ukraine and Belarus in the 20s and 30s and 40s, and then 50s under the Soviets again, Timothy Snyder goes a long way to showing that. Well, why Western atheist capitalists, materialists will say, well, the Nazis exerted all of this effort on exterminating the Jews. That could have been more profitably, they could have done better if they didn't hate the Jews. Maybe they would have won the war. But you don't understand ideology. This gets back to Jordan Peterson. You don't understand ideology. Ideology is, and our worldview is that in which we work. And in fact, that argument that the worldviews are so crucial are foundational to Adam's argument. Because we can't help but express our worldview. So in Timothy Snyder's treatment of the Nazis in World War II, their treatment of the Jews, they expended a lot of effort on, well, sure, they got money out of the Jews, but they also lost some of their best scientists and some of their best people in their nation. But their treatment of getting rid of the Jews was part and parcel of their ideology. In other words, it wasn't an incidental aspect of Nazi ideology. Now, Western pragmatists can look at that and say, ah, you would have done better without that. But you don't understand the way that functioned in their worldview. So again, in order for Adam's test case in the 20th century to work, you have to assume that someone's ideology is central to their worldview. And so you can easily say that Nazi ideology is a loser. It goes against the grain of the moral order and therefore the Germans lost. You could make the same arguments about the Soviets. Whereas the Nazis believed in racial progress, the Soviets believed in class progress and class struggle. And quite again, you saw in Timothy Snyder's bloodlands, for Stalin, destroying the Kulak system in the Ukraine of these local farmers actually caused the famine that killed lots of people. And it was counterproductive. Again, Western pragmatists look at that and say, Stalin, you're an idiot. You're destroying the food production of your land. Well, why? Well, Stalin and his group were working within their worldview. And according to the rules of their worldview, you had to get rid of private enterprise. And yes, it's a painful stage. But at some point, state control of the farming will yield the glorious outcomes that will leave the West in the dust. And again, I would say Adam has a point. Because you can't conceive of the Soviets apart from their worldview. And therefore, Adam's got an interesting point. Their worldview would eventually lead to its demise. Now, you can go into the Reagan question. Did the Reagan arms build up, finally defeat the Soviets? Maybe it made Gorbachev finally give in. Okay. So again, according to Adam's perspective, Nazi ideology is a loser. It runs against the grain of objective moral reality. And therefore, the Nazis lost. And the Soviet Union ran against the grain of objective moral reality. And it lost. Now, you right away see a good helping of pragmatism come under this in terms of this argument that's very much in there. But you do have the question. Now, as always, we have all these different time marks. So you've got the individual arc, which means my 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100-year lifespan. So in 1943 or 1942 especially, who are the winners and losers? In 1941, who are the winners and losers? In 1988, when you're bringing to 1987, 88, 89, when the Eastern Bloc is falling apart, who are the winners and losers? Now it's 2019. Is democracy sustainable? These are some similar questions that were being asked in the 20s and 30s in the Western capitalist democracies looking over at the impressive gains by the Nazis in the 30s and the supposedly impressive gains by the Soviets in the 30s, the impressive gains by the Cubans in the 60s in terms of education and health care deployment. The West looked at all these grains, all these gains, and began to wonder, is our system really the best? And so really what you have in the midst of it is an article of faith. And Adam says, given enough time, the ones that are most in line with the real moral order will win. Well, that doesn't really help you if you're living in Poland or the Ukraine or Belarus in 1930s and 40s. You're just going to die. So, well, maybe that's true of, well, true of what? True of whole societies? And what are we trying to gain here? Are we trying to gain objective morality so that, well, I'm a farmer in Belarus and I really believe that the Soviets are wrong and the Nazis are wrong and deep inside my heart I'm a capitalist. Go ahead, die your capitalist death. It's not going to do you any good. In fact, if you're a capitalist in those places, you've got enemies coming at you from both sides. And, well, does your moral order or your belief in the moral order actually do you any good now? Well, maybe you feel good about yourself because I know I'm right. Well, here's the case. We all think we know we're right. And so therefore, goodness is a lack of dissonance. Now, Lewis Wade's in here with the Dow and he says, well, we've always had a moral order and we've always sort of known it. But, well, then why do we keep losing it and why do we keep trying to improve it in stupid ways? And, well, let me just read the chapter. This conception in all its forms, the Platonic, the Aristotelian, the Stoic, the Christian, Oriental alike, I shall henceforth refer to for brevity simply as the Dow. Some of the accounts of it, which I have quoted, will seem perhaps to many of you merely quaint or even magical. But what is common to them all is something we cannot neglect. It is the doctrine of objective value. Okay. So now the question is going to be, what is the difference between what Adam thinks of as objective and what Lewis thinks of as objective? So the doctrine of objective value, the belief that certain attitudes are really true and others are really false. So again, we're going to get into the question of what is really. To the kind of thing the universe is and the kind of things we are. Those who know the Dow can hold that to call children delightful or old men venerable is not simply to record a psychological fact about our own paternal or filial emotions at the moment, but to recognize a quality which demands a certain response. Now, again, unlike gravity, these demands can be complied with or rejected and rebelled against. Okay, which demands a certain response from us, whether we make it or not. I myself do not enjoy the society of small children because I speak from within the Dow. I recognize this as a defect in myself, just as a man may have to recognize that he is tone deaf or colorblind. And because our approvals or disapprovals are thus recognitions of objective value or responses to an objective order, therefore, emotional states can be in harmony with reason. See now, this is why I always pick Lewis to talk about Sam Harris, because Lewis and Sam Harris have a lot alike. They have a high degree of belief in reason and some commonality about what reason is. Strawn wants me to make a Words That Fudge video on reason, and I probably will at some point. That'd be a more philosophical video rather than a theological video. And I'm not sure I'm qualified to make it, but then again, maybe I'm not qualified to do anything I do. So I read that sentence again. And because our approvals and disapprovals are thus recognitions of objective value or response to an objective order, therefore, emotional states can be in harmony with reason when we feel when we feel liking for what ought to be approved or out of harmony with reason. When we perceive that liking is due but cannot but cannot feel it. No emotion. No emotion is in itself a judgment. In in that sense, all emotions and sentiments are illogical, but they can be reasonable or unreasonable as they conform to reason. Capital R or fail to conform. And if you read Miracles, you'll notice the capital R reason shows up in mirror and see as Lewis's book miracles as well. And the reason it does that is because for Lewis, reason is something that puts us in touch with the Dow, also puts us in touch with God, also puts us in touch in his rather platonic sense, the forms. The heart never takes the place of the head, but it can and should obey it. And this is why Lewis will get to the end of his first chapter. If you've never read The Abolition of Man, read it. It's a very small book. You can often find it in C.S. Lewis anthologies. It's only three essays long, and it's a quick read, but it's a very important read in terms of this. So Lewis also has a sense of objective value of the Dow and in many ways would say things probably similar to Adam that, well, we can the reason the Soviets failed was they're going against the grain of reality of the moral order. The reason the Nazis failed is they're going against the grain of reality or the moral order. Well, can't we just come up with a list and C.S. Lewis would say yes. And in fact, there's an appendix in the back of The Abolition of Man where C.S. Lewis has the Dow and shows commonality in Christian tables of law and Jewish tables of law and Islamic tables of law and and Confucian tables of law and tables of law from all around the world, Hammurabi's Code. And so again, Lewis would argue our problem isn't really not knowing what's good in the sense of the Dow. Problems come in a different way in a different space. So we can know it, we can sense it, we can perceive it commonly. And in fact, we judge actions according to it. But that's not such a simple thing. But here's the thing. And this is where I think we I would probably and I probably will talk to Adam at some point. I would say this is something we don't really wield. It's not really a technology we employ. We are beneath it. We are smaller than it. And as Lewis says, we can live in accordance to it or we can live in disagreement to it. But and this gets theological now and something like the Book of Job because these conversations are actually very old. Living in accordance with it won't necessarily mean you get what you want in life. Won't necessarily mean that your life would be considered easy. Won't necessarily mean that you don't suffer. And again, living in accordance to it, I would argue, will actually make you suffer often because what we tend to do is we gang up against the Dow because we don't like what it costs us. It's not something we can wield. We are beneath it. We are smaller than it. And I think that's essential to Adam's argument about the Nazis or the Soviets. They would like to have changed the Dow. They argued against the Dow. They argued that their system, which was racial progress or class progress, were in fact the grain of the universe. And they were proven wrong. But again, we have the problem of time. Maybe 100 years from now when we're all living in a Marxist utopia, as a good number of people imagine we should be, maybe then we'll look at Paul VanderKlay's video and say, ah, he was one of those Christian capitalist persons. He didn't really understand that the arc of history was with class conflict. We can perceive it, can reflect it, can obey it, but we cannot employ it because that would make it our servant. And in that case, it evaporates. And now suddenly we have the question of will and Dow. And what Lewis would say is the job of the head is to get the heart in alignment with the Dow. Now, that's what it should do, whether it pays or not. We can refer it, and that's where we get into this question of flourishing. Will success yield it? We can refer to it and find agreement within it. Usually in general terms, in first principles, applications get difficult. Obedience, I would argue, is the sacrament of the Dow. Now, in my previous video, I talked about this three tiered universe of conscious agents. And this is, I would argue, the kind of universe most of the Bible is written towards, where there is a high God on top and there is a world of spiritual conscious agents in the middle. And there is the secular realm of people and matter down below. And people today have a one tier or a two tier or a three tier universe. And this impacts how people make decisions further down the line of their philosophies and religions. Well, something similar is happening with this. If you're a Platonist, kind of like Lewis, you would say that the Dow is above us. It's the moral grain of creation. Esther brought in quite briefly into the conversation that of natural law. Okay. And in fact, it is always impinging on us. And because Nazis had a bad idea about racial progress and the Soviets had a bad idea about Soviet progress, in a sense, they were eventually crushed by the moral grain of the universe. That's Adam's argument. Our actions and alignment agreement copying the patterns leads to success or the good. Now, the patterns are in the tier above. They are not material. Now, again, if you're a Platonist, this is really easy. They're the forms. All right. And in fact, they are impinging upon. Now, you might notice some similarities in these tiers. There are principalities and powers that the Apostle Paul writes about in the New Testament. And he is talking about Jesus' relationship of the principalities and powers. And in fact, one way to understand the Bible are the transactions between all of these tiers. These aren't the only tiers available, the actions of all of these tiers. Now, Lewis would say that the reason the Germans, Lewis and Adam might argue that the reason the Germans won were because they were in disagreement with the Tao and you can resist it for a while, but eventually you will succumb because you're going against the moral grain of the universe. But again here, if you go back to my other videos, the patterns are eternal and the material is transitory. The patterns are essential and the material is derivative. All right. And when we talk about contemporary psychology and a secular materialist framework, you're going to see how this has to be flipped. Then you're going to have to ask the questions, well, does the Tao govern these things too? What you're really asking is, does the Tao govern? Can we know the good? The better question is, do we want the good? Now, Adam is a critic of Sam Harris's approach and I think Adam is right. Sam Harris's well-being, he tries to scale up local discernment. Well, I can know that this is, I can have a sense that this is flourishing and this is not flourishing, so I do all this A-B testing of flourishing and if we scale that all the way up, we have heaven and hell. And Jordan Peterson pounces on him and says, that's looking an awful lot like a Christian conception. Oh, no, no, no. This is ration. This isn't based on antiquated technology of religion. This is new-fangled, you know, religion-free monarchical visionism. That's what we're going to do and Adam's like, eh, kind of doubt it. Because right away, subjectivity is involved. And how not? That's the problem with a monarchical vision is that its adherents always contaminate it. They contaminate their imagined clean room of a world of objects every time they try to wield it. And it's obvious to everybody else and they all say, along with the postmodernists, you only see the world this way because you're a high-status celebrity atheist in the year 2019, quickly losing his status from the heights that he had in 2001 when the four of you were together and everybody was suddenly, for the moment, really afraid, no longer of godless communism, but now afraid of religious fundamentalism. And so, hey, you had a good run there. You really carried the day when we're all worried about Islamic terrorists, but they don't seem to be quite the threat they were as when they took down the Twin Towers. So now we're moving on to establishing our new utopia by intersectionality and all those kinds of things. Adam Litt rightly protests the intrusion of subjectivity. You are judging your A-B test against your subjective experience. Someone at a recent meetup noted that Germany was happiest during Hitler's heyday. And if you think about this psychologically, you can agree. After Versailles, Germany felt betrayed by its leaders. They felt put down by the other people in Europe. And Hitler was bringing them back, making Germany great again. And, well, usually if you're going to do that, if you want to mobilize a group of people, one of the easiest ways to do that is to have another easily identifiable group of people as the enemy. They are the fault of all of our reasons. And for Hitler, that was the Jews. And it fit very nicely in terms of his ideology. So you could scapegoat the Jews for everything. Is there a problem in our new world order that's going great? It's the Jews. Well, for the Soviets, it's the capitalists. And everybody needs a scapegoat. Read René Girard. Something we do automatically. Something we do psychologically. So Germans were happy. We're building aircraft. We're building warships. We're building our army. We're not going to face the kind of humiliation that we faced in the Kaiser's defeat after the First World War. Hitler is making Germany great again. The only works if you define Germany, however, apart from the Jews. And those who love them as true Germans. So you have the true Germans and you have the substandard Germans. And they should all leave so that true Germany can emerge and we can have racial progress and racial purity and the hierarchies of the world will be set right. Well, again, you have the problem of definition and perceptive time. And quite rightly, Adam looks at Sam Harris and says, ah, that's not really going to work. Jordan Peterson had the same conclusion. But I do want to notice that there's a flip here in secular materialism. Because again, in the lower tier, you have foundational materialism that we observe. Consciousness is an evolutionary byproduct that helps us survive and compete against death and our rivals. But this level is fundamentally mute. It doesn't speak. It doesn't help us. And this is part of how Jordan Peterson was pressing Sam Harris in those conversations. The more my consciousness Congress continues to mull on those conversations, the I think the better I better understand where and why Peterson was taking on Harris in the points that he did, because the world is full of facts. Which facts do we pick to make sense of the world? And in a materialist framework, well, we're the ones making sense. We're the upper tier. So patterns. So the lower tier, this level is fundamentally moot or mute. I don't know why I'm saying moot. Moot is M-O-O-T. Mute is M-U-T-E. My mouth isn't working right. Are patterns really here or do we just derive them? And when Adam and Esther were talking about the reality of math, that's really where they could have done some more work in that area. Is math is do we create math with our minds? When I look at, I've got to go full screen. I've got to be careful because this is the, am I holding up two objects or am I holding up one cell phone holder and one trackball? Well, you might say that, well, it's kind of depends on your perception. It kind of depends on your categorization. Is math something we create or is math something we discover? And this is one of these fun questions. Now, foundation for natural law. Well, if you're a secular materialist, you're always looking below for, well, this is the common realm out of which we're going to discover our objective morality. But we've got real issues in this realm knowing whether we're imposing the patterns upon them or whether the patterns are actually in it. And in fact, and this is where it gets into my first making of Vervecki with Buddhism and Cognitive Science, where he talks about Aristotle, which is an excellent, because Aristotle said, well, the form is being expressed in the formal cause. Then you have the final cause. You have Aristotle's four causes. But what is, when is it a chair? And you'll hear Jordan Peterson go into that. When is a stump a chair? Well, is chairness always in the stump? How does this stuff work? It's a very hard question. Modernist, postmodernist debate is essentially between these points because the postmodernist says it can be anything. Once you have your secular materialism down below, once you realize that, well, you're going to, if you're imposing the patterns and the patterns, the patterns actually come from consciousness and consciousness is derivative of materiality. Well, now suddenly we have the fear of it being arbitrary. So patterns that our conscious minds perceive in our communal conversations agree are found in the second tier, but it's not the foundational tier. This is the level of consciousness and is dependent upon the unconscious public common material world. The good is what we agree upon. Now pay attention when Adam is longing for an objective morality, he is longing for community and agreement on what is right and what is wrong. And again, according to Lewis, we got a lot of agreement on that. But why doesn't it stick? Why can't we get it all the way down to the details? The good is what we agree upon, what we call it. We call it good. Something that makes us happy, flourish, survive, compete, endure. Well, in late 1930s Germany, it sure looked like ideas of racial evolution sure looked good. It was successful. They all called it good. It made them happy. So you're looking at the patterns at that moment in time. It sure worked for them. Then you get into the Dr. Phil question. How's it working for you? So Adam's 20th century discernment has exactly the same problem as Sam's well-being test. It's just blown up a little bit. It's just a little bit longer time frame. The allies were more moral than the Nazis or the Soviets because had a selection for certain values, individualism. Contemporary neo-Marxists may disagree. We have the, we have, we make this determination after the fall of both. How did it look in the 1930s? Now, again, if you live long enough and you pay attention and you watch what's going around the world, it wasn't too long ago that the United States was worried about the Japanese coming, buying up everything. The Japanese are going to inherit the earth. Well, their economy is languished and they're not doing so well in terms of populating for the next generation. And they're, well, they don't build walls around their nation. They have, and don't read too much political subtext into this, okay? Because the reality is that the world is very, very complex. The Japanese basically allow zero immigration. Is that a good game to play? Well, it depends on how you're doing reproducing. Now they're also not having many children. Why aren't they having many children? These are complex questions. They're very big complex questions. So now we no longer fear the Japanese buying up everything. Who do we fear buying up everything? The Chinese. So we used to fear that the Soviets would inherit the earth. Before that we feared that the Nazis would inherit the earth. Then eventually feared that the rest of the world feared that the Americans would inherit the earth. Then we feared that the Japanese would inherit the earth. Now we fear that the Chinese will inherit the earth. Maybe 20 years from now we'll fear that the Indians will inherit the earth. Who knows? Your point in history and your judgments are part of that point in history. And then you say, but what if we could get out of history, out of context, and see, well, there's your monarchical vision. That's what you're looking for. Now the problem with the subjective creatures defining up, well, we have secular material. We have secular material application and we're going to define up to principles. It's ironic that this is exactly Freud's argument against God. He says, well, God is just wish projection up into the sky following Feuerbach. So, but aren't our principles principle projection up into the sky? That's exactly what the postmodernists say. You're just projecting the success that is convenient for you to project so that you'll win further. And just right now there's a bootleg recording of Jordan Peterson in Melbourne. And I thought that was actually one of Peterson's better speeches in terms of laying all this out. He goes way into the plumber story. Now I would say that C.S. Lewis has a real point. And C.S. Lewis's point is in many ways confirmed in B movies. And this weekend my wife and I were, it was a Saturday evening, and said, oh, let's watch a movie. Let's go onto Netflix or let's go onto Amazon. What can we find? Fine. The algorithm pulled up good old Liam Neeson who just recently got in trouble for confessing his sins publicly instead of to the religious service provider of his choice in private as constitutionally protected. Liam Neeson made a movie called The Commuter. And if you've seen most of Liam Neeson's latest movies, you probably have an idea exactly what kind of movie this is. It will not win an Academy Award. Liam Neeson is playing this kind of role that he can sleepwalk through because he keeps playing the same kind of role again and again and again. And in fact, if you just look at the art, the picture, you probably know exactly what the movie is about. And if you watch the trailer, you'll know exactly what the movie is about. Now in this movie, they have a refrain. The criminals say, don't be noble. What does that mean? Do what's expedient, not what's right. And you'll notice that as I've continued to think about this particular rule of Peterson's 12 Rules, do what's meaningful, not what's expedient. Notice how meaningful and right have become synonyms for Peterson. And that's pretty important in terms of understanding Peterson's larger project. So again and again, all of the people on this commuter train that is being terrorized by this group of people, they are encouraged to do what is expedient, to give up for what is in your flourishing self-interest in the moment. And so Liam Neeson has to decide, is he going to kill people in order to save his family? Isn't that the premise of every Liam Neeson movie? Now this is a B movie. It's not going to receive any Academy Awards. But what it is, is catechesis. Well, you say, well, that's weird. Catechesis, isn't that what happens when you're trying to join a church? Yep. It's liturgy. Well, what's liturgy? Is it liturgy? Jamie Smith has been making a career out of noting the liturgies in our contemporary society. Jamie Smith is a philosopher at Calvin College, my alma mater. What this movie is, is reinforcing the Dow. And it's not a great movie. Who's going to watch this movie? It's not going to win an Academy Award because, well, we've got all these highfalutin ideas about what a good movie is. But a whole lot of people love watching a movie like this because what it reinforces in them is that life is complicated. Goodness isn't easy. But in the end, goodness wins. That's what this, that's what all the Liam Neeson movies and most of the movies we have actually highlight in here in America. Something deep in us, C.S. Lewis would say, our chests tells us that we want to be noble even if it'll cost us. And at one point in the movie, Liam Neeson will give a stirring speech about how this may be the death of his family, but he will not cross the line. And something inside of us is fed and warmth. And somehow we get in touch with, as Lewis would say, the Dow. It feels right. And suddenly sacrifice for a noble effort feels like it's something to give your life for. What might that be? Meaning. Is meaning just an experience? Do we just experience meaning or is meaning out there? We'll talk about that a little bit later. We should be noble. Even if it costs us. But what action will be sacramental doing what's right? Obedience is the sacrament of the Dow. We watched another B movie. The man who lost his head about this English museum keeper who has to explain to this tribe in New Zealand about how they're not going to have their sacred artifact come back. He's engaged. But then he goes to the island and meets the beautiful New Zealand woman. And should he keep his promise to his fiance over there in England? Or should he pursue this hot new island woman and change his life to live with all the meaningful people who are dealing who are still embedded in their natural religion, but suffering? And so again, you have the question. So a bunch of the native Maori people who are worshipping their ancestors. And this seems like a whole bunch of superstition to all these British museum people. But in the end, guess which one wins? It's the Dow. Surprise, surprise. Now, it's interesting because this is at heart what Lewis kept trying to tell Sam Harris in the debates that we must be guided by the stars. And it's interesting that early in the debates, Sam Harris likes using astrology as an example of bad technology. And I agree, I don't believe in astrology either. But Peterson makes the point there's something deeper going on there beside the horoscope in your paper. And it's not the kind of literalism that is so easy for Sam Harris to debunk that we need guides outside of the local contextuality to actually be able to orient ourselves towards that which is noble. And it's going to have to be outside of the iron box of secularity. It can't just be inside. It's got to be outside the system. And that's why here in 2019, we can't make the judgment definitively about right and wrong if we are within this iron box. Because what we're always doing is looking at what's happening in the moment. Well, communism was put away. Well, listen to a whole bunch of people with their newly minted college degrees and they'll say things like, Well, the Soviet practice wasn't really true Marxism. And yeah, okay, keep talking. I ain't so sure. I got my doubts and I was not on the right during the Cold War. Okay, I wasn't a Marxist. But so we're in time. We're really bad judges. Again, if we could only have a view from nowhere, if we could only have the monarchical vision, don't believe anybody that says they have because they don't. Well, who does? Three-letter word starts with G, ends with D, spells dog backwards. That's what religions say. You need something above your tier. Something not subject to you or us. That's why you can't wield objective morality and you never will. Because once it is subject to you, it is no longer objective, which is why monarchical vision doesn't work for human beings. We can't establish a we and we don't rule. We don't even rule over ourselves well. Now we crowdsource it as a proxy for the Tao and that's what we do. And in fact, that's how we're set up to do psychologically. That's why we believe in groups. If you want to change your mind, go live with the group that looks like you want your mind to be and you will be changed in their image. That's the whole basis for how churches work. You want to be a Christian? Go hang out with Christians. You want to be a certain kind of Christian? Hang out with those certain kinds of Christians. You hang out with them long enough, you'll be like them or their corruption will drive you crazy and you'll start looking for a new group to hang out with. And so we're always looking for better calibrations to reduce subjectivity and that's why we crowdsource it. All right? That's why we try and get as big of you as possible. And that's why when, for example, when Peterson is talking to Vervecki, Vervecki makes the move of going back to the axial age and Peterson says, I'll do you one better. I'll go all the way back to lobsters. And if I can say, I lost, I lost bucko. I haven't seen him for a while. Rick, did you take bucko? Those of you know what I'm talking about. Bucko usually lives right here. Maybe he's out there in the sanctuary. Anyway, I distracted myself. Where was I going with this? That's why I have notes. Oh yeah, we crowd, we try to get bigger and bigger samples. But we're trying to get bigger and bigger samples. And so actually it's very smart. If you want to understand, well, I want to get a sense of what works over large amounts of time. Well, look back in history. Well, who is writing things? Most of the, where do we have most of our documentation in terms of human beings? Religious things. And Peterson goes all the way back to evolutionary things, go all the way back to the lobsters. And let's try and calibrate our intuitions with respect to the Tao as far back as we can go. And that will give us the best shot at a monarchical vision. That's the hope. But all our crowds are subject to our principalities. They're subject to the zeitgeist. They're subject to the bigger moods and then all the different sub moods. Now it's very interesting during the Jordan Peterson, especially the first two when Brett Weinstein was there, whenever things would get testy with Sam and the crowd would react, Peterson would turn and address the crowd directly, not Sam. Watch for it. It's a very interesting move that Peterson keeps making. Why? We have to do with this with the crowds. And this is exactly the why, the reason Peterson keeps getting attacked. And when Peterson goes to New Zealand, he's a dangerous man. Well, why is he a dangerous man? Because he's not saying the kinds of words that our particular group thinks needs to be reinforced so that we'll all believe the same thing. And when we all believe the same thing, then the kingdom will come. When the debates got heated, he always turned to the audience because we're always trying to look to proxy, look to crowd source the Tao. Because it's a better one than just me, myself and I. Now I'm going to look at some of the blog posts that I wrote in after listening to Adam and Esther Goh. Because the morality crisis and the meeting crisis are connected. The morality dilemma and the crisis in meeting are of course connected. Only within the monarchical vision can the question, what is good, be answered because it is evaluated from the view from nowhere. Well, I know what's good because, why? Because you feel it. And what happens, as Lewis points out again and again in miracles, is that we make this turn and right away we toss out the moral feelings because we just know that that's wrong. And we keep appealing to it. Now notice that Lewis starts, mere Christianity, with noting right and wrong. And how everybody, try as they might to be postmodern, they get to a point where they have to give it up and speak like, speak like their chests, not like their heads. In their head they say, I'm a postmodernist, I'm just constructed. In my chest, I just know it's right. I just know it's wrong. I want to be moral. And Lewis basically takes after Gaius and Titius by saying, the only reason they call themselves intellectual, the only reason their heads look so big is because their chests are so small. So only within the monarchical vision can the question, what is good, be answered because it is evaluated from the view from nowhere. Each of us, limited creatures in time, must ask, pay attention, you'll hear it happen all the time, good for what? In the conversation they talked about gang initiation. And you're told by your gang, you've got to go kill somebody to be in the gang. Well, what is that crazy premeditated irrational myrtle good for? Well, it's good for you feeling a need of belonging, for you gaining status. It's good for all of these other things. That's it's good for something. And almost every wrong is good for something in the mind of whoever's doing it. We're rational that way. War, what's it good for? Poor Sitch couldn't get that into his video because, ah, the YouTube algorithm, boy, I've run into that sucker too. I stay away from certain things because they'll pull it down. I would love to play you the trail of War of the Roses, but I don't want to get it pulled down. Just go ahead and War of the Roses trailer, 1989. War, what is it good for? Absolutely nothing. Then why do we keep fighting them? Obviously, those who wage it continue to believe it's good for something. And someone say, ah, but that's only these big government types. No, we wage our wars privately. And the War of the Roses, directed by Danny DeVito, terrific movie about two people who fell in love and they saw the world and it was wonderful. And pretty soon they can't stand each other. And it's a dark comedy that goes into the ends of what two people in love will do to hurt each other and in fact try to end each other's lives. Our morality crisis comes from within the iron box of secular materialism. We are cut off from the telos, from the goal, from the ends. We're cut off from the stars that guide us and we don't know how to orient ourselves. And it's 1938 in Germany and Hitler seems to have all the answers. And doggone it, the world would be great if we could just get rid of these Jews. And man, if we could just get this land that all these slobs are on, we're going to kill another six million of them too. And we'll lie to the Soviets because it's okay to lie to a communist because they're not really human beings. So we'll lie to the communists and the Stalinists are thinking, yeah, we'll lie to the Germans. But at some point we're going to do the other one in. Well, then of course Germany moved first and you have the Eastern Front. We're cut off from the telos. The fact that we can't orient ourselves and the fact that we're feeling nihilistic, that we're feeling empty inside, these things are connected. The irony of the monarchical vision is it only can work if telos is more real than anything else. Objectivity has always played out in various foundationalisms. This is how we tend to construct it. This is a foundational effort. And in fact, Jordan Peterson tries to get around the difficulties of his secular materialist, maybe. See, that's the thing about Peterson. Maybe it's true, maybe it isn't true. He rides that line, as I mentioned in my previous video. But he tries to use Darwin as an orienting, basically as an orienting mechanism because Darwin gives them a longer run than the 6,000 years of recorded human history or maybe 10,000 or 12,000 if we listen to the archeologists or perhaps a bit back from there. So he wants to go all the way back using Darwin. That'll give us better orientation. But without something that really asserts the true reality of the metaphysic, you're stuck with these half measures. You've got to build on something so the decision was made to be built on that which was commonly at hand, the material world that we share. But sharing involves sharing with other beings, all of which have views. So we're trying to come to agreement. That's why we talk. It's a good thing that we talk. We're doing exactly the right thing in hashing this through. We're looking for what's true. And Adam and Esther will agree on that. It works in simple things, but as things get more complex, subjectivity arises. And really, I was having a conversation with Preston Sprinkle this morning. And what's one of the main contributions that Peterson has made? Well, what Peterson has done kind of similar to Thomas Nagel, who I've never heard Peterson mention, is the reality of the subjectivity. And Thomas Nagel's point is that we've probably gone as far as we can trying to imagine we can see through a monarchical vision. It's probably time to give up the project. And we're going to have to deal with subjectivity. And we don't know how much it's going to cost us. This, of course, yields conflict. And we try to mediate the conflicts by agreeing on what is good. So free speech, that's good. And it is good. It's a good thing. But when you start talking about free speech, look at Dave Rubin and Jordan Peterson talk about their new platform, which we're waiting for them to come out with. It's going to be a free speech platform. And we're going to be talking about free speech. And we're going to be talking about free speech. So we're waiting for them to come out with. It's going to be a free speech platform, and Jordan Peterson has to say, well, maybe a legal speech platform because free speech is hard. And Peterson and Rubin talk about that. And it's really hard because we're having difficulty coming up with ultimates. And you're back to square one. questions of what is good lead to, because we're within the iron box of secularism, what is it good for? That's where pragmatism continues to come into the picture. So if you're cut off from the final telos, the ultimate telos, the final ends, the final goals, the final stories, the perspective from which you can look at the end of human history forward and say, yep, this group was right. Agreement and knowledge of what is the sumum bonum, and look that up on Wikipedia. Well, maybe we'll go there now. What do I mean by sumum bonum? Sumum bonum is a Latin expression meaning the highest good, which is introduced by the Roman philosopher Cicero to correspond with the idea of the good in ancient Greek philosophy. The sumum bonum is generally thought of being as an end in itself, at which some time contains all other goods. It's a hierarchy with something at the top. The term is used in medieval philosophy and Thomas' synthesis of Aristotelianism and Christianity, the highest good is usually defined as the life of the righteous and or the life led in communion with God and according to God's precepts. In Kantianism, it is described as ultimate importance, the singular overriding end which human beings ought to pursue. I would say it's, I would say actually it's God himself because that's where, see you might have noticed in my tears that God keeps being at the top and you begin to say, well what kind of God is it? Well you've got God number one and God number two. What do I mean by that? Go back to my other videos. You've got in a sense the God of natural law and the God of personal relationship, the God of the sum of all systems that the God has created and the God who is actually personally involved as a conscious willful agent between those systems. It's all of those things together and that's why God is such a slippery thing. A lot of things. A lot of things. It's just hard to talk about. The problem is that what is it good for? Well this is what we have with the marriage discussion. What is marriage good for? And basically what's happened in the last 200 years is that marriage is good for happiness. Well that didn't work so well because there's a lot of unhappy marriages. Well marriage is good for heirs. Well legal heirs, that's kind of a social construct. Well marriage is good for, read Tim Keller's book on marriage. What is marriage good for? Tim Keller will say marriage is good for sanctification. Why? Because you're supposed to love your enemy. Well what happens when you're in love with your enemy? Or what happens when the person you're supposed to be in love with is your enemy? Well suddenly you're going to have to do all kinds of Christian things like forgive. Adam talks about that quite a bit in his conversation with Esther. Well that's what marriage is for. Well I don't necessarily want all that. I just want to be happy. Well then don't get married. But you might be surprised how difficult and complicated something like happiness really is. This is why all judgments beg for an ultimate judge. This is in a sense my ontological argument and I hear this new wave of judgmentalism on the ascendant left. Well you're just going to need a judge. What if people slip out of time? All those slave owners, all those tyrants, all those people who abused power, they all slipped into the big sleep without being judged. Your universe isn't very just. This is why all judgments beg for an ultimate judge and why it is a terrible shame if the atheists are right and there is no good because then all we're doing is fighting for the scraps. Answer Nietzsche and nihilism. Now just recently there was a really good short interview by an Israeli columnist. He writes for Heirats. Someone, again having a YouTube channel is about the best thing I've done in terms of having people send me good sources, sent this to me right away. Doesn't have a whole lot of views right now but one of the better Jordan Peterson interviews we've had for a long time getting into a bunch of different things. So I'm going to play two segments of it. If I had to point out the major theme of your work, would it be right to say that I suffer therefore I am and that the antidote for suffering or what helps us cope with it is meaning? Yes. There you go. One word baby. That's what a good question will do. Is that a philosophical argument? No, it's a theological argument. Is that a philosophical argument? No, it's a theological argument. And listen to when Peterson was on that panel with Dave Rubin and a bunch of people at the Einrein Institute where Peterson basically says in his treatment with patients he found that many of the hardest cases couldn't get better unless they went to the theological level. Why? Because you're not going to know the ultimates unless you get out of the iron box of secular materialism. You've got to go to that level. Now again, Peterson's tricky and a number of people, Bishop Barron had a really good video out yesterday or the day before where he talked about Peterson's relationship with Kant and I'm going to probably do a video on that later this week and talk about that a little bit later. We can talk about that a little more because Bishop Barron is right. And so then the, well, here's the question. Well, can I just kind of have an imaginative God and imaginative theology? Is that sufficient? Is that a philosophical argument? No, it's a theological argument. Is that a... Look at the dude smile with this. Peterson, you're teasing me baby. Is that a theological argument or a psychological argument? Do we need meaning? Ah, theological, psychological. Oh, now you're really putting them on the spot because he's going to have to choose between those. He kept saying that the biblical series was a... this was a psychological treatment. I thought, eeeh, we're getting a little theological in here sometimes. Do we need a sense of meaning? No, we need meaning. Do we need a psychological argument? Do we need meaning or do we need a sense of meaning? No, we need meaning. Meaning's real. So is... ...sense of meaning or do we need a sense of meaning? No, we need meaning. Meaning's real. So a sense of meaning would not do. It's not... it can be reduced to... It's not a sense. No, no. It's an irreducible phenomenon. So we need answers to our questions, basically. Yes. That's right. We don't need to think we have answers to our questions. No, no. The illusion would not help. No, the illusion will hurt. Ouch! You know, what I'm trying to suggest to people is that... ...the pathway to meaning... meaning is the antidote to suffering. Meaning for Peterson is... is a summa bonum. ...as far as I can tell. The question is where is meaning to be found? And my sense is that it's to be found in responsibility. And not in relationship because... ...and this is a curious thing. I don't pretend to have an explanation, but... ...say in... social workers... ...often get their sense of meaning from... ...they get paid so low in Israel that you can't believe, but they're addicted to their work. Because when you feel you make a difference in someone's life... ...that creates a sense of meaning. Sure. So is that responsibility for someone else or is that just a connection? A connection because parenthood gives... It's both. It's both. It's both. I mean, there is... there's more... It's both and a whole lot more. ...to a relationship than mutual responsibility because there's lots of dynamic processes... ...cementing a relationship, right? But... I'm going to leave that there now and we'll go back to another clip from this, but... ...it can't just be... and again, this is... ...it can't just be off having a feeling of meaning. Now we're back to Gaius and Titius. While I'm having a feeling of the sublime... No, it needs to be sacramental. Remember, obedience is the sacrament of the Tao. I need... it needs to be the real thing. Meaning is real. I don't just have a feeling of meaning. I have meaning and you say, well, what's meaning? Well, again, for Peterson, it's the summa bonum. And once you understand that it's the summa bonum... ...now I'm going to talk theologically a little bit here. That's where... so in a sense, I talked to Preston Sprinkle this morning and Sprinkle... ...he hasn't watched a lot of Peterson because Peterson's not his gig, but he says... ...Preston Sprinkle's pretty sharp. He said... I said I called him a celebrity evangelical and probably wasn't the best thing I should do when I just meet somebody. But, you know, so he says, you know, Peterson's interesting because he's got an Augustinian theological anthropology... ...but he's got a Pelagian soteriology. And I said, that's right. Why? Because meaning is the summa bonum for Peterson. And so you carry that cross up the hill and when he talked to Dave... ...when he talked to Dave over at Rebel Wisdom, you know, you can tell VanderKlay that. What's at the top of the hill? Well, the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of God, the City of God. It's all synonymous. That's at the top of the hill. Well, but the meaning is you're carrying your cross up the hill. But for Peterson, again, because of he's not really at least publicly ready to step outside the box... ...that's what you got. That's what you got within the box. You've got meaning. And now the Apostle Paul's going to go further and say, well, you've also got hope. Now, oops. Okay. Next clip. The Israeli asked him the God question. Oh, it's so much fun. Do we need to believe in God because it's useful or do we absolutely need to believe in God? Now, again, look at the question. Do we need to believe in God because it's useful? Because one of the things that Peterson has done is that people are like, okay... ...you've really convinced me in God number one. And you've really convinced me of the utility of this stuff. And you really convinced me that living in the midst of this stuff will give me meaning. And that's really helpful. And it's true. But you always have the problem, and Sam Harris points this out in the talks. Yeah, but just grabbing it because it's useful won't actually allow you to fully inhabit within it. Okay? You won't finally fully convince your consciousness congress. ...useful or do we need to believe in God because it's useful or do we absolutely need to believe in God? Am I making the difference clear? Again? And Owen Benjamin, I completely disagree with you. He's not playing a game. He's not playing a game. I think this is him. This is him. That question always stops me. Take your time. You need to aim at a transcendent. You need to aim at some transcendent ethic. You've got to look up at the stars. You've got to get beyond. Okay? And so in a sense, looking up at the stars is mythological for getting outside of the iron box of secularism. You need to aim at some transcendent ethic. You have to do that. And you can't just do it because it's useful. You have to believe it. You have to inhabit it. You have to feel it in your gut. And the reason for that is that the transcendent ethic is the way that things are put right. It's not an illusion. It's not a mere rational construct. It's not an invention. It's none of those things. It's something that you discover. It's something you discover. It's not something you generate. It's not an invention. It's none of those things. This isn't something that we made. Okay? It's not an invention. It's not something we wield. It's something we discover. Now again, in a number of my conversations, there are people who are getting stuck on living as if and fully... It's arguable whether the words can better work, best work this way, but actually believing. And again, you've got the rider and the elephant, the Jonathan Haight. Your elephant's got to be convinced. Well, how do you convince an elephant? Well, the elephant works in the symbolic world. The elephant works... The elephant... The reason the elephant believes so well when it believes in community, sociology of knowledge, is because that's how elephants think. It's something that you discover. And you discover it despite yourself. And I think that's Peterson's journey. He didn't set out to learn this, but he discovered it when he was making maps of meaning. Discover it despite yourself. See, one of the things Nietzsche proposed when he talked about the death of God and the potential for catastrophe that would emerge as a consequence of that, was that people would have to create their own values. We'd have to replace the external valuation scheme that religion provided with something that was psychological, let's say. It's fine. It's a daring hypothesis. The psychoanalysts, especially Jung, were great students of Nietzsche. And Jung knew why Nietzsche was wrong because of what he learned from Freud. What Jung learned from Freud was that we weren't masters in our own house. That we're beholden to psychological phenomena that are beyond our voluntary control. We have a nature. And that expresses itself within us in ways that we cannot control rationally. It manifests itself as part of reality. It's phenomenological reality, subjective reality, but it's reality nonetheless, like the reality of a dream. You don't invent your dreams in a voluntary sense. They manifest themselves in the field of your imagination. But Freud was painfully secular. Freud thought God was a childish disease. Yes, he did. He thought that religion was a grand wish fulfillment. But it's a very shallow criticism, and he should have known better. And that's why Jung was so wrong. He thought that religion was a grand wish fulfillment. But it's a very shallow criticism, and he should have known better. And that's why Jung and Freud broke. I guess that would be one of your most complicated messages, is that your evil side should not be divorced but rather harnessed for good. Yes. Because it's not so evil. That blurs the difference between good and evil, in a sense. No, it just makes it more complicated. It's like you can't identify evil. And this is again why our relationship with the Tao. We know it. So Liam Neeson doesn't want to become a murderer but wants to save his family. And he's got to work this out. And life throws questions of a similar sort at us, which is why we find the Liam Neeson movie so interesting. Or the British Museum guy. He's got a fiancee at home but he falls in love with this other woman on the island. He's got to figure out what to do. And we've got the Tao. And well, it's hard because we're below it. We don't wield it. We don't possess it. It doesn't work immediately like gravity. It works in fact over long periods of time and we can't see time from the end. Evil with something. It's so evil. That blurs the difference between good and evil, in a sense. No, it just makes it more complicated. It's like you can't identify evil with something simple. Oh, aggression is evil. It's like no, it's not. Fear is evil. No, it's not. Neither is pain. It's not that simple. Whatever evil is, is very complicated. And to attribute to society, for example, or to attribute it to a particular psychological trait, that's just, that's, it's not anywhere near sophisticated enough to come to terms with the problem. So evil is something that's, resentment is closer to something that's at the core, but even that's not sufficiently complicated. And evil is much better construed as a complex personality, which is why that is how it's construed. There's great figures of evil. Satan is the ultimate figure of evil. Why? Because in order to flesh out the concept, you need a character and a personality and a story. You can't reduce it to a set of descriptions, partly because it moves. It's like, well, sometimes aggression is evil. Well, yeah, that's true. Sometimes it's not. And this is why, again, back to the beginning with Adam and Esther, this is why I say you can try to represent morality as a code of law, but that's actually not the best representations we have. That's a helpful representation. You can gain some clarity with it. God uses it in the Ten Commandments, but it's not the most helpful representation. And I think this is one of the transitions from Judaism to Christianity, because in Christianity, the representation of the law is a man. Now, I think there's some of that implicit in Judaism, and so some of the Jewish watchers will probably help me out with that and instruct me a little bit better in your tradition. But it's why the representation as in terms of a personality, in terms of a person, in terms of a story, that's why that's far better representation and why that representation works for us. And why, in fact, you have God number one and God number two, because you can't talk to a set of laws, but you can talk to a person. But then we go back to the previous question. Well, is it good enough to just imagine it as a person? But if you're in your head, you're imagining, well, this person is just a representation. Now we're down to the touring test in terms of your talking to a computer. Can you tell if it's indistinguishable between a machine and a person? Well, that is very, very interesting on a whole number of levels. That's why the personality is a better representative of these sorts of concepts, because a personality is something that's got a certain amount of coherence and identity, but it's also something that's adaptive and flexible in different situations. And there you've got the issue of context. And these things are, to think of evil as a personality and to think of good as a personality is much more appropriate than to think of them as tables of rules or something like that or descriptions. Or instincts. Or instincts, yeah, definitely not instincts. It's like you just can't damn an instinct. You know, it's not helpful. And there's aggression. It's like, what, you're going to get rid of aggression? It's like, you don't like ambition? You don't like purpose? You don't like persistence? So the whole interview is great. Watch the whole thing. And this is why we're interested in even a B-movie catechesis or liturgy with Liam Neeson. This is why your chest swell, unless you're one of these people whose head has been grown so big at the expense of your chest that you no longer have that, which is C.S. Lewis's first chapter in the Abilene. His second chapter, he goes into instinct. And you'll find Peterson and Lewis have a fair amount of carmenality in terms of what Peterson just said there with respect to instinct and what Lewis says with respect to instinct. This is why morality looks more like a person and a story. It's complicated and that complexity interests us because we're trying to figure it out, even in a liturgical movie. And this is why the celebrity atheists, when they look at the Bible, they'd say, ah, the Bible is inconsistent. God violates his own rules. Well, on one hand, you don't understand what a God is. And you don't understand how it is designed to work. And this is the essential problem with many people when they look at the Bible. They say, oh, I know what Christianity is. Christianity is here's a Bible that's a set of rules. And if we do those rules, you will be blessed. And if you break those rules, you will be cursed. Okay, now you've got the Tao. But again, the Tao is better expressed as a personality and not so much a list of rules because a personality within a story has context. And in fact, when you watch Liam Neeson wrestle with the question, how can I actually be noble? How can I fulfill the Tao? Remember obedience is the sacrament of the Tao. How can I actually be noble? Well, it's within the context of the story that he's going to have to work it out. Why are you saying that it's all relative? No. But I'm saying it is so complex, you're not just going to have a list of rules that is going to be able to carry you the whole thing. You're going to need a personality. You're going to need a person. And of course, in Christianity, that person that comes along is Jesus. Then you're going to have the question. And I think, again, Bishop Barron, it was a little podcast chat that he did, which I'm probably going to play later this week. I thought he went into that well. Okay, so Jesus is the highest archetypal representation of the ideal man. Okay. Well, what do you know of him? Well, most people will just say, well, I know the name and then I've got a whole set of ideas in my head. Well, why don't you start by reading the New Testament? Well, I'm just going to read the Gospels, you and Russell Brand, because Russell Brand thinks that the Gospels are the highest, the canon within the canon. Well, actually, the earliest representation of Jesus' resurrection is 1 Corinthians 15. And in fact, the entire New Testament is supposed to be designed to show us who Jesus is. And the Book of Revelation is actually an attempt to look at the Hebrew prophets now in the light of Jesus' revelation. And, oh, now you're just getting all complex. If Jesus is the archetypal image of the perfect man, and this is something I should live up to. Now you can see Preston Sprinkle's idea of Pelagian, those of you who are theology nerds. Well, what does that mean? Well, is he merely a representation? Well, then now I'm going to pull the ontological argument on you, because if it's merely a representation, it's less, it's a less good representation than a representation that actually lived. And if the representation of the resurrection is merely a representation, it is a less good representation than an actual resurrection, than one that becomes actualized at every layer. Is it just the literal, is it just the literal resurrection? No, it functions at every layer, which is exactly how the rest of the New Testament imagines it. Now, it was so interesting when I was reading, I should probably reread this book, I was reading this sort of autobiography of Jung, and I came across this section with Jung and Freud. And this is exactly where my ontological argument starts to dig in and get crunchy. So this is Jung. It interested me to hear Freud's view on precognition and parapsychology in general. This is where Jung gets a little spooky for a lot of people. And then he's saying, I'm feeling the sharp retort of the tip of my tongue, and other positivism, which is kind of this shallow materialism that really in some ways Sam Harris is trying to transcend from with his Buddhism and his use of psychedelics. It was some years before he recognized the seriousness of parapsychology. Oh, now we're sounding all woo woo. And acknowledged the factuality of a cult phenomenon. Now the evangelicals are nervous. While Freud was going on his way, I had a curious sensation. It was as if my diaphragm were made of iron and were becoming red hot. Sounds like Jeremiah, fire in his bones. A glowing vault. Now again, don't start taking Paul VanderKlay. So my consciousness congress had a lot of, yeah, you say that, these group of people over here and those people over there, yeah, but let's just read the text and understand its impact in the context of this conversation. And at this moment, there was a loud report in the bookcase. It's a loud boom or a bang. Like a report from a gun. Which stood right next to us, that we both started up in alarm, fearing the thing was going to topple on us. I said to Freud, there. That is an example of the so-called catalytic, texturization phenomenon. Jung even had a name for it. That's typical Jung. So he's, here, here, there's the report. Well, just hearing a noise, noises happen. Ah, but it's predicting the future, right, Scott Adams? It's predicting the future that you can actually get at truth. That's what all of my materialist friends tell me. It's the power of prediction that you know when you have something. Oh, come on, Freud exclaimed, that's sheer bosh. It is not, Jung replied. You are mistaken, air professor. And to prove my point, I now predict that in a moment there will be another such loud report. Sure enough, no sooner had I said the words that the same detonation went off in the bookcase. Now again, the Amazing Randy can say, ah, Jung planned this for Freud. Well, now you're saying Jung is a con man. What was going on? Well, Peterson is a Jungian and he's got that kind of doubt in his mind about the iron box of secularism. And maybe the world is stranger and maybe stuff is going on that we don't understand. And maybe our capacity to explain everything isn't what we think it is. And maybe in fact, our capacity to, our belief in our capacity to explain everything is motivated by other fears. All the way down, the political level, the book of Revelation asserts that all rebellion will one day be put to an end. It stands, the book of Revelation pretends to stand outside of time looking at the end. Tell us. Well, that's where you can make final judgments of the story. You've got the individual level. So 1930s, 38, German saying Hitler is great. He sure made Germany great again. We have a military to be proud of. We're, we're taking over these countries. We're, we're annexing, you know, parts of Austria, you know, we're on the rise. And, you know, the story of the world is a story of racial progress. In the 1930s, ah, the story of the world is the story of class progress. And here in the Soviet Union, we are, we are building out the New World Order. And a lot of people in France and a lot of people in Britain and a lot of people in America were pretty interested in what was happening in both of those places. And that was pulling at the fabric of the United States. Read your history. But an individual doesn't live very long, makes this snap judgment in very short periods of time. How can they know what's good? How can they know what something is good when they all they're looking at is what it is good for? We are judged according to what we have done and receive what is due us. God can't be reduced to Tao, represented as a personality, but also a conscious agent. You see, Freud and the materialists have a bias. What is the source of this bias? Is it motivated? Vervecky, in the video he put out last Friday, tells a very interesting little parable of parents who introduced their child to a room, a secret room in the house that they had never heard from. And they tell their child, we've only been acting like your parents and we were paid by the government to do a study on you. And the Truman Show riffs on similar things. You know, your wife is only an actress on TV who is playing a role. She doesn't really love you. Well, what does that mean? Doesn't really love you. That means doesn't love you at every level. Why is sex sacramental? What is it hooking up with in another world, in the world above? What is taking care in the Melbourne talk? Peterson tells the story of his father-in-law taking care of his mother-in-law with dementia. And of course, Peterson breaks down. It's a beautiful story. Why is it a beautiful story? Because his taking care of his wife with dementia was sacramental to a love which is eternal. This is how sacraments work. And they only, well, it connects you with another world, with a world that is more real. And this is why Liam Neeson can say, whether my family lives or dies, I'm going to do what's noble. And it might cost me my life. It doesn't matter. And Peterson will say, that's meaning. And here in the B-movie catechesis and liturgy, we feel it in our chests. And we know it. It's the Tao. It's something right. And we're in touch with it. And when we live in touch with it, it's meaning. And actually, probably, meaning is as sacramental as Peterson gets. There's the title of the video, Meaning as Jordan Peterson's Sacrament. Religious people fantasize that they eliminate the bias will somehow solve everything. Yeah, if everyone believed in God, well, before 500 years ago, everyone did believe in God and that didn't fix everything. It's not so simple. It isn't, you know, the biases are relatively recent as the old world was the rebel, and the old world was just as rebellious as this one. Knowing that you're rebelling against someone and believing that you're the author of your own destiny, there's not a lot of difference between them, but we're very capable of living either. Modernist project brought us much good and we enjoyed it. NT Wright quips, he'd rather have a modernist dentist than both a pre-modern and a post-modern dentist. He has real teeth and real pain and he wants his dentist working on his real teeth. Jordan Peterson wants a good plumber who works on real pipes. All of that is true. Now again, it depends on your tears. The modernist, the modernity arose from Christianity. Jordan Peterson's mission is that modernism arose from the metaphorical foundation of the Bible. And he owes its grain to the story. And that's what Adam believes. Now it's important to remember that you can hardly find nations with deeper Christian roots than pre-Nazi Germany. You had a strong Roman Catholic Church, strong Protestant Church. World War I really shook it up. And World War I was a very religious war, which receives almost no historical attention. World War II and the Cold War shocked the West back to church. In fact, church attendance reached its height in the US and Canada during the Cold War. Why? Because of the way all of these stories work. And we're in deathly fear of the communists, so we sought to recruit God's help in fighting the Cold War. So we put in God we trust on our coins and we put one nation under God in the Pledge of Allegiance. Well, why? What has these deep roots? And somehow we sensed, and in fact this whole Jordan Peterson journey I've been on has been a journey in the fact that we are conscious of so little of what we actually know. And watching Jordan Peterson get people interested in the Bible and Christianity has been a lesson in that in and of itself. I think Jordan Peterson has some explanations about why people are interested in Christianity, but I don't know that he's exactly right. And I've been working on this for over a year now, and I certainly know I don't have all the answers. I've got some clues. But I do know that it has to do with all of this stuff that we're working through. That somehow we realize we can't live with God and we can't live without God. And we don't know what to do. And it's not a, and that's where marriage becomes a sacrament. Not because marriage will make you happy, marriage will make you miserable, but maybe miserable in all the right ways to grow you and grow you up into a person that actually understands meaning. Meaning is Jordan Peterson's sacrament. See, I, why do I make these videos? Because I have to think out loud when I make them. And when I think out loud, I learn stuff. I'm going to have to write that down because I'm going to forget it between now and I've got a conversation after this. Meaning is Jordan Peterson's sacrament. That's, that's, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep. So the meaning crisis, we feel the lack of sacramental connection to a bigger Tao. We see that mere moral feelings are insufficient to build community. Social justice warriors eat themselves. They can't maintain a community. This is Jonathan Haidt's point throughout all of his books. That actually religious people with their five or six taste buds generally do better over the long haul. That's why Adam is right on this. That, yeah, religious people outlast them. It's because they're not running against the grain. But when the more granular you get with the grain, well, you're going to have to work that out. Where do you look for hope? Where do you look for home? Oh, it's my last slide. I don't feel like I'm quite done because I want to come all the way back to where we started. There it is. And this discussion. See, objective morality, you're not going to put it in a list. It's going to have to be embodied in someone. Well, how can, who can embody objective morality? Well, you are going to have to embody objective morality. Now we're all the way back to Peterson. You have to clean your room. What's the biggest contribution you can give to world history going forward? Well, embody the Tao. And you can't just talk about it. You have to live it. You have to order your life. You have to clean your room. Well, will that save the world? No. But someone lived a perfect life. Now this is Christianity. Perfect man lives a perfect life, gets killed for it, and is raised from the dead. That's the story. Well, why is that story so powerful? Because it gives hope to you to be a noble person, to actually live out the story that you'll be raised from the dead. Or are you saying it's pelagian, it's works righteousness? No, it's not really works righteousness either. Because misery deliverance gratitude. The more you live it out, the more you realize how bad you are at it. And what that means is that you need to know that you're going to be saved by someone else. And that the way that you live out the Tao actually is an expression of gratitude for what someone has already done for you. That's the way the story works. You say, well, how can I believe that? Well, you have to start living it. Your brain will follow. The writer learns from the elephant too. All right, that's enough for now. I have a conversation in 15 minutes. I have to remember objective morality. See, I already forgot it. The meaning is Jordan Peterson's sacrament.