https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hvE6KqBdLqg

 Alright, well welcome everybody. Thanks for showing up to this super last minute convo slash Q&A thingamajigoo. This was actually Tripp's idea, since Paul was on vacation, because Tripp and I both were having some fun going back and forth on Twitter over a question of objective morality. And this initially came out of, well it's sort of Richard Dawkins' fault ultimately, because there was all of this resurfaced conflict over his comments on selective abortion, and an Irish radio interviewer. And so then I wrote about that for The Spectator, and I was folding in some comments that Tom Holland had from Twitter, where Tom was just saying, ah, this is all in Nietzsche, objective human rights don't really exist. It's a theological view, so Dawkins is just being a consistent atheist by recognizing this. So I quoted Tom in The Spectator piece, but I didn't really have space in that piece to argue with Tom over the way he framed that comment, but in fact I actually took issue with how he framed that comment. So then I circled back around to engage with Tom on that, and he pushed back, and I pushed back. We ended up having this very long, kind of non-Twitter-ish, erudite Twitter debate, which I then compiled and put out there on Substack for people to enjoy. And then Tripp popped in here and there and kind of followed the thread. So we thought it might just kind of make a fun topic. And so Tripp, do you want to kind of, I don't know, kind of lay out the topic a little bit? Sure, yeah. So I think that, you know, in a way that I kind of agree with Tom and his point about Dawkins that universal human rights, if you accept Dawkins presuppositions, don't actually exist. And so I understand where Holland is coming from. I think that what's interesting is that Holland kind of adopts a more sociological view of morality, that he's just observing as a historian, like, well, this culture thinks that this was right, and another culture thinks that this was right, and that kind of stuff. And so in some sense, our morality is constructed, and all Dawkins is doing is being kind of consistent with that, that this is construction and not, and any objection to what Dawkins is saying is really a Christian point of view. And I think that that's, so I think that's how I read the original one. Now, both Esther and I will take issue with that, because I think that that assumption that morality is because we observe different cultures or different people, you know, adhering or claiming to believe in different moralities and that kind of stuff, therefore, it's sociological, therefore, it's constructed. And that's really all that needs to be said about that. And that's where, you know, kind of the moral realist philosophy kind of comes into it. They were like, no, actually, that's not a great evidence for something to be objective or not. So I think that, like, where we ended up was just saying, listen, like, Tom Holland seems to be making the argument that if a belief is influenced by culture or, you know, the situations or the environment that a person in is in, therefore, it's not objective. That's the best argument that I think that or like, that's a concise view of what I think he was saying. It's like, listen, this is obviously constructed. Like, if you believe you believe this because you grew up being heavily influenced by Christianity, whether or not you're Christian and and that and so therefore, this is not like an objective thing in the world. This is something else. And so then I think, Esther, you got into him like, well, two plus two equals four is is that objectively true? Is it not objectively true? What if you didn't believe that? What if a different culture didn't believe that? Would that make it not objectively true? Is that actually a good argument against objectivity? What is objectivity? And so I think that, like, that's where I think we landed on is that this the argument seems to me to be if there's disagreement due to culture, therefore, it's not objective. Yeah, he actually, I mean, he kind of bit the bullet on the two plus two equals four thing as well, because he was like, well, yeah, if there were other cultures that believed and operated under the assumption that two plus two equals five, then, yeah, I would say that's also a culturally conditioned, subjective belief. And so it's like, OK. But I mean, when he asked me, have there ever been any cultures that believed that two plus two did not equal four? And then I thought about it and I was like, well, our culture, you know, like, look at the people right now on Twitter who are saying that, you know, math is a white supremacist construct or what have you. The two plus two was more like James Lindsay got that trending for a while. With that specific thing. And so now you could say that's just some. Brad students on Twitter. Well, I mean, OK, but now at this point, we're shifting goalposts, I think, you know. Yeah. Yeah, no, no, I think that's right. I think that we're we're shifting goalposts and there's other like, OK, fine. We don't want to go into plus two plus four thing. Fine. OK. What about like Native Americans thinking that the world rests on the back of a giant turtle? Sure. OK. Like that's racist. I know. But that's like that's part of the mythology. So like, I'm sure even we're going to say like, hey, that's the mythology. We don't need to take it literally and that kind of stuff. That's fine. But I'm sure there were people in those cultures that thought that that was more or less literally true. Right. I can hear now like Jonathan Peugeot is going to come in and say, well, in some sense, you could say that, you know, it might not be false that the world rests on the back of the giant turtle. Oh, yeah. Yeah. They're an uninteresting modernist view. Would it be false? Anyway, go on. No, no, no, no, I know. I completely agree. And so like taking that aside, though, that's not that's outside of the Tom Hall and Richard Dawkins frame. Right. They they like Tom Hall and Richard Dawkins will say, no, that's literally false. That's objectively false. That's not what's going on. Oh, boy, literally is a word that fudges. We really got to do some gardening on the word literally here. I'm sorry. BBK is gone. I've just taken this opportunity to mercilessly troll BBK. But yeah, but like that's outside of the Richard Dawkins, Tom Hall and frame. They don't they don't talk about mythology and symbolism the way the pageo does. So like like we they would say actually that's objectively false. And I would say, well, but it was a culturally conditioned belief. How can you say it's objectively false? Like the argument just fails on its face because there's all kinds of culturally conditioned beliefs that we would say still have an objective truth or falsity to them. Right. And in fact, I was going to say this, somebody who left a comment directly on my sub stat kind of prompted me to pull this out explicitly. But if anything, we should expect a variety of divergence in how people adhere or don't adhere to the moral code, given how personally demanding it is and that it requires a self sacrifice, a self denial. It requires counterintuitive, you know, placing of others' interests above one's own, et cetera, et cetera. So, you know, there would be something strange if we didn't observe people regularly violating that. Right. Sure. No. Yeah. There's a motivation to deny it. Right. Like there's, you know, in the same way that like there's a motivation to go into court and to deny that you're guilty of violating a law. The objective nature of like whether or not you actually did commit a crime aside, you have a motivated reason to argue why technically you may or may not have. Right. And so that's like, yes, it's motivated reasoning. So like the fact that there's the fact that there's disputes about this shouldn't really surprise us. And it certainly isn't evidence against objectivity. And that's why I wanted to push back. They're like, listen, like a good way of saying whether or not something is right or wrong, whether or not something is objective or subjective is does the truth of the statement change based on who's uttering it? And so you pointed out in the in the subset or in the Twitter, like I think either there are other places you use the example like, OK, well, lighting toddlers on fire for spectator sport, right? Like lighting a baby on fire for that for spectator sport. Like, does the truth of falsity of saying that is immoral? Does that change based on who's uttering it? Exactly. Yeah. And if it doesn't, we say no, that's that's wrong. All cultures always then it's then then we're making it an objective claim. And that's where I think that we've gotten out of it. We're saying, well, by moral or immoral, like Tom Holland's almost doing like a sociological study of what did they consider moral and moral. And we can we can say like, yes, like whether or not your culture considers something moral or immoral. Obviously, that's culturally dependent. But whether or not something is moral or immoral is a very different kind of claim. And that's and that's actually what we all do. Right. That's what we argue about. That's why we can say like, hey, our culture is wrong on this. Right. Like that's the whole point. That's why Bonhoeffer in Nazi Germany can say like, this is wrong. What's going on is because he's making a universal objective claim. He's not making a culturally dependent claim or else he would object. We would have to say Bonhoeffer was wrong. Right. We would have to say that. And I don't think any of us would. I don't think Tom Holland would. And that's my problem. Yeah. Well, is that like I don't even think we're being consistent. Yeah. We I mean, we actually got into Nazis specifically because I asked him, OK, so give me an example of a claim that you would regard as objective. And he said, well, OK, I would say it's objectively true that when people don't eat, they starve. That's an example of an objective truth for me, just like a pure empirical observation about nature, which I think gets into a deeper problem here. And it's it's interesting because now I'm thinking about the Stephen Fry Jordan Peterson conversation where Fry was like, I'm an empiricist at that. PBK was rightly saying, oops, you did a rationalism again. You did a rationalist again. And again, and you're doing a rationalism. So that's that's a big, broader problem, I think. And I see this in some of the language that Peterson uses as well. And in my substack, I brought out this little clip from Maps of Meaning, where when he says objective, it really seems like he's making it synonymous with scientific or empirical. And it's just like, no, I don't think so. But to get back to what Paul and to the Nazis, he was saying, OK, so then. As an example of subjective truth, both the claim it's right to expose infants to die and the claim that it's wrong. These are both subjective things. And I asked, so do you extend that also to Jewish genocide? And he said, absolutely. And then he linked me to this piece where he developed the thesis that he's mentioned in interviews where once we killed God, Hitler and the Nazis became the sort of the gold standard, if you will, for absolute evil. So I'm like, well, OK. I mean, I think there's something actually kind of profound in that thesis. But it's a Nazi equator to jump from there to killing all the Jews as a subjective. It's not objectively wrong. And he told me, well, I mean, you're saying that because your parents are Christians. But if you had been a Nazi, you might not think the same. And I'm like, yeah, I mean, there were Nazis who in our timeline didn't think the same. But to me, this sounds like it's it's a little bit similar to when atheists will try as kind of a gotcha to say, well, you know, if you had grown up in a Muslim country, you wouldn't be a Christian. And I'm like, yes. So what's the argument there? So, yeah. Well, if you wouldn't have grown up in the West in the time that you did, you wouldn't believe the things that you did either. Right. They said like, it's like you wouldn't have been you wouldn't have been an atheist if you were born three thousand years ago. And so like, yeah. So like the whole argument of there, because there's disagreement, therefore it's subjective or therefore, like we can dismiss it. Like, well, everyone can play that game. That's a valid argument. But I just deny that that's a valid argument. Like that it's a non sequitur of the First Order. Like we can we can all play that. There's reasons you think the way that you do. You didn't just come up with it. So exactly. Gingerbill points out the interesting thing is that most of the actual empiricists were also a kind of moral intuitionist, such as Hume and Smith, with their moral sentimentalism. Yeah. And actually, Jonathan Haidt develops that at the Righteous Mind. I don't know if everyone here recalls that. But I found that really interesting, actually, because I hadn't made a study. I'm more familiar with Hume's other work. I hadn't looked into his stuff on morality that deeply. But I actually found myself sort of liking some things that Hume said. So, Tripp, I know if you want to jump in there. No, I completely agree. I think that Hume is both underrated in some areas and also very overrated in other areas. Yeah, yeah. The areas that he's most the areas that he's best known for are the areas that he's overrated, you know, obviously, like on miracles and that kind of stuff. But yeah, no, I completely agree. Like, I think moral intuition, there's a good argument there. I mean, C.S. Lewis obviously, you know, plays this kind of thing up. But like, hey, we all have like, you know, the towel and that kind of stuff in the abolition of man. Like, he plays up this idea that it's kind of and it matches well with natural law. You know, this idea that, yeah, we're born and Paul talks about this, you know, also a lot in Romans, the idea that we're born in some sense with like seeing the truth of these things and actually like Plato kind of, you know, plays on this too, like exiting the cave and seeing the good. And it's like a moral intuition that we have. But that doesn't mean just because it's the moral intuition, it just of course, like how well we see things is cultural condition doesn't mean that there's not an objective truth there. Like that the argument itself just fails. And I agree. I yeah. Yeah, agreed. I have a question. So you mentioned the abolition of man. I alluded to the abolition of man in the course of this. So then there was a there were a few other people who kind of jumped into the Twitter thread with Holland. And one said that he was he was trying to think of a Lewis quote that supported his idea. Our intuitions are unreliable. They couldn't place it. So then another friend went and pulled the quote out. And I read it and I don't think it actually contradicts anything that I was saying. But let me just go ahead and read it out and then we could discuss. So from pages 48 to 49, abolition of man, telling us to obey instincts is like telling us to obey people. People say different things. So do instincts. Our instincts are at war. If it is held that the instinct for preserving the species should always be obeyed at the expense of other instincts, whence do we derive this rule of precedence? To listen to that instinct speaking in its own cause and deciding in its own favor would be rather simple minded. Each instinct, if you listen to it, will claim to be gratified at the expense of all the rest. By the very act of listening to one rather than the others, we have already prejudged the case. If we did not bring to the examination of our instincts a knowledge of their comparative dignity, we could never learn it from them. That knowledge cannot itself be instinctive. The judge cannot itself be one of the parties judged. Or if he is, the decision is worthless. And there is no ground for placing the preservation of the species above self-preservation or sexual appetite. I mean, that seems to me like an argument for like there's an objective way of approaching various values. Yeah, exactly. Right. So it seems to actually complement what I was saying. Right. No, I think that that's right. I think, you know, a friend of mine who's a former VP of like research and development, he's a math PhD from Iowa State, but he's a really strong Christian guy. He's retired now, but he was talking to me about this and he said, listen, wisdom is wisdom is like a dance, right? You have to know when to move forward and when to move back and that kind of stuff. It's like a really well choreographed dance is knowing when to take some of those steps. And he's like in morality, like wisdom in terms of morality is like that in terms of like you have various values, like preservation of the species, preservation of my family, like various things that compete with one another. And wisdom is knowing which one takes precedence over the other. But that's still an objective claim that there should be a precedence. And that's, I think, Lewis's point is that there should be a precedence and there's a right way of doing it and a wrong way of doing it. And yeah, I think that's an argument for objectivity, not an argument for subjectivity. Right. And I want to bring in the example I specifically gave because that arose out of a different sub thread that sprouted later where I think this is a really strong argument against Tom's whole cultural conditioning frame. I said, look, a little child has to be trained or conditioned to accept the morality of abortion, not the other way around, because a child's initial instinct, and I mean, you'll find this if you present the idea of abortion to a four year old or whatever, the child is like, what? Like, he's shocked. Oh, that's a baby in mommy's tummy. That would be wrong. You know, and then it's only after they've gone and taken a bunch of ethics classes or whatever that they're like, oh, yes, for the greater good, something, something. Right. And yet we have normalized abortion in our culture. And so you can't say that the child is being culturally conditioned to instinctively want to protect the unborn wife, the womb, if anything, his first instinct is countercultural, which seems to indicate that he is perceiving he's accessing something that is true outside of culture. Yeah, no, I think that's a good point. And it reminds me of the I mean, a lot of people have made this point. Peterson has made this point a lot that, you know, what, you know, in order to justify genocide, often they start to describe the people that they want to kill as subhuman, as pests, right, as, you know, as vermin, as rats, as insects, as something less than, right. And the question is, why would you need to do that? Like, why would you need to condition people to think of them that way? If like, like if you said, well, I mean, morality is just completely like, there's no intuition here. There's nothing else we don't. Why should we need to condition to think of them as rats, or vermin, or pests? Why couldn't we just say, yeah, they're humans, but it's okay to kill them? Like, why do we need to dehumanize them? For yes. Yeah, excellent. Yeah. And now that makes me think of this great old unbelievable debate that Peter Hitchens had. I don't remember the name of the guy was arguing with, but it's funny from Justin Briarley's younger days as a radio interviewer, but already he was very suave. And Peter Hitchens just like blew a gasket with this guy who was arguing for abortion. And Hitchens is like, here we go. Well, this is how it is. First, you dehumanize it, then you kill it. That's what killers always do. It's like Justin goes, gentle bit, gentle bit, please. But yeah, he's making exactly this point. Yeah. I mean, why would you need to do that? If like, this is all just culturally conditioned, why would we need to dehumanize first? And I think it was like, like Lewis would say, like, oh, because we all know that if it's human, then it has value and killing it is wrong. That's a cross-cultural thing. And like, we all agree on that. There's an objective truth there. And that's the Tao. That's the way. That's whatever you want to call it. Like, why wouldn't like... Yeah, go ahead. Oh, I was going to say, although I will say I do see a mix. Like, I do see people who just completely bite the utilitarian bullet. And we'll say, well, yes, you know, but sometimes it can be right to kill people. If you've done the calculus and, you know, crunched the well-being numbers or whatever, and it comes out the other side. Well, that's what's scary. That's the Peter Singer argument, right? That's the... Or the Dockett's argument. I mean, yeah. You're the Dockett's, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Although I don't know where Dockett's lands on. Well, Dockett's will do the whole, you know, well, a human doesn't necessarily equal a person, and he'll go down the whole personhood theory. But I suppose you could say even Peter Singer is doing his own sort of academic version of what you're describing there too, right? With the whole linguistic slate of hand. Well, yeah, well, it may be a human, but is it a person though? So you have to do some kind of a dance like that to, you know, to complete the conscience searing. Sure. And well, what's interesting is that Singer would still claim his morality is objective, right? Yeah, he's a more platonist actually. Yeah, right. Exactly. Yeah, I mean, like, you know, like suffering is the ultimate evil, and that's like a kind of a universal objective claim that he's making. And so then he's just trying to apply it in what I think are appalling ways in a lot of cases. But like that's like, so like he wouldn't even agree with the Holland. Like he's a he's a moral realist. Which makes it scarier. Yes. Well, that's always the case, right? Like a real moral relativist, like it's hard to get behind. It's hard for them to lead a revolution to like kill a lot of people. Because you're like, it doesn't really matter. But like, it's the people who think that it's righteous what they're doing. Yeah, yeah. The way I put it to a friend, you know, Tom Holland is just like, phew, I am so glad that everyone around me prefers chocolate ice cream to strawberry ice cream. That's so clear. I can't really say tell you why objectively. I'm just really glad. I feel like we dodged a bullet with the strawberry thing. Yeah, but like, are you just like, yeah, what bullet did you dodge exactly? There like, what's the ultimate point of it? And so, yeah, it's weird. But I mean, I've seen so many historians and sociologists approach it that way. And it's not in a way, it's not surprising that Tom Holland would approach it that way. I was surprised though that he seems completely unaware that moral realism is a very real debate in philosophy circles. Just sheer ignorance on his part, because like he seemed to think it's bizarre that somebody who wasn't already a Christian or a Jew, which sidetracked, this keeps going back to Christianity, but really should get back to Judaism. Anyway, he was just like, well, how could you have a discussion about this or think there was a debate if you weren't already, or if you weren't tacitly reaching for a Christian principle? And it's like, no, this is actually quite active, the same way that you can find atheist philosophers who are mind-body dualists. So, I mean, like these are live and active debates, but it's just not his field. So he's unaware, I think. No, yeah, I get it. With his fascination with ancient Rome and even his knowledge of the Greek philosophers and that kind of stuff, it was just surprising to me that he thought this was a bizarre thing. I mean, one of the tweets that he replied to me on was like, I can understand you arguing for this as a Christian, but not as a philosopher. Oh, I saw that too. So I was like, what are you? No, this is not at all. The this is hardly a just Christian perspective. I would argue that it is a very Christian perspective, but it's certainly not just Christians arguing for this. Was this when he was bringing up about this is a theology discussion as opposed to a philosophy discussion? It kind of flows from that premise. If you begin by saying it's a theological proposition, which by the way, I think it's interesting because it seems to me like he bundles a theological proposition with a not objectively true proposition. Yes, yeah. He does. Yeah. That was my point to him. I was like, okay, but are we arguing about like I'm arguing that Christianity is objectively true. And so if you grant me that it's objectively true, just for the sake of argument, like what are you talking about? This shouldn't be a philosophy argument. Of course it should be. Right. If this is true, then it's true all the time and it's true in every subject. Yes, it's like the Proclus of Narnia. But if things are real, yeah. The thing is though, I think the question though is what has to take epistemic precedence. So like a presuppositionalist, which maybe we should just kind of gloss what presuppositionalism is. Is it a sort of Christian frame? So Tripp, do you want to do that real quickly? Sure. Yeah. So presuppositionalism kind of came from Van Til originally. It's the argument that like at the foundation of all of these transcendent truths, so the laws of logic, laws of morality, and that kind of stuff is the truth of the Christian God. And without the truth of the Christian God as a presupposition, none of these other things that we argue about make sense. The laws of science, order, logic, whatever, none of that makes sense. It relies on this. And so like you have to start with that premise to even argue about any of these other things. And so the presuppositionalists would say there's no use in arguing about like the cosmological argument or any other argument from desire or anything else like that, because really, you're granting the ground to the atheist by even allowing them to have those categories. And really, those categories, they're depending on the Christian God for those categories in the first place, and you should just be pointing that out and not argue about these other things. I guess, would you add anything to that? That's perfect, I think. It almost seems like Tom is reinventing his own kind of secular presuppositionalism. I don't know. So it seems to me like Tom and a Christian presuppositionalist could almost bump fists and agree there. Yeah, right. Yeah, no, I think that they could. And I think that there's an argument there, kind of a la C.S. Lewis, there is a certain sense in which atheists are sawing off the branch upon which they sit. But that's not to say that they're not perceiving things correctly in some cases. That's where I would differ with the presuppositionalists, and I think that they probably would agree with Tom. But either way, it was just like he's saying, well, listen, this is a different category. You can argue this theologically or whatever, but you can't argue for it philosophically, to which I say, like, I don't like Plato was essentially arguing for this. Moral realism in Plato is as real as real gets. That's a very strong realism. So and that certainly didn't depend on Christianity. It really didn't even depend on Judaism. That was still a foreign system to him. So yeah, true. And now you can say, oh, but look at the horrible things that Plato or Aristotle excused. And sure, right, I agree. Although, and Lewis makes this point of the abolition of man, you can say, well, look at the virtuous and maybe even inconveniently virtuous things that were extolled, like, filial piety, I think would be a good classic example. Often a very inconvenient thing. But there you see, you know, the story of the Aeneid, you see Aeneas rescuing his father on his shoulders from the burning house. And this is like the archetypal pious son. And that's the example that's held up to be imitated. And that's not like you say, it's separate from Judaism. It predates Christianity. But there it is, a recognition that filial piety is a good thing. Yeah. Well, and, you know, I could, I could, if you keep going with the just the Greek philosophy, you know, I mean, Socrates' debate with Uther Fro like echoes very much of C.S. Lewis's points about like, where, like, where do these values find their hierarchy in some sense? Because that was Uther Fro's problem. Like he was turning in, I remember correctly, he was turning in his father for killing a slave of his. And so he was saying like, this was a just thing to do. And Socrates is like, well, why? Like, what are you talking about? Like, okay, so, you know, the justice for the slave outweighs familial piety. And so Uther Fro's like arguing with him about this. Well, I guess is what the gods say. And you're like, well, which gods? And so in a way, like Socrates is pointing at the kind of same kind of thing that C.S. Lewis was, is that like, where do you find this hierarchy? Really? And, but, and Uther, Uther didn't have a great answer to that, but that's, but he's in a polytheistic system. So it's not that surprising that he couldn't really answer that question. If you're trying to try it to the gods and all the gods are different. And they have very different values. Socrates is a theist though, right? Yeah. I mean, yeah, of some sort. Yeah. I mean, he, you know, well, we don't, I mean, we don't really know. We all we know, like, it's hard to tease out what Socrates actually thought versus what Plato thought, but for sure, like Plato was, he's closer. He's much closer to a theist than he is anything. And, and Socrates is kind of like his mouthpiece in some of these things. But, but that's the thing. That was Socrates' point is like, there's a hierarchy here that you're ascribing to. And I want to know what that is. How do you know? And so his is more like an epistemic question to Uther for like, how do you justify this kind of stuff? But like that, that impetus to ask what like is the hierarchy of values and how do you make these decisions? He's asking an objective question. Like how, how can you justify this? And like these, these questions, like, and that question is like a very core human question is like, how do we like, how do we organize things so that we can be objectively moral and not just like acceptable to society? That's the question. That's why, that's why that, that's why that dialogue lasted. That's why it hit so hard because we have that impulse to want to do that. That's not just a Jewish thing. That's not just a Christian thing. Like we all do it. Right. And I think that there's this problem that's emerged in the wake of the enlightenment, could say, is this narrow empiricism where people, like if you, if everyone could get out their, you know, their meters or whatever, you know, their thermometers, their test tubes and run a bunch of experiments and agree on something. And this is where we find our security. Oh, good. Okay. Phew. That's what it means for something to be objective is that, you know, if people, people all run these experiments that come to the same conclusions, then that's the, that's something I can be most sure of. This brings me to the bit where Tom accused me of sophistry, which was a run bit. So I was suggesting that we actually have more direct access to the moral realm, the realm of moral truth claims than we have to the realm of material truth claims. Because I said, Tom, I'm not a hundred percent sure that you exist. No offense, but I am 100% sure that provided you exist, it's intrinsically raw to kill you. And so then he made a reference to a debate between Samuel Johnson and Bishop Barclay. Bishop Barclay was an idealist and actually CS Lewis was an idealist too, but Barclay believed that the material world was essentially one giant simulation in the mind of God. And Samuel Johnson thought this was ridiculous. And Barclay said, well, how do you refute this? The story goes, they were taking a block and Johnson kicked a stone and said, I refuted thus. So, you know, picking a stone, see, there you go, Bishop Barclay, there's your reputation. So then Tom was alluding to this in our thread. And he said, I feel like Samuel Johnson, I have an urge to kick a stone. And I said, well, I'm not claiming, I'm not an idealist myself. And I'm not saying that the problem of the external world is this big thing, like, oh, we can't really know things about external world or I can't really know that you exist, Tom. But with Samuel Johnson, I could say that, yeah, if we're grading on a spectrum, he could be more certain that it would be wrong to pick up the stone and throw it at a dog or something. And he is that the stone actually exists at the top. It's like, ah, errant, so fistry. There's a good knot. So it's like, no, okay, okay. Yeah, no, I agree. I mean, I use a similar example. Like, you could convince, like, if I say, okay, which, which world is more likely just like play a thought experiment, the world in which 10 years from now or 50 years from now, you tell me that actually, the electron does not exist. Right. Electrons are fake. That was just like something that we came up with that, like, you know, it made sense at the time, but upon more data, we now know that the electron, at least as currently conceived, does not exist. And like, well, I mean, it would take me a lot to believe that, like, I'm, I'm a computer engineer, right? Like, I believe, like, we use electrons to, to run these things. And so, like, it would take a lot for me to believe that electrons don't exist, at least like as fundamentally different as what we know now. Like, okay, fine. Can I conceive of a world though, where that's true? Sure, I can conceive of a world where that's true. Like, we've changed our minds about these things in the history of science a lot. Electrons as currently conceived are very different than what they were when they originally conceived. Okay, fine. Could I conceive of a world in which I believed that, where in 10 or 20 or 50 years, you convinced me via evidence that, that lighting babies on fire for spectator sport is okay? I would say no, there's not a possible world where you could provide me with enough evidence that that would, I would believe that that would be okay. In which case, like, hold on, I got, this example's not good. People used to do this. Okay. The Canaanites used to do this all the time. And yeah, it was bad. Yeah. So you can't, there was a world in which people, um, no, no, no, that's not the question. The question is, is there a possible world in which that's okay? That's the question. Yeah, it's not, it's not possible. You mean objectively, but I mean, the Canaanites did believe, did believe it was objectively okay, or otherwise they wouldn't have done it. Whether or not they're wrong is a different question, but like, that's exactly what we're saying. Yeah, that's exactly the question. Okay. It's not, it's not, I'm not saying, do I believe that there's a possible world where someone believes that that's okay? I'm saying, is there a possible world where you could provide me with evidence where it would be okay? And I would say no. Well, that's where I took the issue though, like provide you with evidence. Um, because like the Canaanites were provided with sufficient evidence in their minds that it was okay. They were wrong, but that's because they suppressed the truth with their unrighteousness. Right. That's not, but so, okay. Okay. If you want to add the caveat, so long as I'm not suppressing the truth and unrighteousness, I'm happy. Well, I just, I think that it's, well, you guys, you guys also were talking about, um, how children inherently know it's wrong to abort other children. I don't think that's true because everyone suppresses the truth in their own righteousness. That's a statement from the Bible. So if we're in the Christian frame and I think this is where you need to give Tom. No, no, no, no, no, no, wait, wait, time out. Like the, the suppressed and the truth and unrighteousness was about a very specific people that God gave over to the consciousnesses. That's to their own like wills and desires. That's not like a universal, like there's some sense in which we all suppress the truth and the righteousness at some point. But then also Paul says like the, like God has made it plain to them certain other things. And so like, it's not true that like across the board, we all suppress the truth on all issues and unrighteousness. I don't think that's a proper reading of Paul. I imagine you're not a Calvinist though. No, I am a Calvinist, but I don't think that's what total bratty means. Well, I'm not a Calvinist. Okay. I'll lay off, but I think that, I think that assuming that children inherently know that that's wrong is, is not a good example of what you guys are trying to argue for. I think that Tom Holland also has a little bit of, I don't want to steal the floor or anything. I know this is your guy's thing. No, go ahead. Yeah. I think that Tom Holland has a point when he says this is a theological discussion because whether Plato knew it or not, he was, he was assuming objective morality existed. And that's only contingent on the Christian idea of God, whether or not he knows that it's contingent on that. Yeah. Right. So that's the, that's the presuppositional stance. Right. But, but Tom Holland has a point that if you come at philosophy without the idea of a monotheistic God who has the general revelation argument from Romans that we're basically just, just flinging ideas around and we don't know why. No, and this is where- There's a difference between epistemology and ontology here. So there's a question of, I'm arguing Tripp's agreeing, I think you can have epistemic access to something without accepting the ontological basis for that thing. Yeah. Yeah. And that's, and that's where like I both agree and I disagree with the presuppositionalist. I agree with them on the ontological point that you need this in order for the whole system to make sense. I don't agree with them in the sense to saying like people can still have onto like epistemic access to truth, even if they construct a system around it that's completely untrue. And like I would say that that's what Plato was doing. I don't know if you, I mean, that's he's, he's, he's seen the objective truth and that's what he's pursuing. And I wouldn't, and I wouldn't tell the person, you know, like suppose you have a secular pro-lifer, which these people exist, you know, I would not say to a secular pro-lifer, you are, you have no reason whatsoever. You're being totally irrational in it's saying that you believe it's wrong to kill the unborn child. I would say, well, no, you, you have good reason. You're accessing something true. Your moral sense is telling you that this is false. So there you go. That's, that's a good reason. But now let me suggest that this fits best in a frame with theism at the center of it that we go from there. But yeah, and even, yeah. And even if you, even if you take a step back from abortion, just murder in general, most people think that's wrong. Like most people do. And they're not wrong to think that now are most people Christians? Well, no, most people are not Christians on earth today. Yeah, that doesn't mean they're wrong. And like, doesn't mean that like, oh, they're, they're just completely like, this is a completely unwarranted belief. I don't believe that. I think it is a warranted belief. And if it's best in the Judeo-Christian, like Amago Dei, why that's true. And yet I think that they're seeing something like it's same way. Like, okay, how do you make sense of beauty? For instance, is beauty real? Well, I would say yes, beauty is real. And someone, even though they don't understand where beauty comes from, or ontologically, they can't really explain this, they can still see something beautiful and know it's beautiful. And I would say, I would say like morality is very similar to that. That actually came up at towards the end of a sub thread in the Hollywood thing, because as I made that same comparison, I said, whether or not somebody appreciates a beautiful painting hanging at the art gallery or a great play or whatever, this doesn't affect the greatness or the beauty of the play. And then Tom said, well, but taste varies according to cultural preference. And I said, yeah, taste does, but quality doesn't. And this is where shout out to, you know, Sevilla and all those people in my, in my sub stack, I said, we interrupt this program to bring you breaking news that Robert Pirsic just called, he wants his motorcycle back. You know, quality, I think this is a sort of a cousin discussion, right? The notion, whole notion of quality, the whole notion of beauty is beauty intrinsic is in the eye of the beholder. Right. Yeah. I mean, I think that that's, and again, I keep going back to Plato because he's a very, I mean, all philosophy is a set of footnotes to Plato, A and then B, he's, he's very, you can't accuse him of being a Christian or influenced by Judaism or anything else like that. Like the good, the beautiful, these were all like something to be seen in themselves that we all know. And, you know, he came up with a complicated system for explaining that, but like, that's, that was his point. It was like, you exit the cave, you see the good and it's just immediately, imminently, obviously good and obviously beautiful. The good, the beautiful, like these are all one thing. And so like, and that's, that's where like, I don't agree that we, everyone, like when you say like suppress the truth and unrighteousness, but not in every way. And no one does that all the time. Everyone, like, generally speaking, like everyone loves their kids. Is that good? Do they see like, you know, this doesn't have to be taught. And then same thing with like the kids. I agree, Esther, most kids intrinsically know this and they intrinsically know also that like death is bad. It's sad, like forget abortion, just death period. Like, you know, my kids come, I have a five year old and a three year old, they come across a dead animal or something like that. Like it's a sad event. You can see it on their faces. I never taught them that, you know, even like a rat or something like that is that, but they see it and they see, they see that something's wrong, right? They see that there's something sad about this. I didn't teach them that ideologically. That was in them from the like very beginning. Yeah, I have actually a different quote from Louis that's relevant here. This comes from, this comes from his letters. So it's in the middle of kind of a discussion of youth of Roe, a goodness of God, and hard passages in the Old Testament. And so if you'll indulge, can I read a couple paragraphs here? Okay. So Louis says, the ultimate question is whether the doctrine of the goodness of God or that of the inerrancy of scriptures is to prevail when they conflict. I think the doctrine of the goodness of God is the more certain of the two. Indeed, only that doctrine renders this worship of him obligatory or even permissible. To this, some will reply, ah, but we are fallen and don't recognize good when we see it. But God himself does not say that we are as fallen as all that. He constantly in scripture appeals to our conscience. Why do you not of yourselves judge what is right? What fault has my people founded me? And so on. Socrates answer to youth of Roe is used in Christian form by Hooker. Things are not good because God commands them. God commands certain things because he sees them to be good. In other words, the divine will is the obedient servant to the divine reason. The opposite view, Occam's Palaeus leads to an absurdity. If good means what God wills, then to say God is good can mean only God wills what he wills, which is equally true with you or me or Judas or Satan. So I mean, of course, that opens about five different cans of worms, but sort of has bearing on this, I think. No, I know. I agree. I think that's, I mean, that is essentially their youth of Roe dilemma, right? Is, you know, is what is good, good because the gods will it or do the gods will it because it's good in the case of God, it's a little bit easier of a problem to solve. Like youth of Roe had many gods to contend with of varying natures, right? And contending wills. And so when he says that, when he asked that, you're like, well, obviously you can't answer that question. In a polytheistic context. Yes, exactly. It doesn't, like, there's no good way of answering that question. It's either arbitrary or it's something outside of the gods themselves. But, you know, the divine reason can also be according to God's own nature. And so therefore it's not separate or arbitrary from God. It is actually part of who God is. And that's one of the reasons that he wills it. And that is the reason, not one of the reasons, that is the reason why he wills it. And so it's eternal, it's part of God, it's not separate from God. And yet it's something that we can see clearly. Yeah. Yeah. So I was thinking when you were talking about, we have, we recognize this, that bit where Lewis is answering the, but we're following and we don't recognize good when we see it argument. I think it's relevant here because I do encounter this a lot and it always kind of makes me scratch my head, especially from a certain kind of reformed Christian, not U-trip, but other kinds of reformed Christians, almost like the way that they talk. I want to ask, so you don't think that we can have any right moral tuition? Like we're just so broken and so fallible that we have to rely completely on special revelation, divine command. Like we just don't even have a compass to speak of. Like I think that leads to a dangerous place. Oh, right. Well, I think that, I think that that's a bad reading of total depravity. I think that's a bad reading by, there's a certain kind of reformed person that does believe that. And I think that's wrong. And I think that there's a certain kind of reformed person or non-reformed person that rejects like Calvin's, you know, like the tulip framework because of total depravity, which I also think that they're getting it wrong. Like I would say that from my perspective, total depravity, and as I read Calvin is like every part of us is tainted in some ways by sin, and yet like it's not completely sin. It's not like our will or our intellect or anything is so bent that we just can't see anything. We can't like, that's not it. It's like every part of us though is tainted and needs to be kind of, you know, placed over in the hands of the Holy Spirit and God to sanctify us and help us see where we are like, you know, a little bit off. And so, yes, and that's why it is important to subject ourselves to the scriptures and not, you know, and not trying to override them at the same time. One of the things that attest to the truth of the scriptures is the goodness that we see in it. And that comes obviously prior to the scriptures, we come to it and we see it and we like, oh yes, this is the truth. And this is like, so it's kind of like a, it's a little bit more, it's a little bit less like black and white, but I do agree that there's a certain kind of reformed person that should say, nope, we just need to like turn, like shut our moral intuitions off and just come to the scriptures and like just blindly follow it. And you're like, no, but the scriptures take interpretation. And, you know, I mean, exactly. Yes. Like, you know, you have proverbs, one proverb says like, answer not a fool according to his folly. And the next one says answer fool according to his folly. Like that takes like interpretation. What does this mean? And that, and like, that's where like, I mean, even, you know, the New Testament is very clear. Like it gives us the Holy Spirit to go and search and see what does this mean and how do we apply it? And yeah, I don't, I don't agree with, I don't agree with like the hard, like really, I would say callous reformed, you know, perspective on this where there's no problem with the Canaanite slaughters and that kind of stuff. At the same time, I don't agree with, with the people that says like, I'm just going to reject the entire reformed framework because I think that they're both missing Calvin's point in some way. That's my reading of Calvin. Yeah, right. Well, and I just had a separate Twitter war over the Canaanite slaughters that kind of blew up yesterday. And I mean, it's really interesting to see kind of the whole range of people that I was engaging with because there were some more thoughtful, reformed types who still disagreed with me, but we could have a conversation. And then others who were just coming in like, well, I mean, yeah, I guess your human emotion might be telling you there's a problem here, but you know, you just need better theology. And I'm just like, so human emotion is crap now. Is it like, it's so dismissive. Like, so we're just missing our moral intuition that they probably kill like babies as human emotion. Like that's not healthy. No, I agree. And so much of reformed theology is based on the book of Romans. But one of Paul's point very early on is that we are subject to condemnation because we did see and we rejected. Right? Like, like that part is part of it that like, no, God made plain to them some of these truths, and yet they rejected it. And so you can't get rid of the make plain part either. Right. And so like you see the truth of God created, and things were good and what goodness is and yet you rejected it. But without that part, without you seeing, you know, clearly, then the then like some of the condemnation doesn't make as much sense. Right. And so like God could just make it clear to you and then you would see it. But like if you didn't see it, like how can he hold you accountable. And so like, that's what Paul's wrestling was is both sides of that coin. And I think that like sometimes we, I think sometimes us reform types, and I'll include myself in that we dismiss that that you're coming to this with like an actual good moral intuition mostly, like a slightly distorted, not full picture, not a God's eye view of things, but you are coming to it with some, some truth. And that can't just be dismissed. You can't just say, well, ignore that. Can I like slaughter not a problem. You're just being an emotional human. Like, no, no, I'm sorry. That's not like, and also, it's not in line with the rest of Scripture, like death itself is bad. Right. And so like the idea that this was just like, oh, this, there's no moral quandary here with killing children. You're like, no, actually, I disagree with that. I think there is. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So in the, in the chat, feature bug was asking if anyone could give a one sentence definition of total depravity, reformed to Templar Colton, quoted Ephesians two, three, trip. I don't know if you had anything to add there. No, I think that I think I kind of described it like as I read government. So like, okay, let's take a step back. Total depravity is, you know, one of the five points of Calvinism, and it's not written by Calvin. Right. Like this was never a framework that Calvin actually came up with. It was extracted from kind of his writings and institutes of Christian religion and his commentary. And so it was extracted from kind of his writings and institutes of Christian religion and his commentaries. But it wasn't like he never came up with this. This was actually a response to other theological systems and you know, the five points of like Armenianism. And so like, so you have to read them in juxtaposition to what those doctrines were saying. So basically, total depravity was a response to the idea that we're good, and then we fall. And in some sense that we're perfect, and we can be made perfect again, through our own will, by seeking God. And Calvin disagreed with that, that we are born sinful, and every part of our nature is in some way tainted or like, by that sin. So this is what he goes back to. He writes a lot about kind of the yeast, you know, and if you have like some, if even a little part of the bread is leavened, it's no longer unleavened bread. And so like, that's what he's talking about. It's like every part of us is tainted, has a little bit of leaven in it. It's not unleavened, it's not holy, and it's tainted in some way, and it needs to be redeemed. That's total depravity, that there's no part of us that is like completely sinless or started out sinless or anything else like that. That's not what's going on. So that's, that I think is the proper reading of Calvin. But again, Calvin never wrote total depravity and said, here's exactly what that is. That was like a development over a longer period of time in response to other theological systems that were counter to Calvin. Okay, thank you for that little theology primer. I also want to circle back to the question Ginger Bill threw out earlier. He said, here's a good question. Morality, prima facie or ultima facie? Do you want to define and give an opinion? No, I mean, you can't say that. I guess I'm not sure what is meant by ultima facie, right? Do you want to define prima facie? Yeah, prima facie means just like a kind of at first glance, right? So like you say like, well, prima facie, this is a argument for X. But that doesn't mean that it is actually that thing. And so like say like, you know, I like prima facie, the TV was on and Paw Patrol was on my TV when I got home. Prima facie, that's an argument for my kids were watching TV today, right? But that's not necessarily what happened. There are other possibilities and some of those other possibilities might be true. And so you say, yeah, so prima facie, that's an argument. So that's what prima facie means. And so ultimate, like, I guess, maybe Bill is asking, you know, is the fact that this is like our intuition necessarily ultimate? I guess is maybe the question. Is that how you read that? Is that like the true? Can we just take it at face value? Or do we need to do something else? Bill's typing, he's going to clarify here. Okay. Here's an interesting question that I've kind of kicked around. Is it necessary for there to how do I want to word this? Would the proposition that it's wrong to burn babies in gasoline as a spectator sport still be true in an empty universe? Like, yeah, what does an empty universe mean? Well, like, no babies, no people. Maybe even we could say no God, but that's itself a question. Like, suppose that you just had God, but God hadn't created anything or created people at all. It seems to me like you would say, well, yeah, like, if there were such a thing as a person who create who was created the image of the all good perfect creator, God, then that would be wrong. Yeah, I mean, I can I can move to Calvin to the Thomas framework on that and say like, yes, like being itself is good. Right. Being is better than nothing. Existing is better than not existing. And so it's a degree of perfection that's not had by nothingness. And so, yes, even in that universe, where there are no babies, it would still be wrong to kill a baby. Because we decide what a baby would be. Right. Exactly. We say like, yes, like the being the baby is a creative being has it has existence and being in a nature and all that kind of things. These are good things. Whether or not is made in the image of God, I would say like burning a squirrel for spectator sport is also wrong. I would say that's also wrong. So like, I don't think that that's the right way. Anyway, so I think that that's even an atomist framework, even in the in the, like, you know, before the creation of time, these would also still be moral truths because of the nature of the beings that we're talking about. Yeah, okay. That's where that's where I go with that as well. Oh, still typing, I think. Okay, I have a while Bill's taking, can I, can I ask something? Okay, the idea that the Lewis quote that you said, Esther about the different intuitions, didn't you? Yeah, yes. So doesn't that kind of have to do with Bill's question? The concept of dip, we have different ones. And I remember actually, Paul van der Klay in one of his commentary videos, I think it was about it was the one with Peugeot and Peterson. And he paused when Peterson said something about this conscience thing that, you know, we would, we would stop silence it if we could, but we don't. And then Paul was like, well, that depends. We do have different, different things that our conscience tells us, some pointing towards the ultimate truth, and others pointing towards what we want, you know, so isn't that sort of what to do? Well, maybe, maybe it points towards the thing that it suggests, like, grip said about his kids watching Paw Patrol, most likely, if there was left on when he gets home, but not necessarily. Well, I mean, this is where the phrase false conscience comes from, right? Because people can get themselves into a state of thinking. For example, in my substack, I was writing about how in Iceland, there's this entire sort of system of cultural peer pressure that's developed around women who are pregnant with disabled babies, specifically babies with Down syndrome, where everyone is saying, No, it's like you actually owe it to the child, like the child deserves to die in a positive sense of deserving. It's like for the child's best good, it's for the best good of the family and friends around you. This is the morally right and proper thing to do. So then a woman could tell herself that, so then she's developed this false conscience that's telling her that it's right to do this. But then I think the very phrase false conscience kind of has built into it, the notion that there is such a thing as a true voice of conscience, which we need to then overwrite and replace. But like underneath it all is still going to be the still small voice of Jiminy Cricket, right? And yeah, man, that's the voice of conscience. But Pinocchio murders Jiminy in the book. We murder Jiminy Cricket all the time. Jiminy Cricket is murdered every day. Yeah, Tripp, I don't know if you want to add something to that. Also, Bill finished typing, so we can answer that. Okay, no, no, I completely agree. And that's how I read Lewis is saying, like, the question isn't, he's not saying, well, there's no way to reconcile this, right? Like, how do we balance the interest of the species versus this versus that versus the other thing? He's not throwing up his hands and saying, well, we can't. He's actually saying, no, we can. And like, we do. And we all have this intuition that there is a proper way of navigating this, which points to an objective, like universal truth, or way of doing it. And so I actually don't, I read Lewis's, like, you know, he's saying the exact opposite. He's saying, no, there is a way. And we all know that there's a way. It's hard. It's not obvious sometimes, but there is a way. And we all have this intuition that there is. Okay. Can we call that the spirit of the law? Anyways, okay, you guys can move on. Sure. Yep. Okay, so what did Ginger Bill say? Let's see. It's regarding two different aspects regarding prime of face. The first is what Tripp explains, but the second is all things equal, or Keter is part of this. And in that case, things could be completely true given all things equal, but there are cases when a moral rule is false if the conditions are different, which means there are circumstances in which certain rules can be violated. Okay, so this is where we get into the question of something that's intrinsically wrong. It's something that's contingently wrong, right? So I would maintain certain things are intrinsically wrong, meaning that there is no utilitarian scenario that you could drum up in a college ethics classroom that would render that thing right. It just is wrong all the time everywhere in all cases. So, yeah, I mean, I guess there's one obvious example. Just to clarify, Bill is saying I'm not making utilitarian argument. I'm not saying you were, Bill. I was just saying that this is where it gets into the distinction between the two different kinds of things. Sorry, Tripp, go on. No, I was saying this gets back to a really interesting argument that's heavy in theological circles. And actually, I would argue, Peterson, he also approaches is the highest good always telling the truth. And like, is that like, so like, there's branches of like, Christian ethics, especially that says, like, lying is always wrong. And yet, then you have like, you know, kind of the prostitute in the Old Testament that hid the Israelites, spies, and she wasn't spoken of negatively for that particular act. And so like, is lying contingently wrong, or is it intrinsically wrong? And, you know, a lot of Christian ethics really, yeah, she did the wrong thing. But the Bible doesn't speak of it that way. And so I think that that's, yeah, that's, that's the I wanted to, I was curious what your answer to that Esther was, like, do you think that it's wrong? Like, if the Nazis showed up, and you know, and Frank was in your basement, are you lying to them? Is that is that right? Or is that wrong? Or like, how do you think? Yeah, yeah, good question. Um, I think I sort of tend to the view that it could be okay to lie in that circumstance. Yeah, I, you know, maybe that's a bit of a normie view. I don't know. Yeah, I guess my thing is, I'm not so sure that, like, you know, I'm not so sure that I think that being and like living and life is, is, is actually the ontologically prior good to even like access to truth. And so in the case that they're in conflict, for instance, like someone's going to die, as a as a result of telling the truth, I think that like ontologically life is the prior. And so that's the that's the way that I as a Thomas, that's kind of the way that I I make sense of like the fact that I think that like rehab did the right thing in lying to them. But that's it's a big debate in Christian Ethnic circles. And I often get myself like, and I'm often arguing with these people, because they seem to think that she did something wrong. And I'm like, Okay, but then you bring up the obvious Nazi examples. And they're like, well, you know, then they start him and hauling. And I'm like, well, maybe I would do it. And then just hope for a miracle. I was like, I don't know, is that the right thing to do? I don't know. So I just did the chat here. So Bill was giving us an example of moral rule that could be also conditions were different, you know, killing, killing itself defense can be permissible. So I I said, Sure. So killing is not something that's intrinsically wrong, but murder is. Right. Your bug asked us the distinction, Bill says murder is tautologically wrong. So I think I kind of Yeah, I agree. I agree. It's killing. It's killing when you shouldn't write that's the easiest like, you know, definition of murder. Yeah. This is why I get I'm sorry to drag my Canaanite Twitter argument to this yet again. But I kind of brought it in with Lewis earlier. But this is where I get annoyed when people are like, they scream Marcianite at me when I say I have a thing with this. And I'm like, dude, it says right there, the tech of Mets, that shall do no murder, Old Testament God, and then over here, it appears to be saying that. Anyway, sorry. Yeah. Sorry to know. And I don't think that I don't think that anyone should be dismissive of those concerns approaching those texts. Like even if you don't think that even if you don't like really feel like I have a great argument for why it was or okay, or something like that, and you want to be an inerrantist, I think that's fine. I just like a little humility goes a long way of saying, Yeah, that's a tough one. Like, like, just, just just be a little bit humble and say, like, yeah, that's one that I'm not sure like, exactly. And you know, and then you get into like, well, okay, was Abraham and Isaac was because Abraham was about to sacrifice his son, and the son was innocent, at God's command, and it was credited to him as righteousness. So we can't just dismiss that. And then you're like, well, what was what did Abraham think the ultimate result of that was going to be and that whole thing? That's, you know, we both had this. Yeah, yeah. Right. It's like, yeah, okay, I agree. Abraham and Isaac is a weird case. Here's how I kind of parse it out. You go back and forth. So yeah, those kinds of those of us who are used to being extremely online, it's having like, log arguments, we've had variations at these arguments 50 different times. For sure. Yeah, I mean, none of these are anything new. I think that it is. But yeah, like I said, humility in some of these hard cases, because I mean, going back to like, you know, we all have values, like the Bible, you know, lists a lot of values and goods and, and that kind of stuff. And sometimes they're in conflict and knowing which one takes precedence sometimes is really murky and hard. And I think just a little bit of humility of saying like, I'm not, I'm not totally sure. But that's not an argument for relativity. That's not an argument for subjectivism. That's an argument for like, I don't have the necessary epistemic access to be like super confident in this versus the other. And, and just just a little bit of humility, I think goes a long way. Yeah. So to maybe shift gears a little here, and maybe kind of getting back to Tom Holland's thesis. What do we think is Christianity's sort of signal contribution? Because I definitely don't deny that the incarnated example of Christ, and then the, you could say the outworking of the Judaic ethic into all of the world, where, okay, now it's, it's not just that the Jews have a code of Imago Dei. Now that is being lived out, outside of the Jewish community in the form of the church setting up hospitals, and soup kitchens, and this and that, and the other thing. And that does seem that outworking seems to have been distinctly Christian, and that it comes as a result of the example set by Christ. So I don't have a problem with saying any of that. Yeah, I mean, I think that the unique, in a similar vein, I think that the, the Imago Dei kind of like, which is like, ultimately the basis for almost any, for every part of our morality about how we treat each other, and that kind of stuff is the Imago Dei, right? Like that we are made in image God and have inherent worth, and we're subject to a creator in whose image we're made, right? So like, that is like the basis for the moral, the Christian moral framework. I think it took on a new dimension, whenever God literally became man, right? Like, all of a sudden, the, all of a sudden, the Imago Dei wasn't just like, kind of this abstract, like, what does it mean? And that kind of stuff, like, in what ways are we like God? And that kind of stuff, it became like very, very specific, and embodied in a person that we can look at, and we could imitate, and that kind of stuff. And so that's where I think that that's the unique Christian contribution, and why the example of Jesus is so, has been so resonant, and so powerful, is because you did have that person that you could look to. You had that person that, you know, Paul says, imitate me as I imitate Christ. You had that, and you didn't have that in the Old Testament. You didn't have that before Jesus came. And I think that's the unique contribution, is that the Imago Dei actually, in its perfection, got lived out before us, and got observed. Right, and I had an interesting bit of interaction with some of my Catholic friends on Twitter, who were coming along and saying, not disagreeing with my point about object of morality, but we're emphasizing the element of conscience training, or conscience formation, or nurturing. And that's very important. And you know, here we could, this could be our one bone that we throw to John Vervecky, who normally we think is out to lunch, but when he talks about propositional versus participatory knowing, right? So you could say that the early church modeling Jesus example, and then subsequently us modeling the example of the early church, is the outworking of participatory knowing. We don't just know it, we are now embodying it, and living it out. And that this is how we practice, this is how we keep our conscience nurtured and well fed, so to speak. No, and I would say that that's, that is actually properly the function of the church, right? Like the big C church, not your local church, but that is the function of the church, is like to help guide, and that's why I think it's dangerous when people are like, well, I'm, I'm a Christian, but I don't go to church. You're like, you should, actually, you should be in a community of believers who can speak into your life. And I don't particularly care, like, I don't particularly care. You know, I have my thoughts on denominations like anyone else, but like, I don't particularly care, but you need to be in the, you need to be in a community of other believers for that reason. Because like, you know, go back, I'm going to plug Calvin again, you're like, you do have like parts of you, like you are tainted by sin. And being in a community of believers helps you see those parts that have been tainted, like how have you specifically been tainted? And how do you need to be corrected and brought back into the flock as it were? And that's a constant, that's a constant in the Christian life, is kind of wandering a little bit, and then Jesus bringing you back. And, but if you're, if you rely on yourself, then you're, you're, you're going to wander and wander and wander. And that's, that's kind of the protection of the flock, as it were. So that's where, like, I think that is the proper function of the church, is to nurture those things, both like for young kids, but even for adults, like, you know, that, you know, it's not, it's not like you can ever walk away and be like, yeah, I know everything now. And I don't, I don't no longer need the voice of the church in my conscience, like, that's, I don't think that's true. Right. And then there's a sort of a dark side of the moon here, where people who sort of have their own anti-Christian religion, so to speak, understand that you have to start forming kids' consciences when they're really young, in order to indoctrinate them, in order to get them into that frame. Right. So yeah. No, I mean, yeah, well, that goes back to what we were saying earlier, is that some of these things are actually so depraved that they have to be taught. Yeah. And they're not just like natural instincts, like my son hitting my other son is not, that's a natural instinct that like, no one needs to teach them, like, whatever, like, he got mad, took his toy, he hit him. But like, some things are actually unnatural, and they are actually depraved, and they need to be taught in order to be accepted. And yeah, I'm not home-schooling my kids, I'm sending my kids to a Christian school, but yeah, I completely agree, like, you should be very concerned. Little platoons, Benedict adoption, something, something, yeah, exactly. And what you just said there is important too, because I certainly, when I use the intuition pump of a child whose first instinct is to think that abortion is horrible, I didn't use that to apply that a child's every first natural instinct is pure and angelic and good, because as you pointed out with your son hitting your other son, this is not true. However, I don't think that that means that children are incapable of perceiving the good. No, all I have to do is interrogate my son after he's done that. If he knows that he's done something wrong. But, but, and here's the thing, the other thing is that like the emotion of like anger, like maybe my three-year-old did something that he shouldn't have done, right? Like that anger is, you know, in some sense justified in my son. It wasn't that, it was the, I'm going to make you like suffer as I have suffered, which is a very natural human thing, and that is something that's like kind of endemic to, I think, like that's part of like the tainting and the fall and the original sin, is our desire to extract, to like, I wouldn't say justice, but it's revenge, right? On things that are bad, and so like that's very natural, and so like my kid doesn't need to be taught that, right? That's what Lewis is getting at when he talks about the instinct to war, right? You know, Liam has an instinct to war against his brother. Yes, yeah, totally, and vice versa. Yeah, Teddy, Teddy will, Teddy wars against Liam probably more, so he's just smaller. But yeah, no, I mean, I think that that's like, and that's where like, it does need to be taught, like the vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, kind of thing, that yes, you have a right to be angry about some of these things, and yet you're called to something higher than that. That needs to be taught. But the, yeah, but like there's some things that are so unnatural that you're like, yeah, that had to be, that had to be a cultural condition to crave the belief, because that's not something that kids wake up just all of a sudden believing that, oh, yeah, it's fun to torture bunnies. That's not something that they do. And, you know, at least like the vast majority of kids, like they want to pet them, they want to, and you say like, oh, be gentle, they get it. Of course, you know, and really dark novels have been written about this, you do occasionally get a kid who is just like, oh my god, this kid just shows a status, you know, we need to talk about Kevin, right? Right. So, but then we say, okay, then this child is distorted. Like there's something perverted here, maybe even like perverted at a deeper level than just having us in nature, you know. Right. No, I mean, I, yeah, no, I think that that's right. I think that like we all, we are, we are all born with different levels of, I don't say depravity, like we're all sinners, but like there's certainly some kids that you and people that you see that like, this seems like more innate than learned. And I don't want to deny that. Like, yeah, there's some people that have gone there. And I don't know, you know, but again, it's not an argument against our moral intuitions. Like in any sense, like it's, there are kids that believe a lot of things or kids that are like, yeah, there are kids that are, that are bent in various ways in terms of a lot of things and a lot of beliefs and a lot of actions. And some of them are moral. And like, we just have to deal with that as they come. It's part of the nature of, of being in a fallen world. I perhaps put forth an idea that might be helpful to this discussion because there's a tension. And I talked earlier and I wanted, I wanted to say the opposite of what Esther said. Esther said, you know, I wasn't trying to say children are angelic. I wasn't trying to say children are as bad as they can possibly be either. I think that that's pretty obvious. And so sprawl has a take on this or sprawl, sorry, it's kind of said that strange. He has a take on this that I think is a better frame of total depravity for the masses because that so misconstrued, I'm sure you believe that too, Tripp. He calls it radical corruption. And it's what Tripp was getting at. But every single part of your nature is tainted by sin, which is ultimately why the Calvinist concludes that you can't come to God except through a change of your nature. But that aside, it helps in this moral intuition discussion because we're stuck with two kind of opposing ideas. One of them that is talked about a lot right now, that's being talked about a lot right now, is that we have a moral intuition for the good. But then the problem is, it's clearly evident that our moral intuitions are not always right. And actually, a lot of the times they're wrong. You know, vengeance is one of those, revenge is a specifically one that everyone seems to have. Everyone seems to have this idea that we want to take the idea of justice, which is good, and then twist it for evil and get vengeance. And so I think that the idea of radical corruption in this conversation, the idea that we have moral intuitions, but every single moral intuition is tainted by sin is a really good frame because it means that we can perceive the good, but we don't perceive it correctly 100%. And the only way we can get close is through sanctification in the image of Jesus Christ. Yeah, I mean, I think that I would make another analogy. So like we all have an intuition that we need to eat also. We all need to like that's an appetite that we have, and we all get that. And so we're hungry, and we can taste good food from bad food. And like, we avoid bitter foods because they're typically poisonous. And so like we have this moral intuition. I don't say moral intuition, but we have this intuition about eating that is mostly right. That's mostly right. We need to eat, we need to regulate, we need certain kinds of food and that kind of stuff. And certain kinds are not good for us. Like we see rotten food. Yeah, we're not interested in that. Okay, great. And yet we eat too much of this thing. Maybe we drink too much alcohol. We maybe we do this, that kind of thing. And that way, like my appetite even is tainted by sin. And so that's where I would say our moral intuition is like that. Like it's not like it's directionally right, but it's also tainted in some way. And so that's my, that's my analogy. I was curious what you think about that. Yeah, I don't. I mean, I'm not a Calvinist. So right. Yeah. Yeah, I'm, what's the roses? I don't remember. Somebody tried to come up with a some clever. We have a flower too. I mean, I don't think I agree that there is no, there's nothing good that we're able to ascertain with 100% clarity or 100% certainty. Well, I think, I think, I think the R. Calvinist argument, just to be clear, is not that you can't, you can't say proposition with 100% certainty and clarity. That is true. I don't think that that's. Yeah. Okay. What is he saying? I think he's saying something a little bit more subtle that like, okay, I can try and clarify if you'd like. It's not that it's not that we can't figure out pretty easily. Like, let's just, let's just say we can figure out pretty easily that murder is wrong. Let's just say that that's true. Okay. Okay. Well, agree on that. But the motivation to see Christianity is so concerned with motivation. It's so concerned with what is your root reason why? Well, just even if it's just one teeny tiny percentile of your motivation is out of pride, selfishness, love of the flesh, worldliness. It's tainted that, that notion, perhaps 1% of the notion that murder is wrong is because I don't want someone else to murder me. Right. It has nothing to do with, with, with, with God's rule. It has, it has something, a little bit to do. I don't want, I don't want to say nothing, but that part has nothing to do with God's rule. It has to do with my own self interest. And you see this play out all the time with more difficult issues that aren't as easy as murder. Like something, something like, you know, justice for theft or, you know, some, something like that, where you say, okay, well, he stole from me. So he deserves to get this. It's like, well, how do you know that? And it's like, what's your motivation behind that? It's like, sure, we know theft is wrong, but there's a, there's a distinction between this is good and the reason why I think it's good or the reason why I'm doing it. And that would be the Calvinist distinction. It's not that Calvin made a distinction between civic righteousness and divine righteousness. And as Paul said, there is nothing, absolutely nothing, not a single thing that we do that is 100% divinely righteous, but we can perform acts that are pleasing to God. And that's it. So, so there, there's a subtle distinction there, but my motivation for performing that act is in some way always out of some self righteousness. Yeah. And yeah, and Astro, that's why, you know, in Genesis, whenever that's, that's how the Calvinist makes sense of the, the verse in Genesis that says like there, all they did, they did all evil all the time. That's how that's made, that's made sense of it's not that literally everything that they did was evil or anything else like that. It was just that like, they were complete, like they were covered in sin, their motivations were even for the good things were bad and that kind of stuff. That's how the Calvinist makes sense of it. So it's not like I can, I can make a proposition, a logical proposition that is true and certain and good. And yet me as an embodied being trying to act that out, it's still tainted by sin in some way, because I'm not doing it because I recognize you as an image bearer. I might be doing it for other reasons because I want social status and, you know, various things like that. So I think that that that's where like, I think that like Calvinists and non-Calvinists get like their wires crossed because it's more subtle and more about motivation and intent. And this goes back to kind of what you were saying about Abraham, like the intent is very important. Okay, so yeah, I mean, I could see that at the abstract and you could even, I mean, you could make an interesting fiction story to write a story about, say, a pro-life activist who actually wasn't a very good guy in real life. And to some degree, his pro-life activism was bound up with status seeking, a sense of pride. It's like, you know, god damn it, I want to be a high flying Republican, whatever, whatever, you know, it's a then that. I mean, you can see that, I mean, you can see that in, I mean, I won't name names because I don't think it's political, but like, you can see that in a lot of political commentators on both, I mean, I'm on the right, so like, I'll take the right, but like, I can see that with certain people that I'm like, I think this is a grift, I think that this is like not genuine, it's a matter of like, how many clicks can I get, how many views can I get, and that kind of stuff, and I'm getting positive reinforcement for it. And even though I'm taking the right stance, it's not actually genuine in some way. And various issues like abortion or, you know, the Second Amendment or whatever, like, there's a lot of those issues. But like, yeah, so. So yeah, I mean, that can be true in individual cases, but I suppose where I diverge from the Calvinist is, I don't think that it has to be true in every single case, necessarily. I don't think it's necessarily always true that no matter who you are, your every impulse, your every desire, your every, you know, declaration of something good has something, a bad self-interested element tainting it. I mean, even the example you gave of, well, I say that I believe murder is wrong, at least partly, like maybe 1% of me, because I don't want somebody to murder me. In fact, I don't even really think that that's true, necessarily. But even if we allowed it, well, I mean, yes, in fact, I don't want to be murdered. But that's not a particularly selfish, that's not a bad thing. That's not a- No, right, yeah. Not wanting to be murdered is not bad motivation. And the guy who murdered me, it would be, you know, on his way to hell for that. And so I'm also like, no, I don't want, I mean, a lot of when pro-lifers make their case, they'll talk also about consciences of the abortion doctors too, and how it's like damning them as well as taking an innocent life. And so, yeah, I just, I think that's a real strain, but that could get us into a much broader Calvinist or Minian dispute. No, I think that, yeah, you and I are not exactly on the same page, but I agree with you, like the not wanting to be murdered is not a bad motivation. But you could say like something like status or, you know, fear of man or that kind of stuff. Like, yeah, you could like, I could rephrase that example in such a way that I think would like illustrate the Calvinist point that like, your motivations aren't pure. Like, okay, for instance, like I love my kids, I want good things for them and that kind of stuff. All that's good. And I give them things and I feed them and that kind of stuff. Part of my motivation is because like, I just don't want to deal with them being upset about something. And like part of it is like kind of a selfish thing. Also, it's the minority. But the Calvinist point is that there's a part of me that also wants some, I want an easy life. I want, you know, something that's more like fleeting, that's more vapid, that's like less than what God calls me to be, I guess. And so it's like, it's not like it's like an evil thing. Well, it's not an evil thing in the sense that like, oh, like I just, I'm doing something like obviously evil. It's more that like I'm not reaching the highest good because I'm considering some of these other things that are like more vapid and fleeting and that kind of stuff. And that's why sometimes whenever, you know, my behavior around my kids like diverges from what I actually want to do. So like I lose my temper with them. That conflict is just like, at that moment, that part of me that's tainted took over. And so now I lose my patience with them, or maybe I yell at them or something like that. When I lose my temper when I shouldn't have, that's where that part of me that's always present, but not always active, is taking over. And so that's the Calvinist perspective is that like, in some sense, you need the Holy Spirit to enter into those parts of you, you need God to enter in those parts of you before you can like start to conquer them and sanctify yourself. So that, anyway, like I'm not trying to convince you of that, but I just want to like be clear. Yeah, but as an Ard Minyan, I don't even necessarily hear a lot to disagree with what you say there either. I think that a lot of like the arguments about Tulip and the Five Points of Calvinism are largely like misunderstandings about like- Just semantic crosstalk. Yes, exactly. I think that's more than just a small part of it. So yeah. Yeah. Well Esther, I have to ask a question just real quick, because if you're a true Arminian and not a like a latent flowers provisionalist or something, if you're a true Arminian, then you believe in the idea of provenient grace. I don't want to say something dumb here, so just refresh me some. I have exactly the right definition for provenient grace. So the Arminians were reformed, right? And they just kind of thought that the direction, the church was going was too Gnostic, deterministic, whatever you want to say. And so they came up with the idea of provenient grace, that all men and women are provided with a provenient grace that changes that nature of man to where now everyone can believe. It's like a halfway point. It's like God draws you, he draws everyone to him, but doesn't like pull them over the fence into the into the kingdom. He like sort of like opens the door and says, do you want to walk through for every single person? So even the Arminian, the true Arminian, now if you're a more Pelagian, I'm not trying to accuse you of anything, but if you were more of a Pelagian persuasion, you might say that we are all born with that ability, we don't need that provenient grace. Or you could argue that that that provenient grace is, you know, applied at birth or something. You could make a lot of arguments, but even the Arminian traditionally would say, yes, we're all tainted by sin. What God does is he sort of like he sort of takes us out of that state and puts us into a more, I'm not trying to be like demeaning, but I would call it a more neutral state where you can freely choose yes or no. And the Calvinist would say that can't happen because once God changes you, there is no human being that would resist the grace of God. And then you get into your irresistible grace. But even the traditional Arminian perspective is that you need some form of provenient grace because of our sin nature. Yeah, that's a good question. I'd have to think about that a little more. I certainly believe that we are in a position where we can freely choose yes or no. So I mean, I've always liked the contrasting analogies, right? So the Calvinist will say that the parrot is dead on the bottom of the cage and God has to open the cage and reach in and resuscitate the parrot and carry him out. Whereas the Arminian will say, no, the parrot's walking around it there, the cage door is open, but the parrot just might decide not to fly out. So the question is, so the provenient grace would be in opening the cage door, right? Exactly. It would be the idea that we are because... Well, I want to interject. I don't know that opening the cage door is the right metaphor. Yeah, it is. Yeah. So I think that you say open the cage door, it seems external to the thing that's walking out. In the Calvinist conception, it's more like changing the nature so that the thing wants to walk out where it would not normally have wanted to. Oh, okay. And so that's where... And this gets back to our discussion a while ago on hell, that can you be in a state where you will just naturally and forever choose to reject God? And so the Calvinist conception is like, yes, and we're all born into that. And then you get to Romans and then you get into other Pauline statements like, he who began a good work in you, who he began a good work in you, will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ. So it's more like we're all kind of in that state. And then God decides to reveal himself and change us in a way that we can see, hey, that door is open and I can walk through it. And so it's more like an internal change than external life. You can't do it. Even if you wanted to, you couldn't. I just want to... The metaphor was bothering me. Sorry. No, that's really helpful. I don't often get my head into things at this level of detail. So yeah, I guess to answer your question, Teplar, I sort of have to think about it. I'm not exactly sure how important the difference is though. And maybe that makes me a Pelagian. I don't know. Yeah, I don't want to turn this into like a Calvinist debate, but I think... I think that at some level though, part of the reason why I feel like, and this gets brought up on the server all the time, it's that your understanding of man's nature is so crucial to topics like this. Because if you think that man is inherently good, for example, which there was a recent poll, I don't know, several years ago that like most evangelicals think that man is inherently good, which is kind of like just mind blowing. But if you think... What about evangelicals? Yeah, I hate the way that evangelical gets anyway. Yeah, but the idea that man is inherently good is pretty well refuted in my book, by scripture. I think that that's pretty well refuted. And so what the Armenians did, for Calvin sort of came up with his theology, and they tried to say that, look, what Calvin's saying is that we don't make a choice. And so they said, well, we also recognize the fact though, that Calvin was right about the state of man, or that he interpreted scripture correctly, that man is fallen, and they will reject God without some intervention. And so the Armenian says, okay, well, what happens is when God draws you near, or when he calls out to you, no one comes to the Father except through, or no one comes to me except that the Father draws him. They say, okay, well, that is like God turning your head towards him and saying, okay, now make a choice. And what the Calvinist would say is like, what you don't understand is that when God turns that head towards him, there is no human being that will resist that. How could you? And so this is... Okay, yeah, that's where I disagree. So this is, yeah, so you would say that once a human being has the truth revealed to them, they can reject it. And the Calvinist would say, once that truth is revealed, once their nature has changed and that truth is revealed, because the Armenian also believes that the nature has changed just that that truth can be rejected after it's been revealed and after you've been changed. The Pelagian though would say... Wait, wait, so I mean, it would kind of be a contradiction in terms for me to say that even after your nature has changed so that you want grace, you can reject grace. So you must be referring to a different kind of change there. Well, no. No, no, no, no. No, and the Calvinist conception is that once your nature is changed, you want grace. Well, right, but I think that's the very point issue for me, right? No, no, I think that irresistible grace is actually the sticking point between Armenians and Calvinists. Yeah, I believe so as well, yeah. Yeah, I think that's the thing. Then in that case, I would also reject the idea that your nature has been turned towards grace, that your nature has been changed in a way that you want something because then you would want something. Whereas I'm saying that... Yeah, I think that is precisely where I think the debate needs to be had and it's like we're getting distracted with other things in the tulip framework, but I think that's right. If you think that as Calvinists do that, God changes you so that you do want that and you will respond to it, then it's almost like self-refuting to deny that that's what's going to happen. At the same time, do you think that that's what actually happens? Yeah, okay, I see. Yeah. Yeah, so I agree with you 100%. So I think it's a separate debate, but that is actually I think where the actual... Everyone gets unconditional election and total depravity is where everyone focuses, but I actually think irresistible grace is more the proper dispute area that should be focused on to see where we differ. Right, and so then to try and connect this back to the topic, I think TEPFAR has been trying to push and where we're sort of pushing back, I think he's been sort of pushing that this is connected to how much of a point you think Holland has in the debate, whereas I don't think this is a Calvinist-Arminian thing necessarily because, I mean, look at us here, I'm an Arminian, you're a Calvinist and we're both... No, I think that Paul's saying like, or actually no, it's James saying like, well, even the demons believe and shudder, right? So I think that you can actually perceive moral truths or truths more broadly, like such that there's a creator God and that kind of thing, and still reject him. And still like suppress that truth and unrighteousness and that kind of stuff. So I don't think that Paul... I don't think Tom Holland has a point there because I think that you can actually perceive some of these things and still reject them, even though you perceive them. And so that's where I don't think that he's right there. And I also don't think that his argument that just because I can point to other cultures that disagree and I don't have empirical proof in some kind of like weird sense that this is wrong, therefore it's not objective and it's just a construct and outside of theology, it doesn't make sense. I don't believe that. I think that, no, you can see that in the same way that I think that you can see the ordinalities of nature. I don't think the orderliness of nature, the uniformity of nature makes sense outside of... I agree with the presuppositionalist there ontologically that outside of like a theistic... like this faith that you have in the uniformity of nature doesn't make any sense. It's not like you can't support that. And yet I don't think that you're crazy for assuming it. I think that you have access to like you're looking around and you're like, yes, nature is orderly. I don't think you can make sense of that. But I also don't think that you're crazy or unjustified in believing it either. And so that's where I think that Tom Holland is wrong. And I don't think that he's like... he's like... yeah, he's missing the point of what objective morality means. Right. Yeah. And I think a good analogy for this would be... I suppose that a little kid has a bike that he likes. And then he has an uncle who's messing with him and tells him, well, you know how that bike was made. There was this tornado and it randomly picked up these pieces of metal and plastic and put it together. And then you came along and found it. Now you're able to ride it. I think he kind of stares at the bike and he goes, but it really seems like this was put together in a purposeful way. And the wide-ranging uncle was like, no, on my honor, this is how the bike was made. The kid comes to have these contradictory things. So like there's the worldview that his uncle has given him about the witness tall tale of how the bike came to be, that there's the evidence of the kid's own eyes that intuition that the bike was not just thrown together by a random tornado, which I don't intend to open up the design evolution thing. But I think that that's where atheists find themselves, if they find themselves still being atheist, but also wanting to affirm that human rights exist, that human beings are intrinsically valuable, et cetera, et cetera. Right. They're riding the bike and they're not unjustified for having faith in their ability to do that. And yet they can't make sense of how there's a bike to begin with. And that's where I'm kind of in between on the presuppositionalist thing. And I think you are too. Like, ontologically, we completely agree. And yet we can't say that they're crazy or wrong. Yeah. Like, of course they're seeing something real and true and we should like, yes, and. Yeah. Like, let's keep pulling at that thread a little bit. Right. And I don't know why, but it really seems to be a powerful thing that bothers people. Like the mere fact that there's disagreement bugs them. And I don't know, this doesn't bug me, Tripp. It doesn't bug either of us. I guess we're just contrarian by nature to where it's like, oh no, but somebody somewhere has disagreed. I'm like, cool. So they're wrong. I know. Right. Exactly. Yeah. I mean, I'm sure that that makes us more comfortable with saying, yeah, okay. Like that's fine. But that doesn't mean that, yeah, this doesn't mean that this is all of a sudden a subjective argument. Like, I mean, just conceptually, the number zero didn't always exist in human mathematics. Right. That was at some point, culture, like someone came up with that concept and then it applied it to mathematics. That does not mean that two plus zero did not mean equal to. Yes, exactly. So like, I'm sorry. Like the fact that this was a cultural construct does not, cultural construct, like more broadly speaking, like it was a discovery of a particular culture at a particular time or a belief of a particular culture at a particular time does not, is not an argument that it's not also objectively true. And this is like to bring it full circle. This is why Tom Holland is wrong on that. That is not an argument for that. He needs to do better if he's going to make that argument. And as does like other people like Adam Friended and that kind of stuff, like they all make these kind of same arguments. You're like, no, no, like that's not at all what they're arguing about. I know that that's funny. Right. When you mentioned that in DMs, I thought, yeah, this is kind of similar to when I was going around in circles with Adam Friended. But, you know, like no offense to Adam, I might've, I might've felt Tom to slightly higher standard and yet. Oh, totally. I would've, I would've expected, I would've expected at least like Adam openly doesn't like philosophy. Right. Right. So like I get, I get why he would be like completely like, but like Tom is like a super well read, like he gets like the Greek in the Roman world and yet he finds he's making this argument. So I feel like, you know, I mean, I guess we're all large. We contain multitudes in some sense, but like Tom, I feel like is living in a lot of different worlds. And his, his world, his world as a historian is a very like, it's a very different the world also than what I get from him. Like when I read dominion too, that like he gets how, I don't know, like it's just very weird. Like he's, he's living in two worlds simultaneously and it's very interesting to me. Yeah. Okay. So just a couple closing things from, from Templar. So he proposes, he doesn't agree with Howa totally, but he just kind of sums up his two agreements. So first he act on the deeply known conviction that God does actually exist. So he has a point that this is a non-philosophical issue because we're all unconsciously presuming the existence of God, but then too, he proposes that fallen nature of man will fruitlessly struggle to get close to objective truth without divine revelation. I flatly disagree with that. I don't know if you want to. Yeah. I mean, I guess I, we'd have to tease out more what he means by like, we will not like fruitlessly approach. Like, okay. Like, so for instance, like in the old Testament, Melchizedek, right is, is spoken of quite highly, but, and yet he wasn't a sensibly worshiping the God of Israel and those kinds of things. And so like, and yet he was spoken of like fairly like complimentary, even in the new Testament, right? Like, you know, Jesus is kind of like called the new Melchizedek, right? Prophet, priest and king. I don't think that like, we can say that like, he wasn't, he was struggling fruitlessly. I think that like, it's fruitful because the things like, as we approach the good, the true, the beautiful, even in this life, it's, it's fruitful no matter where we end up. And so like, I don't, yeah, I wouldn't use that term fruitlessly. And so I don't know that I don't want to like impute my interpretation on that fruitlessly in the sense that you can actually pursue some of these things and yet not become right with God. Sure. Yeah, sure. Yes. And so that's where like, we would have to like get into a much deeper argument. And this is like, I hesitate to like go either way with it, because I would want to know more than what, like, you know, about what he exactly meant there. But yeah, so like, obviously, like, Plato was approaching, like the good, the true, the beautiful and some of his concepts. Great. Is it fruitless? No. Is it enough to like, you know, be in the presence of God at the end of this life? Like, that's, that's a completely separate question. And so that's where like, yeah, and I think, yeah, there's a there's a real problem with making natural law hard, I think. I mean, the Apostle Paul himself is saying they had no excuse, right? Right. So that's the point. Yes. You have no excuse. Like, God made this plain to you. And you rejected it. So sorry, like, yeah, exactly. That's, yeah. Now that being said, I mean, try to sort of think about how I could recast Tom's point in a way that I would agree with. And I guess this is, I already did this, but maybe kind of rephrasing. Sometimes you need a disruption to debug a culture that has, like, over time, seared its conscience on a mass scale. So here's an example that a lot of people would flip out over. But let's say the British Empire coming in and abolishing sati in Indian cultures, right? So the Indians practiced this, it was just it was part of their ritual. This was a good thing. Does that mean that it's difficult without divine revelation to see that it's wrong to for women to burn themselves alive? No, that that's not like a hard thing that you're going to flounder around and oh, gee, I'm not sure this is really tough to see without God just coming down from heaven and revealing it to me, you know. However, because people are bad and corrupt, you could build a culture around that and condition each other, condition your kids to grow up and think that it is okay. That's what it means to sear your conscience, right? So that's the kind of depravity that we were talking about earlier that has to be learned. Right. So then you didn't need. Yeah, it didn't need the disruption of the British Empire just coming in and forbidding it and just saying, nope, nope, nope, nope, this is wrong. We're not going to do this. And so you could see Christianity, the church, Jesus as the ultimate disruption, right? But then, right, the church disrupting Roman culture, it's saying, no, if this just is wrong to expose your babies, we'll take those babies, thank you, you know. So I'm agreeing that there was a powerful disruption that needed to happen there and that there needs to be these periodic course corrections, if you will, periodic debuggings. You might like that analogy as an IT guy. Yeah, totally. Yeah, no, I completely agree. And what was powerful about Christianity was it was an A, it was like a cross national disruption, right? It didn't rely on the power of the state in order to disrupt some of those things. You know, whereas like the British Empire going into India or whatever did. And like Christianity was different in the fact that like it just it's moving the culture, whether or not like kind of at the, kind of, you know, in almost like antipathy toward the, toward what the actual national government in time wanted. Right. And also significantly, because I do think Judaism tends to get lost in a lot of these discussions, which is why I'm always kind of bringing it back up. Well, the ethic is there. You know, the Mako Dei is there already. The adjunction to care for widows and orphans is there already in the Old Testament. But it's- Or the sojourner, or the sojourner. Like you don't- Or the sojourner, that's actually a good point too. You do have to care for the stranger. Yeah, that's outside of even like the Israeli state, right? Like that's outside of like, it's not just like, oh, leave it there for Jews who happen to be walking through your fields. It's, no, it doesn't matter who they are. Don't like leave them there and leave the extra crops there for people as a sojourner through your land as well. Like that kind of ethic was there in Judaism. I think that like what Christianity made was, hey, it's a universal thing and we need to evangelize this, which it wasn't really with, you know, in the Old Testament. There wasn't like this evangelism ethic the way that it was after Jesus. And then also, obviously, God literally becoming man gave the Imago Dei, like way more like potency in terms of what that actually looked like. Right, right. That's exactly right. You know, Jesus is like, you know, a new command I give to you, you know, and he's saying to go to all the world. So it's the, we're not just going to lift this out as an example among ourselves. We're going to go out and impose it on everyone else in a way, you know, right. But we're still insisting, no, everyone, you need to. And this is where like I and Tom Holland, like, kind of like, OK, he acknowledged that like he can understand us doing this as Christians, right? Because I was like, that is part of our ethic. That is what Jesus commanded us to do. And so like, he's like, I can understand as a Christian, but not as a philosopher. I'm like, well, I think, but if Christianity is true, like, what do you expect me as a philosopher to do? Is this not philosophically true also? I think it is. Yes, exactly. And that's where like, you know, you know, I go back to Kuiper, like, you know, there's not one single like inch of this creation that does that over which Christ does not claim mine. This is a line. And that was like, yeah. So like, is if our disagreement is just whether or not Christianity is true, I'm happy to have that debate. However, like, like, if Christianity is true, then all of this follows all of it, every single bit of it, all of the moral realism and objectivity and that kind of stuff, all of that follows. You can't get around it. Yeah. Okay. So Teppwar makes one last stab here. We could kind of move into landing the plane. How about this? Since everyone can't be Plato or Sam Harris, why is Sam Harris the standard of anyway? People need divine revelation to consistently over time approach objective truth. This is what Christianity provided for the West. Definitive claims of divine truth, Christ, divine truth incarnate closer. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it goes back to your point earlier is that, is that like you need disruption sometimes. Right. Right. You need a clearer picture. Like I'm like, as certainly as a Calvin, it's not saying that we see all of the pictures. I like I'm standing outside in the Okanagan Valley and Eastern Washington right now looking out on mountains. Like my eyesight's not 20, 20. And yet I see the mountains. Right. And so like sometimes like you need a disruption in order to see things a little bit more clearly. If I put on glasses, I might see it a little bit more clearly and crispily and exactly and that kind of stuff. And so this is, we can wrap this up on Lewis. Like this was the point of Lewis talking about the tower, the way or whatever we want to like all the ways that he described it. He's like, listen, there is no society. There's no civilization that values cowardice. Not one, not a single one. Right. And you're like, Oh, Jesus, like, you know, he wasn't cowardly. It was actually bravery in the face of violence. Right. Like there's no society that values that. And why? Why is that? So like even those societies that we might find the most the prey, like the ones that are the ones that are sacrificing children, right, to, you know, the gods and that kind of stuff, even they did not value cowardice. Right. They valued like, so like there's their cardinal virtues and cardinal vices. And that is like, nigh universal. Right. And so like, we need to recognize that, that like, we don't see clearly. And I'm good with that from a Calvinist perspective, I'm tainted in some way. I'm not seeing exactly clearly. I do not have a God's eye view of anything, even morality, but that doesn't mean that I'm not seeing the hills across the way from me right now. I am seeing them. I'm not seeing them as exactly as I might. And sometimes that takes a disruption. And, you know, in the case of Jesus coming, that was like the major disruption in human history that allowed me to see it even more crisply than we could prior to that. I think that's an awesome place to wind up on. Thank you everybody for participating. I know this was short notice, but I think we wound up having a really good crew and great questions. And I can't wait for this to go up on PBK's channel. And if he comes back, I can't wait to see what he thinks of it. And thank you, Rick, also for throwing this together. So last minute.