https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=X7jjZ1oHwXU

 at the Capitol the other day. I was just gonna meet Philip for lunch as he works there and saw this protest. And I thought, oh, look at this. It was a protest at the Capitol. And I get there and I saw Matthew Bryan, he works at the city. I'm talking to Matthew and the guy comes up to Matthew, he says, are you a pastor? Matthew says, no, but this guy is. And so they said, well, we want you to say this prayer. Lead us in this prayer. And most of the people protesting, it wasn't really a protest, it was just kind of a rally. It was to raise awareness for the fight against Ebola. And this was a couple of weeks ago. I think for many Americans, unless they had a connection to West Africa, weren't paying a lot of attention to it. But now, of course, when I turn on the evening news, Ebola and be afraid, be very afraid. It's here in America and on and on they go. And that gets a lot of people concerned. We should probably be more worried about this Centero 68 virus that is going around the country. If we feel, we feel vulnerable and we feel afraid. Actually, Ebola is not that easily transmitted and probably will not be a significant public health threat here. But all of our remedies for this tend to be medical and scientific. I was having a, I was talking with some atheist friends on Facebook, where I seem to meet more and more atheists there. And one woman says to me, you know, part of the reason I can't believe in your Bible is because it's commandments make no sense. If God really wanted to give some worthwhile commandments, he would have told the children of Israel to wash their hands five or six times a day. And use latrines and keep their water sources clean. If God had only done that, then Israel would have been a lot healthier. And I'm sure they were back in the Bronze Age. I also sometimes comment to people that when we look at Jesus' miracles, if Jesus had just given people that formula for penicillin couldn't he have cured more people? That's to illustrate that something else is going on than what we think. For many Americans, part of the proof of the ineptness of religion to protect us from harm is probably plates, like Ebola or AIDS, and one of the greatest, the Black Plague of the 13th century. Many of us are not familiar with Mongol history, and actually there was what's sometimes called the Pax Mongolica, which during the great Mongol empires over Asia, there was a huge network of trade and civil society throughout Asia during those periods. And actually the great Mongol empires were brought down by the Black Death. And although people prayed fervently and appealed to God, the Black Death spread again and again from one place to another, causing turmoil. And now of course we say, well, if they had only managed to contain the rats, they could have contained the plague. And by saying this, many of my atheist friends will say, see, your religion doesn't work, but science does. Actually what this reveals is what we usually want from God, because what we usually would like from God are results, the kind of results that we expect from our medical technology. This is a medieval painting of Simon the Leper, not Simon the Leper, but Simon Magus, who was Simon the Great Magician, who under Philip the Evangelist, Simon the Great Magician, who under Philip the Evangelist became a Christian, but then when he saw the Apostle Peter healing people and the Holy Spirit spreading, he offered the Apostle Peter money so he could get in on the action. And the Apostle Peter told him, curse you and your money, God is not for sale. But what Simon recognized is that when I come to church, I want God to give me results and to do and to fix the things in my life that I want fixed. And in fact, I want this deeply. Between Services reading a story from a daughter of the Christian Reformed Church, I found it posted on Andrew Sullivan's The Dish. And it's the story of her walk away from faith. She's the daughter of a Christian Reformed minister. And she tells the story about when she was out on her youth group, her youth group was all praying for a young man of their youth group who had leukemia and they prayed and prayed and prayed while on the youth group. And then they got the word, he passed away. And she tells in her story, she says, right there at that moment, I no longer believe in God. I went through the motions for a number of years after that, but they were hollow. Once God took that life of that young boy with leukemia, I thought he doesn't work. Why should I worship him? When we read the book of Leviticus, it seems to have very strange laws. And while we would like to say, why doesn't God tell them, kill the rats, wash your hands, build latrines, keep your water clean, God gives them these other rules which to us seem to make no sense. The Lord said to Moses and Aaron, speak to the Israelites and say to them, when any man has flowed, now what I did here was quite literally translate the Hebrew because that's what it says in Hebrew. If you read it in your pre-bible, you'll probably read something like genital discharge. When any man has flowed, his flow is unclean. Whether it continues flowing from his body or his block, it will make him unclean. This is how his flow will bring about uncleanness. Any bed the man with the flow lies on will be unclean. And anything he sits on will be unclean. Anyone who touches his bed must wash their hands and bathe with water and they will be unclean till evening. Whoever sits on anything that the man with the flow sat on must wash their clothes and bathe with water and they will be unclean till evening. Whoever touches the man who has it flowed must wash their clothes and bathe with water and they will be unclean till evening. And again, when we read this and we hear Well, this man is sick and he's discharging something, so this makes sense to us. It's just a health thing. Stay away from that yucky stuff and stay away from him because maybe he'll make us sick. But this is just the beginning of the chapter. When a woman has her blow, the impurity of her monthly period will last at least, and anyone who touches her will be unclean until evening. Now, I said to the Sunday School class, some people in the church are gonna be so happy when we're done with Leviticus because Leviticus talks about all this stuff. Here's a woman with her period. It's a monthly event for most women. Anything she lies on during her period will be unclean. Anything she sits on will be unclean. Anyone who touches her bed will be unclean. They must wash their clothes and bathe with water, and they will be unclean until evening. Anyone who touches anything she sits on will be unclean. They must wash their clothes and bathe with water, and they will be unclean until evening. Whether it is the bed or anything she is sitting on, when anyone touches it, they will be unclean until evening. Now, I'm not going to go into detail here, but you all can get the picture. If these were the rules we lived with, the rules we would live with today, things would be very different. And I think we can very much understand why friends of mine who are not Christians read this and say, why would this be in your holy book? We've talked in this series quite a bit about the work of Jonathan Haidt, who is an atheist. He was raised an abominable Jewish asshole, but he's done a lot of work on the question of where do morals come from? And he talks about these five moral taste buds. Harm and care, fairness and reciprocity, in-group loyalty, authority and respect, purity and sanctity. Most of his work is actually on, good morning Daniel, come on in, have a seat. There you go. Most of his work is actually on political thought, because the point he makes is that politically, most who are on the left usually only focus on harm and care, fairness and reciprocity. Those who are on the right tend to ask questions about authority and purity and loyalty, and so most of his work goes on that. But one of the insights he has is that for many of us, morality and the emotional experience of disgust are deeply tied. Last week, a German committee reviewing the morality of laws suggested to the German government that any laws against adult incest should be laid aside, because this would be unfair to people in terms of the law not sanctioning their kinds of relationship. Now, I post this on Facebook usually to get response from people, and the response is usually visceral. This is disgusting, of course, this should be illegal. Others, not so much. So what he tends to do is run a lot of interesting experiments as a psychologist with people, and one of his experiments is with a roach, and he brings in a cockroach and he says, this roach was raised in a very clean environment, always fed only healthy food. He has been sterile all of his life. Now, what I'd like to do is take this roach and dip it in water. Would you drink the water? How many of you would drink the water? Well, everyone says, I don't care where you raise the roach. I don't care what the roach has eaten. I'm not drinking the water. That's just disgusting. Now, he can say to you, but there is absolutely no medical reason why the water would be impure. Now, we all live with this on a much more regular basis because if you go down I-5 a little bit over on the left, there's a water treatment plant, and everything we put down the drain goes to that water treatment plant and then gets treated there. If you talk to Ben, Ben works in this stuff. And then what do you think the water treatment plant does after they treat the water? Puts it back into the river. Where do you think it goes after it goes back into the river? Downstream. What do you think happens to it then? Oh, it will only put that water on the fields. No, no, no. You think there aren't any water treatment plants upstream of the Sacramento River from us? Again, you can talk to Ben and Lori about that. But we don't think about this because we say, ew! That's just wrong. What he points out is that in fact, again, our consciousness is like the rider and the elephant. And you can talk to the rider all day long and say, this roach is clean. And you can talk to Ben and Ben will say, they test that water coming out of the treatment plant. And you know what? It's cleaner than the water in the river already. Does that make any difference to you? No. The elephant just looks at it and says, yuck. So what are we to do with these commands from Moses? Actually, one of the things, some of the people again, who are my Facebook friends, a lot of them ask me, why are you posting the stuff you post this week? Well, part of it was I did a lot of research into different cultures and how they think about menstruation. It was quite an education I got this week because all over the world, a lot of cultures have a lot to say about this. Pliny the Elder from the Roman Empire had this to say, contact with the monthly flux of women turns new wine sour, makes crops wither, kills grass, dries seeds in gardens, causes the fruit of trees to fall off, dims the bright surface of mirrors, dulls the edge of steel and the gleam of ivory, kills bees, rusts iron and bronze, and causes a horrible smell to fill the air. Dogs who taste the blood become mad and their biting becomes poisonous as it radiates. The dead sea thick with salt cannot be drawn asunder except by red soaked in the poisonous fluid of the menstrual blood. That red from infected dress is insufficient. Linen touched by the woman while boiling and washing in water turns black. So magical is the power of women during their monthly period that they say that hailstorms and whirlwinds are driven away. The menstrual fluid is exposed to the flashes of lightning. One of my friends noted, boy, if this is true, some of these people down in the Midwest who are running from tornadoes had better get a new plan. We don't care that. And we read this and say, this is this. Can we understand some of our friends who don't believe who read the book of Leviticus and say, I find your Bible hard to believe. Holy shit. One of the things that I noted, which was interesting about Leviticus is that, no, it has nothing to do with that. Why? Because while some kind of bodily discharge may make you ceremonially unclean, the things that we all do naturally every day don't make us unclean. We go to the bathroom every day. That does not make us unclean. All other bodily issues and excretions are not taboo despite their impure status among Israel's contemporaries, such as cut hair or nails in Persia and India, and the newborn as well as the mother in Greece and Egypt. Human feces was not declared impure. The elimination of waste has nothing to do with death. On the contrary, it is essential to life. That is why it was decreed from early on that the act of excretion should be accompanied by this blessing. So if those of you who might read material in the bathroom want a prayer for the body, here's one. Blessed is he who has formed a human in his wisdom and created in them many orifices and many cavities. It is fully known before your throne of glory that if one of them should be ruptured or one of them blocked, it would be impossible to survive and stand before him. Blessed are you who heals all flesh and performs wondrously. And if in fact you have a problem with your digestive system and it is resolved, you probably in fact pray prayers of thanks to God. That's why you should. Part of the reason I gave you the translation I did was that in the language of both the man and the woman, the word that the Hebrew uses to describe the flow that causes impurity is also the word used often for flowing water. It's the same word in fact that's repeated again and again in Exodus and Numbers about the land flowing with milk and honey. One of the things that we realize in the book of Leviticus is while certain things can make one impure, the things that make one pure are almost always the same. Water, fire, and blood. And blood is the strangest because blood both makes you impure and cleanses. Why did Israel choose to stand alone in its absolute prohibition of blood? The reason for this opposition becomes clear when they would recall that the blood prohibition is unavailable and concessions to eat meat are given for the first time. That was known. Humans have no right to put an animal to death except by God's sanction. That's why only animals were allowed to be eaten by Israel. Blood is the essence of life and belongs not to humans but to God. Hence they must eschew the blood, drain it, and return it as it were to the creator. Blood taboos may have existed elsewhere, but for the first time they are emphasized and extended to all animal life. The pain and fear of expropriating the blood that is divine now becomes transmuted into Israel's innovation. The fear of expropriating life that is divine. The absence from blood is a constant reminder to humans that though they may satisfy their appetite for feed, they must curb their hunger for power because life is invalvable. It may not be tampered with indiscriminately. What does this mean? Essentially what he is saying is that this entire system of clean and unclean screams, our world belongs to God. He owns it. That's an important thought because this morning we baptize this child and part of the reason that I bring her along is I'm not saying she doesn't belong in the Gaius family. I am saying they don't own her. They don't own her because she belongs to God. As all of us does, life belongs to God. He's its father and protector. You see, we want God to give us technology so we can control life. We want God to let us give the giver and we want God to let us be the giver and the chooser of life. And so when we read the book of Leviticus, we think the book of Leviticus should be about God giving us power, but the book of Leviticus is saying God is the owner and we are the stewards and what we do with life ought to reflect his values. But why don't we follow this anymore? So Jesus went with them. This was a man whose daughter was dying and he comes to Jesus and says, come to my house so you can heal my daughter and he's in a great hurry. So Jesus goes with them. And a large crowd followed and pressed around them. A large crowd followed and pressed around them and a woman was there who had a child and a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for 12 years. If you paid attention to the Leviticus text, you would have known that after the cessation of bleeding, she would have to undergo a seven day period to become ritually clean and to once again enter into the community of people. But this woman for 12 years had been ceremonially unclean. Anyone that she would have touched would have been ceremonially unclean. Anything she would sit on, anything that she would work on would be ceremonially unclean. This woman was ostracized from this community for 12 years. She had suffered a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all she had, yet instead of getting better, she grew worse. When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind a big crowd and touched his cloak. And if you know the Old Testament law, you know why she did it in secret. Because to touch Jesus would have been a violation. Because she thought, if I just touch his clothes, I will be healed. Where did she get this idea? Immediately, her bleeding stopped and she felt in her body that she was free from her suffering. And once Jesus realized that power had gone out from him and he turned around in the crowd and asked, who touched my clothes? You see the people crying against you, his disciples answered, and yet you ask who touched me? But Jesus kept looking around to see who had done it. Then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth. And he said to her, daughter, your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be free from your suffering. Christians believe Jesus fulfills leviticus. You see, for the Hebrews, the only way the uncleanness could be taken care of could either be with water or with fire or with blood. And Jesus comes and says, in me is your holiness. In me is your health. And this woman gets the audacious idea that if I only touch him, the transmission that in the old covenant produced uncleanness will be reversed and he will make me clean in a moment. Now, I'm sometimes hard on folks who say, pastor, I'm going to church to get something done. I have a bill to pay or I have a relationship that's a mess or I have someone who's sick and I'm coming to God and I want things done. This is part of our using nature of God. And this woman came to Jesus as a user. But what Jesus honored is that she came to him and she believed. I think that's where we begin in faith. She came to Jesus, we knew his heaven. She believed he was the owner of life. When he turned his face, when he turned the face of death, there was mercy. Daughter, your faith has saved you. This kneel makes no sense if you don't understand Leviticus. Because on the night he was betrayed, Jesus took bread and he broke it. And he said, this is my body. This is my body. What does that mean? What do you mean this is my body? No, this is bread. Jesus is making the point, what I am about to do for you will make you clean. What we did this morning with water, well, her head wasn't dirty, then it may be, Ben and Mary brought us a very clean baby. Thank you very much. And it wasn't a point. What we said in the saccism is that she belongs to God, even before she knows what's going on. And what we're saying with this bread is that yes, for our brokenness and rebellion is owed. And what Jesus said with the sacrifices with my body, I will pay it. I appreciate that. Do this in remembrance of me. ["That Joy Be同 enrolled"] I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I'm gonna be a good boy. I am a good kid you're fine. I know my stuff is best. How many years will take you Try soldiers and weapons wind. I跟 good friends with good plays I will share We start making the choice Around the table, in the front door And say to God, I'm ready I'm ready, I'm ready, I'm ready I'm ready