https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2vmRoeqdMM0

 All right, we are live. I was a little late sending out the link, but it should get to the participants soon. They should be hopping in and joining me. Still dealing with the COVIDs. Got the old, I'm gonna put a little mask on inside of this and it works great. I always hate mask around my ears. I just sent it out to Cassidy and Luke and Sam and Tripp. So they should be on any minute. This is day, I tested for COVID, tested positive for COVID Wednesday night. So Thursday, Friday, these are my isolation days. Let's see if that email went out. I was gonna send it yesterday because I made the link yesterday and then I forgot to send it out. And they should be coming soon. This is really boring video, I know. Giga Chad. There's Ups. Nathan, I've got another Rando's conversation that I'll be dropping today. Yeah, I saw that Chad posted a video this morning. I haven't had a chance to see it yet. Thank you, new member. Awesome, oh, here comes Cassidy. Oh, here comes, oh, here comes, oh, here comes. Oh, here comes, oh, here comes, oh, here comes. Oh, here comes, Godzilla. Sam wanted to talk about Godzilla too. So this is gonna be movie talk today. I know he's been telling me how Godzilla is a better movie than Barbie and I haven't seen it yet, so I can't judge, but I'm just, I don't know. Rick and his brother saw Godzilla and Rick said it was great. So yeah, sounds like Godzilla is a good movie. That's a good thing. It sounds like a very interesting premise for a movie. So different from all the more recent Godzillas. And there's Sam and then, all right, I'm gonna be wiping my nose from time to time here because COVID has reached the runny nose stage and the pseudophilic hasn't quite kicked in. So who wants that? So we had, we're coming into this with two people that said they liked the movie. Cassidy and Luke and two people that were not down on the movie, Sam and Trent. Girls versus boys. Except for some reason, the guys can't use their physical strength in this contest. We're just voluntarily withholding that. I don't know. We're still in the matriarchy. Yeah, still in the matriarchy. All right, well, let's have ladies first. Cassidy, opening thoughts. Opening thoughts. Oh, this is a lot of pressure. Well, I like the movie. I thought it was a really well done film. As filmmaker, it sort of like, was a beautifully done film technically, but I think the way that they did the comedy as well was very smart. And I think it handled a situation in a conversation that was, has gotten sort of ridiculous in a way that made it less divisive to talk about it, or at least for some. And it opened up the absurdity of what we do in real life. And I really liked it. And I thought as a woman, it was an interesting conversation to have, because I think the story about womanhood is very complicated for modern people. Okay, all right. I rewatched it last night with my wife during our COVID isolation. So my perspectives, I forgot to bring my notes though. Shoot. All right, Luke, why yes. So I agree that I think it's very well done. I mean, there's a lot of points where I could go into the detail of why I think that is. I think a lot of what they're doing is playing off of the assumption or the binary of superficial and deep. I think they're really playing with that a lot. And ultimately, I think it touches on the deepest things about what it means to be a human being. Cause I think it's, I mean, I would argue it's kind of about the choice of incarnation, the choice to be and to enter into suffering versus staying some ideal, heavenly, perfect, untouchable, I think. Okay, all right. Sam, you're up. Well, everyone knows I don't like incarnation. So- Right, exactly. I didn't like Barbie. No, I mean, I thought that it was, there were a lot of really good parts of the movie and there was a lot of things that it did well. I thought the acting was good, the costumes and so many things about it were really, really good and it was fun to watch. And it was clearly trying to play in the archetypal realm of male and female and gender role stuff. And so it was clearly tapping into mythological forces and ideas and I just don't feel like it really was able to deliver on the sort of promise that it started with at the beginning of the movie. I might also have COVID too, I don't know. My voice is a little hoarse today. And I'm not sure if it deescalated the male versus female culture war really. I think that there are a lot of guys, I didn't personally feel this way because I'm very secure in my masculinity, but I think that there are a lot of guys who might've felt blamed or thrown under the bus by Barbie and for a lot of guys, they feel very blamed and thrown under the bus already. And I felt like maybe there's a lot of people who felt like Barbie kicked them while they're down or something like that. Well, suck it up, you've been in charge forever. Yeah, I sucked it up. To be fair, I did put the caveat for some people because I do think for some it heightened something, but we can get into that. But it does seem open to multiple interpretations, which is interesting and I think suggests that there is some quality to it. It also might suggest that it just didn't know what it was doing. And so sometimes I struggle with, was this brilliant in unfolding multiple layers or is it just a ink blob Roe Shark that you can pick up the pieces and assemble different stories and ideas from? And that's sort of what Tripp, Luke and I have been sort of going back and forth on. Okay, well, okay Tripp, bring the thunder. Okay, yeah, so I'm gonna, oh, no, Luke is probably taking a deep breath right now. He's gonna, he's about to like yell at me. Here's the thing, the movie, first of all, I like Gerwig. I love some of her earlier work and I thought that it was a really well-made movie. I thought that Barbie Land looked really cool. It was like very Wes Anderson style and she knows what she's doing. I thought it had some really interesting ideas. I don't think it knew what it wanted to be. That's my problem. I don't think that the things landed the way that, I think it is a Roe Shark test where depending on where you're sitting at, you're gonna look at it and think very different things of it. But I don't think that it was intentionally. And I have quotes from Greta Gerwig that I think represent this about the film. I don't think that it actually knew the message that it wanted to send and that's why it's open to so many interpretations. And that's why I think that you can come to it and there are some good things that I really liked about it. But the fact that we're sitting here, A, I think it illustrates the confusion. We talk about the, I think that it actually in some ways illustrates the confusion of our culture about gender and politics and a lot of these things. The fact that it was in my opinion in a confused film, but then also the fact that we're arguing about what it actually was trying to say is not a virtue of the film. That's not a good thing. I think that's something that we're saying something about our culture and the way we're looking at these things. But the film itself, I think was a confused mess. I'm just gonna say it. I think it was a confused mess. I think that there were really some cool ideas and some really great scenes that I really liked, but the film itself didn't work for me. So yeah, I'll stop. And when you say didn't work for you, what do you mean by that? It means I don't know what it was trying to say. I don't know what it was actually trying to communicate or anything else. I think that it was so self contradictory that it undermined I think even the good parts of the film. And that's where it just didn't, I don't think that it worked. And I think that we're gonna look back on this. I mean, I do think that Josh Gibb was right whenever he wrote about this, that it's kind of like the girls version of Fight Club, where it's like, it knows what it's against. It doesn't know what it's for. I think that's right. And I think that that's where you're just like, okay, the heart of the movie, the moral, like all that, there's no payoff to the movie. And that is bad if you're telling a story. It's not gonna last well. Okay, can I say two things? Can we stop you? You could, I'm asking, trying to ask. I've shared a lot of my thoughts with Sam and Tripp. So I'm trying to shut up and let, cause I don't know what Paul thinks about it. And Cassie has a lot more to say. But you could say that the Bible is a convoluted mess that's open to many interpretations that people argue about for a long time that has no clear message. You could. I think new atheist types say that. Also, the film is very feminine. It's asking questions. What am I made for is the question Billie Eilish asks at the end. And so like, I encourage you, I hope you guys watch or listen to that podcast, watch that Sarah Hardy, our friend sent about shamanism, mysticism, rationalism and Chinese medicine. Cause it talks about the male. She sent that today. I know. She sent that today, right? Yeah, I know. Where did she send it on the Discord? No, in like a private chat. Well, that helps all of us. I'll share it. I'll put it on the Discord. I'll share it with you, Paul. I'll give it to Cassidy. I'll put it in the comments here. But he says, John hears, the John hears conversation. He says in there that very typically the masculine is thought of as very rational and where the feminine is very chaotic. It's something like Jordan Peterson has talked about. But he says, that's not like good and bad. Being more, being rational inclined is not a good thing. You guys want the movie to be rational. Well, so I won't talk about Godzilla too much, but I saw Godzilla not last night, but the night before. And I feel like Godzilla was operating at multiple levels, had multiple kinds of stories going on. Like there's the characters, there's the story of like Japan after the war, and there's the story of like fighting the Leviathan chaos monster. And so it's got multiple things going on. It's dealing with tragedy, guilt, honor, war, post-traumatic stress, all these different things. But it like comes together and coheres at the end. And the ending is kind of both surprising and amazing and sort of ties a bow on it. Not saying that like, it's like, I can give you one propositional sentence that like this was the message of Godzilla, because it's still more complicated than that. But it like, I don't know, it comes together and coheres. There's a payoff. There's a payoff. And obviously Godzilla is a much more masculine movie than Barbie, but I'm just contrasting. Like Barbie, it felt like the ending was like fumble, or you know, something. It felt like someone not sticking the landing at the end of a gymnast routine. But there was a lot of interesting things that happened before the ending. I don't know. Geez woman, what do you want? Just tell me. Maybe it's a little bit, maybe you're a little bit right. I track with a lot of what you're saying here, watching it again last night. There are movies that are behind this movie. The Matrix is definitely behind this movie. There's a number of scenes where it's, you mean the- 2001, The Space Odyssey is another one. Like, yes. It's an ode to moviemaking in some larger sense. And it's an ode. And she really knows what she's doing. It's really good. Like, I mean, it's really well-made. She's making references all over the place to moviemaking. So like, it's not that I think it was poorly made. I just think it was confused. Now, I think at heart, it's a Peter Pan movie. It's a feminine Peter Pan movie. Because the question is between the mother and the daughter, there's all the tension of growing up. And then between Ruth and Barbie, what's hilarious for me is that my sister's named Ruth and my mother's named Barb. And my sister always complains about her name. Because she says, it's an old lady's name. And so I first saw the movie in Massachusetts with my sister and my mother. And my sister's like, see, see? And so I think there's deep Peter Pan themes in this movie, both for Ken, because the Kens are the Lost Boys. And then the whole question is Barbie. I thought about Sam actually at the end of the movie, because when I saw a lot of the movie is, like many of you said, they're just sort of processing things throughout the movie. And so trying on all, they're just processing things. Is this the answer? No. Is this the answer? No. And then finally, at the end of the movie, when they wanna give their answer, it's typical American Hollywood, New England transcendentalism. Look inside yourself, the answer's in there somewhere. Find yourself, discover yourself. Yes, it's that. Yeah, like the meet your maker scene, your maker is supposed to have something to tell you about who you are, but the maker doesn't even know who you are. You have to know who you are. Right, you have to, the maker can't decide who you are, you have to decide for yourself. So I think- And that's bad? That's not true? No, it isn't true, Luke. All right. I think there's something interesting about Barbie being a created world from a human maker, right? So in some way, Ruth is the god of Barbie land, right? And what was her purpose for it? Well, it was to make this world that empowered women and did all of these things. And when you're in Barbie world, you think all is perfect, all is great. And then when it's clashing with reality, which is not really reality, it's this absurdist reality that you're coming to terms with. Well, actually it's like weaved in with other things, but you're having this sort of dialogue in this idea of God and creation and humans and what power do we have as creators and consumers and as humans? That's something that I kind of got from it at the end. And whether her point was to say you can decide what it is or not, if that's her intention, I don't know. I think I have more faith in Greta Gerwig and her interest in religion to say that she's just saying, decide whatever is good for you. I think she is kind of poking to something deeper than that. But I think that question of understanding what we're made for to understand our place as men and women and the human dynamics that go between those things is a really interesting one that can open a lot of questions. And we might call it confused, but I think Greta did something really brilliant, which was playing off this childhood wonder that we have as kids to highlight something that is very intriguing to adults and all humans of men and women, the way we interact and the human dynamics of what we're made for and how we create in the world. It was really interesting to me. And I think she's doing this complicated dance of weeding absurdity on both sides of the aisle with sort of, and like going into these spaces of more real moments. And yeah, I thought it was very interesting. And it's not linear in the way that some people would like, but I don't think I would call it confused. I didn't think it was confused. I liked the movie. I liked the movie a lot. I enjoyed watching it again. I enjoyed watching it again the second time. I think it was skillful with respect to dealing with the shallowness of the memes contra Ben Shapiro. I don't think it was a movie that was pro patriarchy. I don't think this was like a feminist screed. I don't agree with that take at all. Like that's not what it was doing. It was definitely more nuanced than that. Yeah, that perspective was given voice in some of the characters and in some of the dialogue, but that's different than it being the message. Right. And it was definitely the world's mythology. Yeah. I just think that it was more- Go ahead, Sam. No, no, I was just gonna say- It's Pinocchio-like, right? I couldn't decide if it's a Pinocchio movie, a Toy Story movie, or if it's like some weird gender-inverted Adam and Eve story where Eve is actually the one made first and man is made to serve Eve. And it's sort of like a upside down gender. I do think that that was part of it, right? Is like that was part of what they were doing with Barbie Land. And I think that like the relationship between Barbie Land and the real world is what made it really, really confused. And I will say, in kind of defense of the Ben Shapiro takes, is that at parts of the movie, it invites you to view it politically. Like there's a whole scene where they talk about Citizens United. This movie was marketed as, if you like Barbie, you'll like this movie. There's some of that. They're playing on that. And no doubt this Christmas, I bet Barbie sales will go through the roof. I mean, that's part of the pitch to Mattel. But I think they're trampling down consumerism and marketing by good art. By taking advantage of it. It's kind of like Lego, the Lego movie, criticizing capitalism when you're just like, you're just making this movie to get people to buy more Legos. That's at the end of the movie, that's what you're doing. That's why it seems, I will maintain that it's a confused movie because I don't actually think it knows what it's going to be. And I'm gonna read you a quote from Greta Gerwig. So it's not actually just my, this is about the scene, do you guys remember it, whenever Barbie's sitting next to the older woman on the bench? It was a beautiful scene, actually. I really enjoyed it. This is what Greta said. I love that scene so much. And the older woman on the bench is the costume designer, Anne Roth. She's a legend. It's a cul-de-sac of a moment in a way. It doesn't lead anywhere. And in early cuts, looking at the movie, it was suggested, well, you could cut it. And actually the story would move on just the same. And I said, if I cut the scene, I don't know what this movie is about. I don't know what this movie is about. That's how I saw it. To me, this is the heart of the movie, that scene. The way Margot Robbie plays it is so gentle and unforced. There's the more outrageous elements of the movie. People say, oh my God, I can't believe Mattel let you do this. Or I can't believe Warner Brothers let you do this. But to me, the part that I believe that is still in the movie, that I can't believe that is still in the movie is this little cul-de-sac of a moment that doesn't lead anywhere except for it's the heart of the movie. Okay, if the heart of the movie doesn't lead anywhere, that's not a praise or a virtue of the story that you're telling. I'm sorry. I'm sorry, no. Tripp, no. You're arguing rationality versus chaos. It depends if you're trying to make a film for a feminine film. No, no. Exactly. This is exactly what I said. It depends if you're trying to make a film for a feminine film. It's a hundred, no. I will fight you on that. Cassidy and I spoke about this and Cassidy brought this up. If the heart of the movie could be removed and the plot would continue nonetheless and it doesn't lead anywhere, you have written a bad story that will not last well. I'm sorry. No. Like, name me a story. Don't you think this is the verveky narratable versus what's the other one, nominal? Okay. Let me see if we can bring a little bit more progress to this impact. I think Byrne's take on the Barbie film, which is on Byrne's channel is important to see because Byrne gives a lot of historical context. Barbie arises and Byrne is dead on right. Barbie arises as, there's one point in the movie where Barbie says, I'm not a bimbo. The Barbie doll was a bimbo. It was the Playboy generation, just up on the heels, torpedo boobs. Barbie was built to be a bimbo. Now Barbie then had to change through time and that was also in the movie. The question I have for that scene is it's very fashionable today to look at an older person, especially an older woman, because older, especially white women today feel like they are unseen and unvalued because an older black woman is supposed to be godlike and wise. An older non-white woman is supposed to have cultural heft and divinity in a sense, but an older white woman is pointless. I hear this from a lot of older white women. So the question is, okay, you say she's beautiful. Now she's not a bimbo like you, Barbie. She's not, I mean, of course, there's this point in the movie where Margot Robbie basically says, I'm not beautiful. And then there's a little voiceover that says, well, we dramatically cast this poorly because what is obvious to everyone is that Margot Robbie is astoundingly beautiful. Right, yeah. Right, yeah. No, she's mad. No, I mean, this is- So why is, what does that mean that the older woman is beautiful beyond just this new thing that we have in our language where the other word that is used all the time is amazing. You're amazing. This is amazing. Amazing, amazing, amazing, amazing. What about the woman is beautiful? And I think, again, this goes back to the Peter Pan, and the question of growing up, and then don't forget what causes the portal and the rift in the continuum, however they wanna phrase that, is incessant thoughts of death, Barbie. So what about the woman is beautiful? And I think human or film is much more than just about stories, it's about understanding humans. And to say that a scene doesn't move a story along, it therefore doesn't make any sense in a movie, because it's a face of a history of realism that has been very powerful in the shaping of filmmaking. Like, The Bicycle Thief is one of my favorite films. It's got a scene in it. My favorite scene in the film is the father and the son sitting at a table eating at a restaurant. I think it's like pasta or pizza, and they're like pulling the string. And it's this little human moment sort of dark story that gets you connected with the humanity of people. And that's what I think that scene did. And that's why I think that to me doesn't show that it's confused, it shows to me more, she's really trying to understand this idea of beauty and the dynamics and the depth in that, in the human experience. But again, what about the woman is now relationally, because she is a survivor of the age of decay? And that again, goes to Tripp's point that she's pointing to mysteries, but is she making a contribution with respect to us understanding the mysteries? Should she? Well, this, yeah, this is like- Here we are. Please, that would be helpful. If you're gonna write a story, it would be really helpful if you did that. Okay, what is proper understanding? My favorite filmmaker of all time is Terence Malick, Tree of Life. Most people watch that and are like, why did you waste two and a half hours of my life? What was that about? And Terence Malick explicitly is Heideggerian in his approach because he says, my goal is to change the way you perceive the world, not to change your ideas about the world. This is why I bring up Polanyi all the time. Modernist assumptions of knowledge and narrative is that it's conscious, articulable, encapsulatable. That's not what knowledge is, people. Modernist knowledge, you talk about this all the time. My question then is, how does this movie do that? Extend on that question. If we're arguing about that, that's a problem. That's the issue. Because, I mean, with a Terence Malick movie, you're right, you're right, Luke. With a Terence Malick movie, you tend to, at the end of it, you have, let's often, sort of an experience of the ineffable. And that's what you're pointing to, Matt. Okay, maybe we can't put words on it, it's ineffable. We have an experience of ineffable. It's deliverable to people. At the end of this movie, I did not get a sense of the ineffable. I got a sense that, I got a message that, oh, it is ineffable, but I didn't get, it didn't deliver the payload in that sense. I think where Terence Malick, I think, does. Well, we talked about this, like, I think Tripp asked me, or Sam, maybe somebody asked me, if it made me cry, and I said, it did the second time. Because that, I think, I think that scene when she's choosing, it's after all these speeches, it's after all these difficulties, how hard it is to be a woman, childbirth, child rearing, the struggle with her daughter. What it's asking Barbie is like, do you want that? Do you want that kind of beauty that this old woman has? It's entering into the pain of suffering, and she chooses to do it. And then everybody thinks this is a joke at the end, spoiler alert, then where does she go? What's the very last scene? What does she do? She goes to the OB, because she gets a vagina. Guess what that is? Procreation, person- She goes to the gynecologist, she does not go to the gynecologist. Sorry, gynecologist. Yeah. So now we're sort of into James Bond land, where I had this conversation with Dr. Jim. James Bond, now is Barbie going to, and one of the things that I really thought was also good in the film was you had this line of long-term, distant, casual boyfriend. But the first time, right before Ken makes that line, he says, are you going to be my wife or my long-term, distant, casual girlfriend? And so I think you're right, Luke, and I think that's a strong point. But she was not about to, I mean, look at the absence of the husband of the America Ferrera and the daughter. Oh, he'll be okay. He's up there doing Duolingo, trying to learn Spanish. I mean, and now again, yeah, she's playing on the trope that she's playing on the Homer Simpson, every sitcom in the last 30 years. The bumbly, fumbly dad. Father knows dick all, that's the trope. Yeah. Me and Ferdy had a conversation about this, and we think you're wrong about this, Paul. Okay, well, let's hear it. Well, we think that, well, first of all, to take that role is to take the role that many feminists have taken, that because a woman just plays a wife, she's not worth anything in a film. Just because a man plays a husband doesn't mean he's worth anything in a film. I disagree with that. I think that's a silly take. Some stories focus on the husband versus the wife and vice versa. I don't think that in and of itself should be the first place we go. But the fact that he's taking the time to learn Spanish is a really interesting choice that they made, because what is he doing? He's trying to connect with his daughter and his wife, and he's fumbling through it, and he's making mistakes, but that's kind of the beauty of it. And as a person who has to learn a language that my husband speaks that I don't for my daughter and my son, that is an incredibly powerful thing to do. And I don't think that that's something that was just a throw away. You said your daughter and your son. My husband. My husband and my daughter. Oh, bigger Freudian slip. Poor Ferdy just got demoted. So they did, because we talked, Tripp and Sam and I talked about this a little bit. There were little, and I equated it to, because I loved Rob Bell and Richard Rohr, but every once in a while they'll make, even though I love the broader stuff of what they're saying, they'll make little political jabs to just be like, oh, you dumb religious conservatives, whatever. You say this. So they'll take little jabs. There was a point, like my son watched it, well, dang it, I don't wanna say what he thought now in this format, but there was a section where that scene that we're talking about where the daughter said something like, it was like co-opting the culture or something with him trying to learn Spanish, or he's trying to love you and learn the language of your mother and your native language. Can you guys agree with us then that they're much more specific about the, you're a dumb cultural conservative than this kind of mixed like, oh, but this guy is doing all of this effort and those kinds of things and learning about it, because they mentioned, I can't even, I don't even know how many times they mentioned the word patriarchy in this movie, but it was a lot. And they're doing this and they're inviting you to be political, but they're much more specific and on the nose about the critiques of the patriarchy than they are on the opposite when guys are actually making efforts or those kinds of things. Like, I don't think that that's questionable. So I think Sam, you haven't talked a lot, so maybe- No, it's okay. But there were multiple of those political jabs, whether it's a reference to Citizens United or the Supreme Court and Roe v. Wade sort of things and very not subtle, but not very subtle, jabs like the Democrats are on the right path and can't we all just agree about that together as if doing that thing where it assumes everybody is on the same political page about who the bad guys and the good guys are. And it wasn't that, I didn't feel like those were at the level of just characters saying things, but not the level of the top. I felt like that was actually at the level of the top because they were the meta jokes or something like that that comes from the sort of the superstructure of the writers or something like that. And I felt like that really multiple times just detracted from the movie as if the main point is to just vote for the right political party or something like that. Yeah, and that's- I don't know, I read it differently. Now, whether she meant it that way or not, but the way that they talk about the patriarchy and stuff, it felt like, oh, isn't this a pretty picture with a bow on it, yet it's not what it seems. And you see that one through the Barbies, well, we fixed everything. Feminism fixed everything, right? And then you go to the real world and say, okay, well, not everything's fixed. But then what does she do at the end of the film? She chooses to enter the world. And the world wouldn't be a part of that. Like if it was really boo, patriarchy, matriarchy, I think it was sort of making a comment that the childlike participation we have in these ideas of patriarchy and matriarchy, and that there might be some nuance that we have to have. And I even see that through the relationship with the daughter and the mother. The daughter has these very woke takes, she called Barbie a fascist. She says, everybody hates women. And the mom goes, well, it's a little more complicated than that. It's sort of like these different phases in which you play with the story as you grow. I don't know. I felt like she was sort of poking at that. And the beginning part when they did the first sort of Barbie Mattel scene, there was something in the Barbie's eyes and everything that felt like, like the crazy eyes. Like it felt like, isn't this great? And I don't think she did that. Like she made it so superficial and plastic. I don't think she did that without thought. It's playing on the superficial thing because that's another thing. Like, I'll agree with you. I watched this in Minneapolis, like the city of Minneapolis. And so like, I know I paid attention to where like all the people in the crowd were cheering and clapping and thought it was great. It was the political points. But I think the irony is, is that they're having a superficial take that there are deeper points being made to Cassidy's point. So whatever, take it politically, fine. So Erin asked, and I think this is a good question. People still watch The Matrix 24 years later. Do you think people will keep watching Barbie for decades to come? Not to the degree of The Matrix, but yes. I think film students will watch Barbie more than they watch The Matrix. That's interesting. I think it'll be like a, look what was happening then movie. Yes. I think there's gonna be a lot of, it doesn't this have internal. Five years ago, yes. I think that that's what's gonna happen. It's not gonna be because it was. Okay. And that's still a good thing. Politics is now, politics is now, religion is always. I think that this is talking about masculine and feminine things, which are much deeper than mere politics. And I do think it's making a call. You can politicize it. No, the movie politicized it, Luke. Let's be very clear. The movie actually made it political, like explicitly. So like, let's not pretend that that didn't happen in the movie. Well, that's what we were just talking about. We were just talking about that you can take it that way. But Cassidy was saying she thinks Greta is doing a deeper thing. The movie asked you to take it that way. You can't have an entire Supreme Court like scene about Citizens United and be like, oh, why are you guys taking this politically? No, you're asking the audience to take it politically. No. So then the question is, what are you trying to do? I think she's asking people to move beyond the political, which is why it ends with what am I made for and her becoming human. I think it's shining a magnifying glass on the idea that the way we talk about politics is childish because even at this absurdity, we can still see a mountain of truth in it and it's a film that you can read it, but it also reads you. Like it doesn't surprise me at all that Ben Shapiro reacted the way that he reacted to it. But what does it do? It highlights what she's talking about. And it's the same with the left. I've seen a lot of people talking about Barbie being like from the left saying, this is like a story about reclaiming womanhood because we can wear pink. And I'm like, are you kidding me? There's something so much deeper going on here. And it's really that call up, like, what are we made for? Because that's the question of men and women. Like what role is it and what are we made for? And it doesn't take you to this endpoint where some people want it to take, but it does open the door to say, hey, maybe religion is something to explore, to understand what it is we're made for. Well, let's contrast it with- What's that saying? What you see in here? What does it say? What you see in here is dependent on where you're seeing what's- Depends a lot of time? Yeah. Huh, that's a good one. Well, let's contrast it to Mean Girls because Mean Girls is still with us. Why is Mean Girls still with us? And Barbie might not be with us 20 years from now, except as a look back into, oh, remember the, remember right after that, remember the 2020s? I think Mean Girls wasn't trying quite as hard as Barbie was and wasn't quite as like, so obviously Mean Girls is awesome because it's set at my own high school. You wonder what sort of neighborhood I grew up in, Paul. I literally went to the high school that Mean Girls is set at. The mall that they go- I have to rewatch Mean Girls now. The mall they go to in the movie is the mall I would go to as a teenager. That is awesome. That's obviously why it's the best. But I mean, I think that Mean Girls, there is a little bit clearer of a structure and it's sort of capturing just like that eternal dynamic of female competition that I think is, it just does a really good job of that and it has some really funny characters and moments and stuff like that and memeable places and not that Barbie doesn't have some memeable places. But I think that Mean Girls was a much more archetypal story that has a structure and a payoff that- Yeah. Barbie, I'm not quite sure what Barbie's archetypal plot line is. It seems to have a couple- Also, I would say genre-wise, it's very much clear that Mean Girls was trying to be a comedy. At various places in Barbie, it's very funny and then at other places, you get this lecture kind of screed and it just feels tonally dissonant to me and in ways that kind of makes me wonder, am I supposed to take it seriously or am I not? And I think that that's the problem is that you can't, you don't know how to take this movie because I don't think it knows how to take itself. That's why I feel like it's, I'm gonna be honest, I've enjoyed the movie, I've watched it three times. I don't think that it's actually, I think that it's confused, but it's interesting in various places, which is why we're talking about it, right? Is because it's actually interesting. Could we compare this to 13 Going on 30, which I saw one of the women in my family pulled this up. I'd never seen the movie and I don't think it's as important movie. It's a Jennifer Gardner movie, but it's made again before sort of the apocalypse of the big franchises. And in some ways it was similar in that there's a question of growing up and it was a rom-com, so it was definitely more shallow, but it's interesting to compare it to that. Came out the same year as Mean Girls, exact same year as Mean Girls. Really? Interesting. They're doing a new Mean Girls. For some reason. But it's a musical. What are these basically proof? Yeah. It's a musical. No. Sam is a big fan of Mean Girls. See, the problem is I don't remember any of these. He's just not that into you. I've seen that like four or five times. That's much better. I like that movie. It's a great movie. So like, I feel like we haven't talked about what obviously was the best part of the movie was Ken. And Ryan Gosling as Ken. I actually felt like he was like the only real character. It's hard for me to disagree. Maybe just, I can only relate to masculine characters because of my limited gender category perspective. I feel like Ken was the only character who kind of had like motivations and like a little bit of growth and stuff that actually seemed like a developed character that could relate to. And I felt happy when he was happy or sad when he was sad and that sort of thing. I agree. Well, I mean, he is our generation's greatest actor. What's that? I said, I will agree. He is our generation's greatest actor. Really? Can you not hear me? I mean, I thought that Margot Robbie was really good at especially like she has more range. She showed more range in this movie than I thought that she had as an actress. Like I kind of up until now kind of thought of her she's obviously gorgeous, but she, like in this movie she showed me things that I didn't know that she had as an actress and I really liked that. But yeah, I think Ken is the most relatable character because he has the clearest motivations and what he's looking at. He's the one that I understood at least, even if I thought, we can talk about Ken for a while but then I also wanna talk about the real world versus Barbie world dichotomy that they set up in this because that's another issue. I think that happens with movie, but I thought Ken was great. I thought that Ryan Gosling was awesome in it. Now again, I wanna make it clear. Good Luke, make it clear. All right, I wanna make it clear that I love Ryan Gosling. He is my favorite actor. I've seen all of his films, but Margot Robbie was better in this. Are you kidding me? She's so much better in this. She was amazing. I don't think Ken's character was better- The best character. Than Barbie. I agree. Not just acting-wise, but as a character, I felt like Ken was more of a real character than Barbie was. But to get back to the question of finally the payload or the payoff of the movie, again, at the end, it's just classic American New England transcendentalism. It's, you know, what is Ken's takeaway? I've got to discover myself and be my, it's authenticity. I've got to be my unique individual. I've got to reach down inside to the secret, sacred self, try to discover myself, and then play that out on the outside. Yeah, but there's seeds of that in Christianity, right? Like, but it's that question of like the yes and. Yes, there's something true about being authentic, being, sorry, Luke, your face is like so weirdly screaming. We're really staring at Luke's face right now. There's something true about that, but then there's, I think there is the other question that we're not asking in American films. Well, what responsibility do we have? Yes. Yeah, yeah, I mean, because the long, the long-term casual boyfriend, you know, that's where, that's where the, and that is one of the deep weaknesses of the movie, which, you know, at the art conference, Farrell made the point, and Peterson makes the point, the real power of humanity is men and women working together. That is the real power of humanity. And we were just left with individualism in the movie. Here's a question that I would like all of your answers for. Why didn't, or maybe why couldn't, or maybe why shouldn't the movie just end in sort of, in some sense, the obvious ending of Barbie and Ken getting together and becoming real people together, and you're visiting the obstetrician instead of the gynecologist? Why not that? Because I think the way the rest of the, I think the way the rest of the movie played, it didn't make sense. Because- Is it? Go ahead. Because, yeah, that's sort of, and this is something I've been thinking about too, about sort of this rewriting stories. We talk about classic Disney fairy tales. They always end with the prince, and people are mad because they're rewriting the ending. Well, why are we surprised that Disney is rewriting the ending? Because they already rewrote those endings. The grim fairy tales are very dark. Little Mermaid did not end with a marriage and two worlds coming together. It ended with her becoming sea foam and memorizing the life of suffering. I think this is a swing back to sort of ask that question of, or question the idol of romantic love being the purpose for men and women. Now it certainly can give us meaning, and I think there is something very sacred to that. I'm not minimizing marriage there, but to me it would feel like a cop-out the way that they developed the story. If they had developed the story differently with different characters, maybe that would have been a good ending, but to me, I don't think that would have been a satisfying ending. Or maybe they're saying marriage could be an idol. Maybe you have to know who you are first. Because here's the thing, like was Pinocchio involved in his own creation? This is the thing, this individualistic transcendentalist secret sacred self I think is bogus. Don't understand Calcedon. I think that's what's going on. All right, here's something to consider. Now we keep talking about Greta Gerwig. This movie had two writers, and so Noah Baumbach gets no attention. Symbolism happens. His first spouse was Jennifer Jason Lee, divorced in 2013, but got together with Greta Gerwig in 2011 up until the present as partner these two make the movie together. And again, Ken and Barbie stay partners-ish. No, Ken doesn't come into the real world. So there's something going on here. Yeah, well maybe in Barbie 2, it will end with Ken getting a prostate exam and I'll have to eat my words. You see, like when you say it that way, doesn't the ending sound absurd, right? Like, okay, who wants to see a movie that ends with a prostate exam? Literally no one. So then why is a movie that ends in a gynecologist office supposed to be a good ending? I'm sorry. I think it's playing on the absurdism, right? Because what woman is excited to go to the gynecologist? None, but that's the thing. But that's sort of that thing. Like, well, I get that I have that opportunity because I'm a human, which she wasn't before. So it's sort of playing on that. But I do think this, whether she meant this or not, I do think there is an interesting symbolism of the idea that the fact that she can go to the gynecologist gives her the potential to create life, which she didn't have before. Which is at the end, that's what she asked. She's like, I don't want to just be the thing that's created. I want to be the thing that creates. And as humans, aren't we kind of both? We're things that were created, but also things that create and invited into a story where God wanted us to create with him in the garden. I think it's hitting on something very true about our human experiences. Aaron, do you think that landed? Do you think that landed? I don't think, if she meant it that way, which I'm not saying she did, but that's something that I said. I don't know. I mean, I'm- I have to talk about that. She's very smart. She might have actually intended that. Do you think it landed? I think for a lot of people, it didn't. And that's what makes me sad. Because I said this in a comment section in PBK's video. I think this movie is going to go down as the most misunderstood film of the year. Of the year, by both left and right. And that's really sad to me, because I think it does- Oh, it's definitely going to go down as that, for sure. Because I don't agree with the Ben Shapiro take, that it's a feminist screed or anything else like that. I don't think it's trying to do that. I think it's trying to be more nuanced and failing at some points and being more nuanced. But I don't think that that's what it was trying to do. And then also, I don't think it's also not a- It's not this feminist, you know. It's also not pro-feminism either. It is more like, I mean, Greta Gerwig, again, I have some other quotes where she talks about, this is a pro-humanist film and those kinds of things. And that's what she was trying to do. So I don't disagree with you. It's going to be misunderstood. And I'm saying that's why the film didn't work for me. Because I actually really loved some things about this film and that's why I'm frustrated. It's because actually some things really, really did work and some things, but I don't think that it connected and there wasn't a payoff at the end that I think is going to resonate with people. It's resonating with women. Like it resonated with me. And so I watched the video of Ben Shapiro and Brett Cooper talking about the film. Ben hated it. Brett loved it. And Brett was talking, Ben Shapiro was talking at the end, oh, it's stupid with the images. And Brett's like, oh, I cried at that part. She couldn't articulate why, but those tears, like they mean something. Like even if you can't articulate it, it's landing for women and some men. Rationality versus intuition. So my internet sucks. I'll just say one more thing and I'll go. But this, I love it. This would go toward where I think the little corner. People have started saying this in the comments. We need to integrate more Rupert Sheldrake into these conversations because what is the value of attention and intention and placebo and nocebo, because that's the whole Rorschach thing. What you see in here, what do you want to see in this film? What do you not want to see in this film? You will probably not see what you don't wanna see and you'll probably see what you want to see because that's the hard problem of all perception. You cannot divorce the perceived. I did not want to see any more of Luke and I made it happen over the internet. My internet's terrible. All right, I love you guys, bye. No, I'm just joking. And just to clarify, my point to say that it's resonating with women doesn't mean that it's not resonating with men. Ferdie loves the movie and he saw exactly what I saw. I enjoyed it too. Well, tell them, why do you think it's resonating with women? Well, one, I think women, the narrative of women is so confused in modern times that I think a lot of women are having these struggles that kind of are presented, right? Like you're supposed to be beautiful, but you're also supposed to be smart and educated. And you're also supposed to be down to earth and not bothered, but you should also have high standards. And it's these back and forth. And the funny thing is those standards aren't actually put upon by men, they're put upon by women, which is really funny that Barbie was made by a woman and is creating all of these problems for women. It's like we're our own worst nightmare, but I think about it too, especially now that I have a daughter. What do I teach my daughter about being a woman? That's a really difficult question because I don't even know that. And there's that commercial in the middle of the movie where it's like depression Barbie, where she's scrolling on Instagram and eating Starburst and watching Pride and Prejudice. And I thought it was really interesting because it's accurate. Every woman has done that with the BBC, Pride and Prejudice. But there's something very interesting about why Pride and Prejudice. And I've been like wrestling with that question. And I wonder if there's something about the distinct roles that men and women had and the knowledge that this is how we act and behave that's sort of subconsciously appealing to us. Or reassuring or grounding. Yeah, where there's this thing where men and women have like a respect and dignity for each other, but it plays itself out in this different story where right now men and like the whole Ken and Barbie thing, why does Barbie choose to be the long-term non-committal girlfriend? Well, that's because I think a lot of women think that's what men want because that's what we've been shown in movies for the last 50 years. Who's the hero? James Bond, Han Solo, the guys who, they get the girl and the love, but they're sort of, they don't want the long-term commitment in the marriage. But what was interesting about Barbie is they kind of flipped that on the head, what it can want at the end. He wanted to share the house with Barbie, which is what I think men really do want. But yeah, there's a disconnect in stories about what men want and what women want and how they're dialoguing. And I think Barbie played really well with those things by heightening the story to show that absurdity and connect to the idea of what men and really women actually do want, which is to work together in some way. There were a lot of points in this movie where I felt like I was in a fight with a significant other. Like that feeling of I'm being unfairly criticized, I'm gonna have to explain and defend myself because I'm part of some relationship fight that's going on. And in a certain sense, I think it was going for that, and that was good and that it was achieving that. But there were so many times where, I don't know, there would be some feminist point made and I felt like I needed to defend myself or something, like there was a lot of, I don't know, I needed to defend myself or something like that as if I was being, I don't know, personally attacked or something. Yeah. Well, and I think that's one of the things that is a weakness of the movie is that it does feel unbalanced, in my opinion. Like it does feel like the, again, like I said earlier, like the critiques of the patriarchy are explicit and very visual and known and it's not, you're moving from the Barbie world to the real world where the patriarchy exists. And it just feels very unbalanced where the matriarchy is this fictional thing that doesn't really exist except in these girls' minds, but like the patriarchy is real and it's here. And Barbie's getting smacked on her butt on the beach in Southern California and all this kind of stuff. And it's so like, you're just like, okay, but you understand that that's not, like Mattel board is not made up of a bunch of dudes. Like that's not, that doesn't exist. And- Although it kind of pointed that out when Ken expected to be able to get any job he wanted. And then the guy was like, oh, you're actually not qualified. Yeah. But then he says, but we just hide it. I mean, they essentially just essentially go with, we just hide it better now, right? And so it was very, like, it was very, it was very like on the nose about like, the matriarchy and this being a, this essentially being a parody of a world. And it was almost like trying to be satirical on the other end. And I just felt like it was very unbalanced the way that they were doing it. And it just didn't work for me in that way because you're not actually going to get like a mutual understanding, like kind of a both sides thing that it was trying to go for. It just seemed very unbalanced. Now I've got a question. One of the things that was notably absent with the possible exception of Alan was LGBTQ stuff in this movie. And its absence given its pervasive presence in just about everything in terms of representation is conspicuous. Thoughts on that? They did have a trans Barbie. They played her as a woman, but they had a trans Barbie. Yeah. You guys, it worked. You couldn't even tell. She passed. She passed, okay. So like- Dr. Barbie. I mean, yeah. And also it's not like the politically correct answer anymore to say what makes a woman a woman is being able to go to the gynecologist at the end of the day. So there, so it does. Right. And it's very gender essentialist in a very weird way that was allowed to not be critis... Maybe there were some people on the far left in the alphabet spectrum that noticed that and criticized it for that. But it seemed like you weren't allowed to criticize the Barbie movie from the left. And that's also telling about like how it landed in the cultural moment too. Right. So quick comment, Stephanie. I do think Sam, in a few years it will be. And I think it's going to actually be criticized in a couple of years by the left. But right now you're not allowed to because I think that Greta Kerwig is probably gonna go the JK Rowling route and be kind of a villain to the progressive left. That's my guess. Here's a question. There's an interesting part in the movie where Ben comes back and institutes the patriarchy and the girls are running around opening beers and dressing in skirts and that sort of thing. And they seem to like it. And the Kens like it. And the Barbies seem happier than they were in pre-Ken patriarchy Barbie land. But then that sort of hinted at that that was just because they had been mind-warped or mind-controlled or something like that. But there was a weird sort of conservative reactionary take to that that was like, look, that actually is the better solution. And maybe it's not like beer pong and driving Hummers, but like that, if you invert it, that actually both sides were happier with the inversion, at least temporarily. And then they had to go back and like awaken their perspective to the matriarchy or something like that. But there was that brief period in the movie there that like, I'm not sure if you're really supposed to be making the patriarchy look as happy for both sides as they seemingly were. I just thought- But don't you think that that was like a plug me back into the matrix thing? They're happy because they're unconscious. It's just like Ken. Ken was happy running the patriarchy of Kendem, but he wasn't because when Barbie came back, what does he do? He scrambles as fast as he can because all he wants is Barbies to love him. Barbie has all the power in that dynamic for the fake patriarchy. All he wants is Barbie. Well, it's been a while since I've watched a film, but I went back and watched clips today to try to remember. Cassidy, I've had to watch this movie three times for this talk. Where do you- Listen, I have the newborns, okay? I have the newborns. Don't tell me it's been a while. Yeah. I was like, what, eight months pregnant when I saw it. Cassidy is a real life mom with a five star baby. I have a five star baby to take care of. Let's platform her perspective here. Let's just say this now, right now. Cassidy, you're amazing. Thanks, Ken. But I watched clips today to kind of refresh my mind. And there was this one scene in the car where the mom and the daughter were driving away after Barbie gave up. And Alan's in the back of the car and he's beating up all the other kids. And then the daughter's like, we have to go back. We have to help Barbie. And she was like, why? She gave up. She's not who I thought she was. And she was like, no, but we have to go and we have to try to help her make it better. And even if it's not perfect, we can still try to make it better. And I think that quote right there is sort of where we land at the end of Barbie land, where it's not perfect. But did they make it better where they found a way for men and women to work together in a way that seems somewhat reasonable and fair? I think most modern people would say, most modern people would say yes. Maybe it's not utopian. Wow, wouldn't that be fun? If we had something that wasn't utopian, if we would just do this, everything would be perfect. I guess that's the show. Yeah, I mean, I don't think that it, again, I don't think it was shallow. I think that she had things to say. I just don't think that it worked as a coherent narrative because I'm not sure what I'm supposed to take away with. And I think that it is a flaw of the movie that we're arguing about what it was trying to say and we're noticing all of these inconsistencies. And I don't think that it's going to last well in like society, like societal consciousness, because I don't think that it's, I think we're gonna look back on this as a point in time. And I think we're gonna look back on this and we are gonna watch this movie, but we're gonna look back on it as a commentary on our current culture and not so much as a film. I think it's a reflection of the fact that men and women, we don't know how to talk about this as a culture. And I think that that's what's going on with it. And that's why it's both popular and hated. And why we're all debating what actually it was trying to say because I think it's confused. I would make the argument that most films that last the test of time are commentaries on their day and age. I think that's true. Like you can look at citizenship. And people debate them. It was not accepted during the time. They tried to keep it from being successful because of what was being said about powerful people. Yet here we are, how many years later, it's arguably considered one of the best films of all time. Like we won't know for a hundred years, but I think that, I mean, even Mean Girls, Mean Girls was a commentary of the time and place. And this is sort of this extension of where we've gotten 20 years later, 15 years later. Right. And that's why I think it's an interesting movie. I think it's an interesting movie. The Joker was that way. Yeah, but it also had a much better payoff in conclusion. It did have a payoff. Yeah. Well, let's bring Taylor Swift into the argument because is Taylor Swift in some ways the Barbie of today? Yes. She is the initiation of the divine feminine in our current culture. What? No way. No way. That's the best we got for now at the present. But I wouldn't say she's the divine feminine. But the archetypal feminine or something like that. She's the archetype of the modern feminine. There she is, marry the mother of God, Taylor Swift. I mean, kind of. I mean, Beyonce is a little bit like her Beyonce compete a little bit for this title. But there are pictures of Beyonce on a Beyonce album where she's like pregnant and looks like basically a Venus fertility goddess. And like she has a halo. And it's like, I mean, it's obvious. It's like iconic and like the old icons. I'm not letting you finish, but Taylor Swift had one of your best albums all time. All time. And Kanye will let us know who's doing the better job of instantiating the divine feminine at any given moment, whether it's Taylor or Beyonce, but yeah. Also, Cassidy has a great series on her channel about Taylor Swift. Plug for everybody's wanting to check out. No more Taylor Swift. Here's what I think about Taylor Swift. I think she is a really good person to look at if you want to get the cultural temperature of what women feel like today. Do I think she's the divine feminine? No. But like Luke said, what woman is, except for maybe the mother of God. Like if we're looking at the divine feminine. Well, I guess that's my question. What do we mean by divine feminine? Well, Jordan Peterson's currently instantiating the divine masculine as that lady who wrote that letter to him on her Ayahuasca trip or whatever said. Isn't that from a very early Jordan Peterson biblical lecture? Almost like his second or third one where he's like, I got this letter. This lady was on Ayahuasca or shrooms or something. And one of the DMT robot fairies told me that Jordan Peterson is the instantiation of the divine masculine at this culture and time for a while or something like that. And I think Taylor Swift is whatever the opposite of that is. And she's doing the other super girly things of, well, do I wanna date the cool artsy boy? Should I date the muscular quarterback or whatever that the position, the football player, the star of the football team? Or should I, and like trying to, like it's the whole, Taylor Swift is just a living high school drama, like Mean Girls. Right. But she's 34 or something. Right, and honestly, that's kind of like, to tie that back to Barbie, that's kind of like, you walk away from it being like, wait, is this good? Is it bad? Is this what you should do? Is this what you should seek? Should you, like, what actually are we trying to say here? And it's, I mean, it's not clear to me with the Barbie movie, but like with Taylor Swift, it's kind of like, I have a friend who actually went to her house and met her and all that kind of stuff. She's an artist in Nashville and all those kinds of things. And Taylor Swift was really, really kind to her. I have no real opinions on Taylor Swift other than that. I don't care really, but it's, but it's interesting just watching her being the hero to people because like, is that what you would raise your daughter to do? Really? It's, you know, I wouldn't, and I wouldn't encourage my sons to date someone like that, but that doesn't mean she's a bad person or anything. Oh, be real, you had daydreams about if you could be the one dating Taylor Swift and what song she would bring back to you. Oh, no. She put you on the map, Tripp. He's worth like $400 million, so like, yeah, I mean, I'll take that. Yeah, so yeah, but no, it's not, but like, you know, would I encourage like that, that kind of lifestyle, like money and fame and everything else aside, like, is that good for girls? Is that good for guys? I think that that's some of the areas that Barbie movie was trying to traffic in and ask those questions and raise them that I just don't think landed, so. Well, what if Taylor, what if the football player, whoever his name is, wins the Super Bowl? Travis Kelcey? Gets the MVP trophy at the end of the Super Bowl, and then like Taylor Swift comes on the field, he drops on one knee and you know, love story starts playing on the loudspeakers, and like our whole culture is now enraptured in like this, you know, super archetypal love story that ends with, you know, Swift babies or something like that. Would you feel differently if they end happily ever after, then good for them, you know, that would be great. But yeah, I have a hard time seeing that. I think it's more likely that he gets a flame song at some point in the next few years. Could be worse, could be worse. Who doesn't wanna be immortalized in a Taylor Swift song? That's true too, it could be worse, yeah. So here's something, here's something we're dancing around that I think we're not talking about directly, is this idea of consumption versus creation. What responsibility does a creator have to put good morals into their songs, to tell true things, to pursue the good, and at what point is it the consumer to be able to wrestle with those questions themselves? Because they're also human. And why I think Taylor Swift has gained success is because she's cashed out the currency of vulnerability. She writes her own songs about people everybody knows, and she puts little hints to get people to dig, to try to get them to know her story better, and so she can feel known and her consumers can feel known. And that's what Barbie plays with too, it's this human relationship that they're really playing with that is drawing people in. And it's an interesting dynamic, and I think it will have a lot of consequences for her. Well, she's already experienced those consequences before in her career, but I think she will continue to experience those consequences if you play that game of leveraging parasocial relationships with art. But it certainly tells us something interesting about the lived stories of people, because why are people connecting with her stories? Because they're living the same stories too, and they're feeling the same thing she's feeling. Yeah, and I feel really sad for Taylor Swift, because I think it's a very lonely life she lives, and she's just trying her best to do good, and she has no idea what that looks like anymore. Wow, that's sad. That's sad. All that, I mean, Citizen Kane story, right? I mean, in 30 years, is she gonna be the new Howard Hughes? I mean, listen to her new album, and that's hopefully the last video that I do on Taylor Swift, going through some of her album. It's this Midnights, it's 12 or 13, how she pitched it at first, 13 songs throughout sleepless nights in her life. And so she's going back, and she's relooking at relationships at 33 from when she was, all these different times in her life. And it's an evolving album, because since that album came out, she's lost a long-term partner, she's gained two more partners, there's songs that she keeps releasing from the vault, and it's growing this lore that surrounds Taylor Swift. And man, I just feel like her story is so resonant to so many other women, just trying to pursue the good, which for a long time was marriage, family, and a happily ever after, that the Disney fairy tales provided. And when they did that, or- They promoted it, but they didn't provide it. Or promoted, that's what I meant. Like, or, you know, set as the highest good. And- Would it be incredible if Taylor Swift at 50 came out really pissed off, she never had children? I mean, that would be just the archetypal example of a woman who had absolutely everything, except the one thing, which- Well, in that one of her songs, she talks about how she has a nightmare where she's like looking at her own funeral, and her daughter-in-law, right, not her daughter, is fighting over the will, and the will says everything goes to her cat, or something like that, right? Like, she seems aware of this possible bad ending to her own story. Wow. And honestly, I think that that's, I mean, you know, again, so my friend was telling me the story about meeting her, and she had a, this girl had a boyfriend at the time, and was, you know, they were getting engaged, and all this kind of stuff, and she was telling about, she was telling Taylor Swift about her boyfriend, and Taylor Swift just, she said, seems so enthusiastic. She's like, you know, I hope one day I, you know, I have a guy that I can talk about as enthusiastically as you're talking about this guy, and I'm really happy for you. And so, it's really sad to see that, you know, that it's just like guy to guy to guy, as opposed to like, I think that, again, this is one of the criticisms, is that these films, like Frozen, I would have this, you know, this criticism of Barbie, all these kinds of films, like they're not actually providing any positive aspect. It's just like a negative or neutral one, where it's just like, I'm just gonna like throw up the things that are problems, but you're not actually going, like I'm not actually gonna provide anything positive for you, and maybe that's not the point of, you know, these movies, although these are marketed to kids, so I think that maybe they should be. But that's my criticism of a lot of these films that try to traffic in these areas, is that they're not actually teaching, they're not actually giving people morals to live by and to move forward with that are gonna resonate long-term, or work, I mean, forget resonate, work, they're not gonna work. Well, I think at this point, most creators are wrestling with those questions themselves. They don't have the answers, so what responsibility do they have to give anybody answers because the answers they were given were fairy tales or half-truths. Right. All right, we're taking questions from the chat. Now, Lance didn't ask, I asked for all caps for the word question. Lance put his question in all caps. Now, this gets back to a live stream that Sam and I did because marriage and family, the highest good for most men and women. Now, this has real tension in the history of Christianity because this in many ways, for all the Orthodox out there that used to be Protestant and are sort of dumping on Protestants, this should make them shudder because this was Luther's answer. You know, clean out the monasteries and the convents and let's match them up and the home is the little church. Yeah, but what do we mean by marriage? Do we mean a piece of paper that we sign that we keep as long as we're happy? Or are we talking about the millions of types of marriage that are embedded in different religious participation? Like... Well, in marriage even, this reminds me of the conversations that the other conversations that Sarah sent us about marriage and relationships and what makes a happy marriage and traditional, like ancient marriage versus modern romantic marriage. Like, it's just a very different thing. Like, it was a business contract, almost more than anything. It wasn't your best friend. It wasn't someone who fulfilled all your needs. You know, somebody that you had children with and you structured your life around. And like you didn't... Like, one of the lines that really stuck with me from those two lectures was when he said like, my wife and I never talk about our marriage. Like, maybe once a year, we have like one fight a year where we're mad at each other for about five, six hours and then we work over it. And that's probably why it's successful because we don't talk about it endlessly. It's just what we do. It just is. It's a sacrament that we participate in. Hey, Paul, what's the chief end of man? Yes. Love God and enjoy him forever. Yes. By enjoying him forever, Christian hedonism. All right. You're channeling Piper, but yes, like that's the... That's the... Westminster smaller catechism. Not a catechism of the Christian-informed church. We have a height of difference. How does Taylor Swift talk to the future homeless elderly woman? It's an interesting question. I don't think she's thought that through. Like, I think a lot of women who are promoting the young, wild and free lifestyle, they're trying to play an archetype that was promoted for men for a really long time that actually wasn't very helpful for men either. But you know, we're... You know, they're lost in that. And I think a lot of people, like the question, isn't marriage like the best good for most people? And that's an interesting question. And it's something to wrestle with. But what if you're not most people? That's the question I had asked myself for a long time before I got married. Should I be single? And I was Protestant then, so there wasn't like monasticism to really lean on. But it was really lonely and hard and I said, I don't know how to do that. And the answer was, well, most people get married. And it's like, okay, but what if I'm not most people? That's not helpful to the question. And that's where I think a lot of women, they feel torn because most people marriage is good for them, but they've seen so many marriages that are bad. And then they've been in so many relationships that they hope to end in marriage, but a guy wouldn't commit or, you know, whatever. Like, there's a lot of behavior that women are participating in that are part of the problem. It's not like an only man thing, but like that's, I think that's a hard question to answer when you're in the middle of it. I think a lot of women are struggling with that. Kevin wants to know how old should my children be before I let them watch this film? 25. Barbie? Yeah. It's not a children's movie. No, it's not. I would say at least 15 or 16 honestly. Barbie? I took my 12 year old for a birthday. Child abuse. Yeah, I wouldn't. And here's why, like I'll give a very specific example from the movie. The weird Barbie Kate McKinnon character literally makes, it's not even a double entendre. Like you can find that in a lot of movies where you have a double entendre that can be taken both ways and you can choose as a parent how to explain it. But she literally says, oh, that guy's like a, he's a protein stick and I'd like to see what like the smooth bulge is under his jeans. No, she like, I'm sorry. This was marketed for kids. Don't take young children to this. Like it was deceptively marketed, which is another one of my irritations with it. So I would say don't do it because you, like these are things that you can't not explain to your kids. And it's not like a double entendre where you can just kind of like let it go over their head. They're gonna wonder what that means. And I like, I wouldn't do it. Yeah. All right. Is Taylor Swift really Katniss Everdeen? I don't think there's someone up in charge in the Capitol who has the ability to control who's popular that thoroughly. I think this is, it bubbles up. Anselman from his hideout in Scotland wants to know, do you give Hollywood and the music industry more attention than they deserve? They, I'll answer this give you, because I, this is on my channel. Hollywood and the music industry are the religious service providers for our culture. And as a Christian minister, I have to engage them, critique them and deal with them because they are providing the religious formation for our culture. It's interesting, Greta Gerwig in the Barbie movie, when she was prepping for the movie, she would invite all of the cast to go to these screenings of these movies that influenced it. And she called it movie church. I think it's just a reality. Now you can, sometimes you deal with that by ignoring it, but I've chosen the other way. Between Gerwig's little women, Lady Bird and Barbie, how do they rank? Ooh. Lady Bird was great. Like Lady Bird was really- And it's all about Sacramento, so. Yeah. Well, and I think some of this depends on your temperament. Like I was talking to a buddy this morning that I met up with, and he was talking about Oppenheimer and Barbie, and he hasn't seen both. And I was telling him like Barbie's way better than Oppenheimer. Like it just is, in my opinion. But that's because, but people have a, I think people who have an egoic attachment to things and they're like, well, this is better than Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer. How could that possibly be? Well, get over it, because it's just a better film. That's what I'm saying. Like who cares? Like people want, this is, you know, when I say like there's a difference between believing you ought to believe something and actually believing it, you think you should like Oppenheimer more. That's what your ego's telling you. It's not better though. It's not. I don't actually think it's better, even though I tend to really love Nolan films. I saw Oppenheimer. Me too. It was entertaining. I mean, it was entertaining. And, you know, in the same way that Barbie was, I don't think that it was a better film than Barbie though. And so I think that Lady Bird is probably the best of them. I think that Little Women probably ranked second and then Barbie probably last of these. But I mean, Lady Bird was legitimately a great film. It was really good. Of the three, probably Barbie had the biggest impact on me. I saw all three and I enjoyed all three, but Barbie tended to stick with me more. Same. Was that because, do you think that that was because the, like if people weren't talking about it as much, would it have stuck with you? Is there like kind of like a social aspect to that or? I think it's probably because it was dealing with issues that we're dealing with on the channel and I tend to think about a lot, more directly than the other films. I liked all three. They're all good. Yeah. I mean, for me, I don't know what I would say it's better, but I really love Little Women. I think it's such a beautiful story. Each of the films have like quotes in them that stick with me that I think resonate with the state in which like womanhood is like in crisis right now. But that one is just so interesting to see the diversity of what it is to be a female without trying to make it overtly male. What about the majority of Swift fans that are too little to have a bunch of relationships, but are diehard Swifties? I couldn't name a Taylor Swift song. So I have just way too old. Okay, Boomer, I just don't, I barely know who this woman is. No, but I bet you know some. I went to see Taylor Swift. I didn't go to Eris. I went to the 1989 tour with my sister. And like the vast majority of the people at the concert was one or two chaperone moms with a gaggle of preteen girls. That was like the most common type of person attending. There were other people, but that was like the bulk of the audience. And I think that for a lot of girls, like even like I showed my five-year-old daughter a music video of Taylor Swift and she has been talking about Taylor Swift ever since. I think that it's not that my five-year-old daughter knows and understands the high school dynamics of love stories, but like Taylor Swift is like a living princess or something like that. And girls just know that. It's like, why do five-year-old boys like Batman? They don't know, I don't know, but they like, they see it, they lock onto it. And Taylor Swift is in the divine feminine role I've already laid out. And little girls know and recognize that without needing to understand all of the relationship stuff. Well, I think another point to make is that just because you like a song or find it interesting doesn't mean that the message is there for a good one or one that's going to lead to a profitable relationship. I think teaching people how to consume art better is gonna be part of that conversation. Because if you really listen to a Taylor Swift album all the way through, I don't think you get the message she's trying to send to you if you only listen to one song in isolation. So can you give me an example of that, Cassidy? What do you think would be a song, both a song that might hook you, but then one that might also undermine the good that you're talking about? I'm just curious. Sure. Well, you can look at all three of her lead singles for her last album. Anti-Hero, that's what she led with, which is basically talking about how all, like, her own devices have led her to depression and anxiety and feeling like she's gonna be left alone and have no meaning. And then Bejeweled, it's, you're great, I love you, but I wanna shine, I wanna be pretty, I wanna be a diamond. And then Lavender Haze, it's all about, I don't need marriage in that 1950s nonsense. Like, I just wanna be in love and stay in that love bubble and it doesn't matter what anybody says about that. And these, all three of these songs live together on an album. And then the interesting part is this is a dynamic album. She released the songs from the vault after her six-year relationship breaks up. And the song that came out, You're Losing Me, there's a line, the famous line, "'I wouldn't marry me either, "'a pathological people pleaser "'who just wanted you to see her.'" Which is such a dichotomy from Lavender Haze, which is, all I need is love, I don't need 50, like the 1950s shit. Yet here you are saying, I wouldn't marry me either. Like even when you're trying to get yourself in that phase, like, I just need love. There's something about her that's still calling for that marriage. And that, you know, she hasn't. Yeah, no, that's really helpful, thank you. But that's insightful. She even has a song called Dear Reader. And it's basically talking about all of these things of like advice. And at the end, it's basically, you should find another guiding light, but I shine so bright. That's this dichotomy of like, don't listen to me. But like, there's this beauty that's coming off, right? Which I don't think you can deny there's something beautiful about Taylor Swift. Is it? No, it is. I mean, you know, of the trends and symbols, beauty is the thing that draws us in, right? So making beautiful music, being a beautiful woman, being like, those are the ones, goodness and truth can drive us away when we don't want to be good and we don't like the truth. But beauty is the one that we can't look away from. It's the one that we go to, and it's the one that she's trafficking in as a career. And it's interesting because, you know, she, yeah. Anyway, it's really interesting. Thank you for sharing that. There was a really good- I just liked PVKs, just as Cassidy was talking, I could just see it happening. All of a sudden, PVK's like, I should be checking out Taylor Swift. Like that's the whole time. He was like, oh, oh. I'll make PVK like her even more. There was a great Mary Harrington piece that was basically like the essence of Taylor Swift is sort of the Gnostic dream fantasy that you fall in love so hard that the only way to consummate it is to die or something like that. Like some weird, almost suicidal love wish or something like that. And like Romeo and Juliet. I would say like one of her first songs that were really popular when she was kind of still trafficking in the pop country was the Romeo and Juliet song. Yeah, read that article, put it, give it five or 10 minutes in a commentary video. Paul, you'll like it. Awesome. All right, Godzilla, Biblical Leviathan? No, technically he is the Biblical Tanin. Leviathan is a ground monster. Tanin is the sea monster, but he is a Biblical monster. Yeah, so wrong Hebrew word. Connor Peel is late, but he raises a good question. I was late to the video, but did you already discuss the Plato's cave Gnostic element in the film? Real world outside the cave, having subtle patriarchy whose ideas can be brought into the cave. I mean, that's the matrix like element of the storytelling. That sort of Gnostic Plato's, that's where the Gnostic Plato's cave idea stuff comes from. But it is sort of, I mean, but unlike in Plato's cave where the cave is bad and the higher thing is just like inexplicably better, there's something better and pure and the identical about Barbie land before it gets contaminated. And that's sort of like the the paradisal state of childhood play or something like that. Right, it's not as clear that like the real world outside the cave is better than that world inside in the same way that Plato's cave is, right? And so once you exit the cave, like there's downsides to this too. And so yeah, it's not like a straightforward metaphor there. Now, one of the films I wanna, I know Grim always gets jealous of the attention I give to Chris Williamson, but I want, sorry, sorry Grim. Chris has a great line that he says often, he said it with Jordan Peterson video, he said it in a number of others. And he basically made the point that our internet, I'll rephrase it, our internet idols that we are attempting to emulate are not within the range and scope of most people. And that's kind of behind this question, why are most people held to a standard for a minuscule minority of monastics? Because in some ways the internet personalities that we see are extreme personalities. I mean, Barbie herself is an extreme idol. I mean, women have been making the point for years that the body image of Barbie is, it's unworkable. And then there's that woman out there who tried to, refit plastic surgery her way to Barbie. And it's not gonna physically work for a human being. So in that sense, it's an ideal. So- Barbie is archetypal Barbie, not stereotypical Barbie. She was misnamed. Yes. But why are most people held to a standard? Now, the question is held to a standard by whom? I think again, Peterson keeps saying that, these ideals judge us by, and that's the dynamic, it's a psychological dynamic of an ideal. And that of course has been something that's been kicked around in the Barbie sphere for a very long time that Barbies are evil because they're this archetypal image of womanhood. It's the archetypal image of a bimbo that tries to keep getting retrofitted into different things, but the pregnant Barbie, that doesn't work. All of those other Barbies don't work. It's the archetypal Barbie. So I think that's just the nature of ideals and why people go to YouTube. So. Yeah, well, and the other thing that again, one of the complaints that I have Barbie is that it's very one-sided. And again, it wasn't made by me and for me, and that's fine. But like men are judged too, right? You want a man that is strong, but then also that is vulnerable. You can make that speech of like, oh, you want me to be this, but then also to be this at the same time. Look at superhero physiques, okay? Maybe Luke and I, we match up to the Batman physique, but most guys do not, right? And so. I'm working on it, I'm working on it. Yeah, exactly. I'm wearing my Batman shirt. So I had to do that outfit. I'm gonna go get some testosterone. Yeah, exactly. This is one of the things that like, it's not recognizing that flip side of it, that this kind of dichotomy of being both and exists on the other side as well. And I don't think that the film, I think if the film did that, it would work better about this real world, fake world, kind of dichotomy than it did. But men face this too. I both have to be sensitive and also have to be firm. I both have to be a disciplinarian, but then also have to be sensitive to my kids' needs. I need to, like all of these kinds of things are really important to men too. And we're faced with all of this. We don't want to seem needy, but then we also want you to want us. And all this kind of, like these kinds of things face men too, it's not just women. And we only talk about one and not the other. And maybe a Barbie movie doesn't need to do both, but I think that's one of the reasons why you look at it and it seems so lopsided. Anyway, so. Unless you're some simp in the manosphere, you don't bitch about it, you just deal with it. Right, you just do it. Yeah, you just do it. You just deal with it. You're not gonna waste everybody's time whining about it. You're just gonna deal with it. Yeah, exactly. But I think there might be an interesting point of like why are women more susceptible to trying to pivot for the criticism, right? Like, there's really a lot of like wired in women, but I think for women, it affects us more. And it's probably been sold to us more that like beauty is the number one thing than anything else. And like that stuff, cause even Barbie, she's a doctor and everything, but she's beautiful. Why can't we have the antidepressant Barbie? Not that I'm saying that should be an ideal, but like it's her beauty that always led. And then the other things came because it's not her beauty. I think that's what I'm saying is that that inner life that women have, A, us as men don't have access to, but then also like our inner life about what it's like to be judged by our own ideals and what we're looking at is every bit as real and as important and as weighty to us as those other ideals. And so yes, we are not judged as much about what we wear and our like physical beauty and those kinds of things. Although I love being judged by my physical beauty because I'm a beautiful person. But, you know, we're judged by other things that women are not judged by as much. And so like, and it weighs on us. Like it can be anxiety inducing, it can like be stressful, it can be all those kinds of things. And so it's one of those things where I think it just needs to be explored more that like the inner life of like the two genders like aren't the same and that's good. And like, we need to like, you know, acknowledge both. That's what I want. What if the dad in the movie had gotten to give his how hard it is to be a dad speech? I'm supposed to learn Spanish to be able to talk to my diverse wife, but if I do it's cultural appropriation bubble. Right, right. No, you can do that entire, yeah, exactly. And, you know, I'm supposed to be strong and provide for my family, but then also, you know, if I see needy and I want affirmation from my wife, I'm seen as weak. I like, you can play on this. It's a good idea. I just wish it would have been executed better. We'll do it for the GI Joe movie. Okay. There's already good GI Joe movies. When Barbie came out, there's a bit made about it coming out together with Oppenheimer. I didn't, I haven't seen Oppenheimer, so I don't know. I'll see it at some point. Is there something interesting that these two movies come out at the same time? Because Oppenheimer, I mean, obviously he's a man. The movie wasn't, but if there's anything that men are judged on, it's basically status in terms of accomplishment. And Oppenheimer is an interesting character. The rest of his history did a couple of episodes on him. So it's a very interesting story, but did any of you see both the same day or anything like that? I did. I saw, I did the Barbie-heimer, yeah. Okay. And? I mean, maybe, accidentally. I think that they're interesting movies. I think especially if you didn't understand the character of Oppenheimer, he's, I mean, A, he achieved like kind of the highest levels, but he also, he slept around. Like he got, he slept with his best friend's wife. He got another girl married, girl pregnant and that kind of stuff. And so there's, maybe there's levels to this culturally that I don't think that maybe I'm appreciating, but I, it seemed like a coincidence to me, but since they were both out and they were both popular, I went to see both of them. All right. I think it just started from the beginning. So they talk about it. There's a actors on actors interview, which is really good between Kelly and Murphy and Margot Robbie, where they talk about why that happened and that whole phenomenon. And apparently it's because Christopher Nolan just really has some obsession with July 21st and likes to release movies then. And Barbie was happening to come out at the same time. And they were just like, well, we're not backing down. And so it was just random, but Kelly and Murphy love Barbie so bad. I mean, they obviously like at first glance, they wouldn't be competing with each other. They don't seem to be marketing to the same people. And so like, why would we even back down on this? And then they got, they suckered in people like me who went to see both of them the same day. I think there's just something interesting about the dark and breeding versus like the pink and fluffy. Yeah, for sure. Those coming out at the same time, it's like. Yeah, nuclear bomb. I don't know the literally me moments. I have no understanding what this question asks. Paul Antleitner would be a good person to talk about this. I actually only know about this meme because of Paul Antleitner, but apparently it's common in like younger than us generation memo, bro-o's fear stuff, where you take these characters who are supposed to be sort of ironic or outlandish characters and say, oh, this is literally me. That's all I can tell you. I don't, what do I think about them? Whatever Paul is. And you mean that figuratively? Yes. Yes. Cool. Literally. Literally. Literally figuratively. Literally, yeah. All right, Chad is in for his own question. How do we grow out of our own recovery from the sexual psychological molestation that's been inflicted on us over the last 40 years? Wow, Chad, what do you mean by that? Well, it's something that I kind of noticed in like, it was just like this, it was in everything. Like all of the television commercials, television shows, magazines, music video, everything, like it was all real subtle almost, like from a secular point of view. And it's just like stacked on top of each other over and over and over. And what I find interesting is how like, now we have all these questions about sexuality and stuff when the whole time this stuff has always been kind of going on. So I don't know. I don't know what I'm asking exactly, but like, how do we recover from that? I don't know. I don't know what I'm asking exactly. This is also actually kind of attached to the other question, which is like, what is our, like, how do we deal with and talk about our these subtle obsessions around sexuality and what I think basically is suicide. And I think like these things are like not directly being addressed. We can't talk about them on YouTube. This video will be flagged now, I'm sorry, but like you start saying these words and they're like, oh, you can't talk about that unless you have some sort of like disclaimer or something. And it just, it sucks because these are really, I think they're very pervasive issues that are actually really impacting us on a deep, deep level. Well, sexuality has been completely divorced from procreation. Like it's merely recreational. It's just for fun. It's just for consumerism. It's just for entertainment. Which is not disconnected from birth control. I mean, the best thing I've ever read on it is this essay by Garbaro Marcell, Technology and the Sacral, where he laid it out just incredibly well. I mean, when people think about sex, it's for consuming. I mean, it's mammon essentially is what it is versus an outpouring. It's not canonic. It's not, I mean, people will talk about like, oh, I want like my partner to orgasm or something, but that's just for your ego. Like it's probably so you can accumulate more sexual partners. And because you actually like care about the partner, the self or want them to be. Yeah. Well, I think almost worse than it just being split from procreation is that love has become synonymous with sex. And it's not to say that sex can't be a loving act, but how many men and women think, well, if I love this person, withholding sex from that is not a loving act. Love is reduced to sex. Yes. Erin brings in and Erin's here now. Leftist criticism of Barbie, which is this very interesting quote, a film that pedals an identitarian politics so it can claim progressiveism as a form of sex claim progressivism while not doing anything to address the criticism of perpetuating hyper consumerism. Now that the, it's interesting all of the, what's different to me now from the seventies is that in the seventies, if you are against capitalism, you tried at least to a degree to step out of the system. You tried to live on the fringes. You didn't participate in consumer stuff. You lived off of garbage. You tried to step out of the consumer. Today, people love to criticize capitalism, but when you ask them, they really wanna get rich. It's like, I'm against capitalism. I'm really trying to get my business to thrive. Oh, that's like all the California Buddhists that certainly are not doing anything to rid themselves of attachment. So I don't know, Aaron, that was your question and you're here. I don't know if you have more that you wanna say or you're into this bigger. Right, no, I do feel a bit guilty because I think the previous subject matter was fairly serious and this might be different from that. But no, what I do think is interesting is that lots of the movies also about the business side, just off the whole Barbie phenomenon. And Greta Gerwig said in so many interviews, wow, that they allow me to make this movie. And I think some of the marketing was like, if you love Barbie, you'll love this movie. If you hate Barbie, you'll love this movie, which is kind of interesting. So it shows that it really, as you said, right? So it's so all encompassing that people are not really, at least practically against the consumerist aspect of it anymore, which is also why I think it's deserving that you discuss these other aspects. But I find it just interesting that it's, and that's also the criticism of this particular individual. He was afraid this was becoming like a new idol of like left-wing politics where he was like, no, we need to be aware that this is actually still so capitalist, and it's still promoting so much consumption and all that. So I was just curious what you thought of that, but yeah. What the fuck? Well, the film has totally been colonized by the capitalists. I mean, they have been- It reminds me of the Lego movie, the first one, where it's the president business as supposed to be- Who was also played by Will Ferrell in both cases. Also played by Will Ferrell, who also played the president of the Mattel Corporation in Barbie. But it's president business, and that's supposed to be the bad guy. But this is a movie that literally has made a billion dollars and is going to sell a bunch of Legos. And that's what it was. And so it's interesting. I do think that Lego was ironic in ways that Barbie wasn't, but that's just my opinion. But it is interesting that all these supposedly progressive organizations are using movies and stuff to sell products. That is interesting to me. It's totally symbolic of the weird relationship that the progressive left has with big business at the moment. And they're each trying to take advantage of each other, and it's unclear who's gonna win in the end. The capitalists are like, okay- I think it's unclear who is winning. Yeah. But it's just perfect. Yeah, I mean, it's a good criticism, but it's weird now. I think that some of the more anti-capitalist criticisms are now on the right than they are on the left. That's true. Yeah, I mean, there's definitely a populist- In that respect. Yeah, in that backlash. That's why Russell Brand changed sides. Yes. Andrew. Hello. How are you doing? Yep. Getting enough sleep? Yeah. Yeah, there were a bunch of questions I didn't all get to. Did you wanna bring in something? If you want. Half of them were sarcastic, so. Oh, well, which one did you most want to address or have us talk about? Okay, so in the Barbie movie, there's this literally me moment, right? Where Ryan Gosling enters the real world and he's just blasted with a bunch of male propaganda or something, I don't know. It's like a serious literally me moment. So if literally me- I don't understand the meme. Okay, okay, okay, okay, okay. So Ryan Gosling is this dude, this male protagonist for every single movie, right? So the joke for the people that watch the movie is that like, oh, Ryan Gosling is literally me, even though like none of us are doing like anything that Ryan Gosling is doing, right? We are not in like Blade Runner 2049 or anything like that. But these movies want us to identify with them, right? So literally me is just like, you know, I know it's like a meme. It's like a meme that we are literally Ryan Gosling. But if Ryan Gosling has a literally me moment, is it like literally me squared? Does literally me gain sentience? Like what's going on here? Like, what am I supposed to feel? I don't know. It's crazy. What was this one of the sarcastic questions or was this one of the non-sarcastic questions? You couldn't decide which one it was. Exactly, exactly. Ryan Gosling isn't here to tell me. That's the problem. Yeah. All right, we have a couple of minutes left. I probably shouldn't linger too much. I'm hoping to make another video today before my energy runs out and the COVIDs get the best of me. Can I just bring up one point? Yeah, it's just that, so I also asked the question about the ranking between the different movies. So personally, like I also watched the Barbie movie with my partner and she also really disliked it. And even though we both really loved Greta Gerwig and really expected like a lot of it. Partner is a woman, I met her. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, exactly. Yeah, that's correct. And the reason why I'm saying that is because, I don't know, I kind of feel like it's wrong to say that, because you brought up the whole masculinity versus femininity thing, and that maybe if there was a point to the movie, it would have been more masculine. And I do understand that in terms of symbolism, but I also feel that these other two movies by Greta Gerwig, like Little Women, like Lady Bird, were very feminine and they had a point to it. Like you could really see like, wow, this was a coherent ending to this story. And you could feel that it all made sense. And I really did feel nonetheless that in the third act, it just went all over the place. So, and I don't think that was just because it was feminine. I thought it was like, no, I just wanted to- No, I agree. I went to see it with my sister and just to get her take on it. She felt the same way. I thought that the first like, the first like third of the movie was really well done and really coherent. And then it did kind of fall apart for me at the end, but I don't think that it's not just that it's a feminine movie, because again, I loved Little Women and I loved Lady Bird. That's not what I'm reacting to. It's just that I just didn't get like a coherence out of it that I wanted and I walked away wanting more. And Greta Gerwig is capable, more than capable of giving us that. And that's what I was expecting. So that's, I feel the same way. My sister, I asked her afterwards and she was like, yeah, I didn't like that movie. That doesn't like, I'm not doing it. I mean, my sister, she might be weird, but she didn't like it either. But I also wanna say, I had the same as you. I actually loved so many individual parts of the movie, of the Barbie film that I was sad and didn't wrap up nicely. And I never wanna watch it again. I honestly felt so disappointed at the end. And that's just sad, even though there were so many good individual scenes that I was like, yes, that was great. But yeah. And Cassidy made me watch this three times. So that I can talk about it. And I'm mad, I'm gonna write her. I'm sad I couldn't watch it again. I mean, I get what you guys are all saying about the different endings. And I think part of that is because of how absurd it was. You had four different storylines going all at once and you had to find an ending for all of them. I think part of it is the style of absurdity where little women and Lady Bird, in some ways they were simpler stories. Where- They were simpler stories. I think that Barbie was trying to do too much. And it just didn't, it was as long too. Just cut out Mattel and Will Ferrell and all that. It didn't add anything really extra. Agree, I agree with that. And there are several scenes that I think that you could just get rid of and tell a more coherent story. Well, I thought the boxing scene was important. I didn't get the boxing scene. I'm like, why is she, we already know how to get her back to Barbie Lang. You just put her on a bicycle in the place. No, but the box is, I mean, then it's sort of, then she really is the iconic bimbo in the box. Then she's completely a product. But the thing is also, if you look, this is obviously a strange comparison, but the ending of the whole Lord of the Rings trilogy also takes a long time. There are multiple endings, but it all feels very well-placed. That's because it's also a trilogy and there are three hours for each movie. And that's the thing, I really felt that it was trying to end the trilogy of endings, even though it was just one much shorter movie. So I think it could have been dealt with far better. That's just what I wanted to say. I think it's interesting too, because it shifted in styles. It wasn't just shifting in stories, it was shifting in styles. You had hyper-absurdity in Barbie Lang. Yeah, that's true. And then heightened reality absurdity. But then you had these moments where she would dip very quickly into realism. Yeah. And then back up. And so for me, it was almost necessary to do that to kind of get the sense of the building, the absurdities and trying to... Fair point. To the point where we're answering this question that we're all struggling with and most of us don't feel like we have a good answer to of how to live this out as humans. And- But I think, Cassidy, that's why it's hard to process for a lot of people, because it's not sure. There's a lot of things where, like, are you asking me to take you as satire? Are you asking me to take you as a parody? Are you asking me to take you as like a realistic critique on the world? And it's very confusing in that way. And so it's... And so, I don't blame... I mean, I don't agree with the conservatives who have this like flat take on it, just because, I mean, honestly, just because I've seen Gerwig's other stuff, but I also understand why they're doing that, is because it was... It did feel uneven to me about where it would dip into realism and then back into parody and then back into satire and those kinds of things. And so it's like, I think that it made it... That makes it really difficult for a film to have a payoff at the end when you're dealing with realism, satire, and parody all like at the same time. I think that that's really, really difficult to pull off. Does anyone know how this film did in non-Western? Well, how was it in the Netherlands? That's a very Western... That's a good question. Yeah, so, well, like, I don't know how many people you know, Cassidy, but I knew plenty of people who saw it and plenty of people who did enjoy it, but then also plenty of people who thought it was like, meh. But I would say like, I'm curious, what do you think of this, Cassidy? We have a, what do you call it, a saying in the Netherlands, just act normally because that's crazy enough. So we're all very nuchter people. We try not to get too emotional about stuff. And I would say when I see some clips of these American moviegoers, they're like, oh my God, I love this movie. And that's just not a Dutch thing to do. So I just think Dutch people might've enjoyed it some Dutch way, but I didn't see this identification with the scenes. They might've just thought of it as a fun comedy to watch. No one in the Netherlands was cladding in all pink and glitters. There's no literally me in the Netherlands. Like what's going on? Crazy. Yeah, good point. No, I did see that once by the way. Like I saw one group of women all in pink and I was like, whoa, it's actually happening here too. But that was an accident, I guess. Did this movie go to China? Oh, I know. There was like issues with it because on one of the maps, they had something about Taiwan that Chinese people were offended by or Taiwanese people were offended by. So I think it had some trouble in Asian countries being even shown. It earned 800 million overseas, which is a lot, but I don't know. That's a lot. I can't quite see how much that is in like every single country. So I would say by the way, like I really enjoyed that aspect that like, you saw like the bench bureau and even the critical drinker, they were all like, this movie's gonna bomb at the box office. Like it's gonna do awful. And then it did like amazingly well. And then they admitted like, okay, I guess the marketing was good. You know, like, but it's like, well, there's something more to it. I mean, the marketing was good. I do agree with that. Like it was- Well, you make woke movies for women. If they're about women things, then they'll do well. If they're woke movies for women, but they're about action figures, they don't do well. It has to be suited for purpose. Barbie was suited for purpose. Also, it's a strong IP. Like it's the first movie, like the first, you know, real Barbie movie and that kind of stuff. So you're gonna have strong, whether or not there's gonna be Barbie 2 and that's gonna do as well, I'm more skeptical about. But you know, I mean, I mean, even movies made for men, like The Last Jedi, if you're building on a strong IP and you have good marketing and all that kind of stuff and high production value, you can do well, whether or not it becomes a franchise that lasts is a completely different issue. I mean, you know, Marvel's experiencing that right now and those kinds of things. So, I mean, you know, Lego Movie 2 didn't do as well as Lego Movie 1, you know, whether or not Barbie 2, if there is gonna be a Barbie 2, does as well as another question. But it's building on an IP. Like, I mean, people know Barbie, so you have a built in advantage. There's never been a movie like this. And so like people are gonna talk about it, you're gonna have word of mouth, people are gonna go, all that kind of stuff. Their marketing was, if you like Barbie, you'll love this movie, that kind of stuff. Like, I mean, they did the things that you would want to do as a business, whether or not it's going to work for number 2, I'm more skeptical. Yeah, I hope they don't do a number 2. That'd be terrible. Where would it go? I don't think Greta will do it. The prostate exam, you know. Yeah, well, that's the thing. Ken would have to become a real man. Like, I'm joking about the prostate thing, but it would need to be the Ken side of Ken choosing to incarnate himself. I would also be curious. But who's gonna go to that? Who's gonna go to that? We will and we'll have another live stream about it. What's the audience of Ken becoming a man? I ask you. Okay, wait, sorry. No. I think there is a strong Ken-dom kind of fan. Like, I think actually many women will go see that movie, if it will be about Ken. But just another point, I'm curious, because we compared it to the other Greta Gerwig movies, and I'm curious if in 10 years, she'll maybe say something like, well, actually, I did feel a little bit pushed by the studio to do this, or actually I had this planned, but I had to cut it all. Like, if she'll say, because it's very different, in my opinion, like obviously to everyone, but also structurally and in terms of coherence, from her other movies. So do you think that will be the case, or do you think she is fully behind this movie and loved everything of it and made no compromises there? Can I just make... Can I make a really quick comment? I don't have a lot of time, but something I haven't heard any of you guys say is, this film is about Barbie, which is played mostly by little girls, and it's a make believe, and it's not really supposed to be logical or linear. It strikes me as millennials processing their life as women. And so it's not really, it's super abstract, and I don't get why everyone's making such a big fuss about it. It's supposed to be kind of silly. Anyways, I gotta go. I'm working, but I haven't heard anyone say that. So just making a comment. And I did this intentionally this time. Thanks, Kate. Yeah, I agree with Kate. I think the absurdity is a feature, not a bug. I think they're really playing off. Like Greta talks about it all the time. She tries to go back to her five-year-old self, and what would I do? Well, I would do the tiara and the gloves and the necklace. And how does Barbie get to her car? Well, she floats from the house because what do little girls do? They float them down from the house into the car. Like there's something that she's playing on there that's like, that's built into the film. And like, I can understand what you guys are saying about the payoff, that it's not the nice little bow that is very clear that everybody's going to understand. But as a filmmaker and a creator, that's actually kind of refreshing to me because I think it's really highlighting the fact that we are seeped in media, but we are not media literate. We don't really take seriously how to consume media and understand what it's saying. And even when we do understand what it's saying, we don't take seriously what it's doing to change us. And I think it really is a call to what does it mean to be a creative thing that gets to create? Yeah, so one of the questions in the chat that says, what did Tripp actually like about the movie? I thought that there were a lot of really, really good things about the movie. I thought that Barbie Land was really well done just from a visual standpoint. I thought that the acting was great. I thought that there were several scenes that were really well done and things that you can play with. I think that I liked the matrix, like here's a high heel, here's a Birkenstock kind of thing. I thought that was really fun. I thought that actually the Barbie dream sequence whenever she was able to see through the eyes of her creator in some ways, it's a really interesting way of telling a story. And so there's some things that I really thought were great. I like the dichotomy of the real world versus Barbie world. I could go on, I could keep rattling off things that I really actually thought were good about the movie. I just, yeah, I wanted, it's not so much that I want like a bow on it though, Cassidy. It's more that I wanted somewhere to go with it. And I don't think that we have anywhere to go with it. And that like, so at the end, I'm just looking like I don't, it makes sense to me why we're all arguing about what was the artist trying to say. And I can list off like quotes from Margot Robbie, I can list off quotes from Greta Gerwig that are saying two different things. This is the lead actress, and this is the director and writer of the movie that are saying two different things about the exact same scene. And so the issue that I have with, that's why I think that we're all confused about what we're gonna think about this movie. Like maybe in five years, I'll think it's great. Maybe in five years, you'll think it's bad. I think that's a problem though, that the movie has this question going for it. It's not that we're debating even whether or not we agree with the message, we're debating whether or not it even has a message. And that's a problem, I think. I would say it doesn't have to be a problem. Sometimes an aporia moment in a movie can be very well earned and deserved, that everyone is just like, whoa. And it's just like, what? But I honestly felt super frustrated. And usually when there's a properly deserved aporia moment at the end of a movie, I'm like, whoa, okay, wait. And there is at least multiple interpretations possible, but then you actually feel like, I don't know, like it makes sense. So I guess that's just something that I would add. Yeah, it was a frustrating ending because I wanted more for it. I want some of these things. And I think that what you said earlier, Cassidy, about it was trying to have so many storylines that it was trying to keep going with is one of the reasons why it couldn't let some of them breathe a little bit and actually come to conclusion. So that's my take. I would also just add to that, just to the absurdity being a feature, not a bug. We've seen two very popular movies recently, which is the second amazing Spider-Man, the animated Spider-Man movie, which is very full of absurdity. The Spider-Verse one, right? Yeah, exactly, the Spider-Verse one. And then you also have everything happening all at once, which is also very absurd. And actually, I didn't love that as much as many other people did, but I would say it's so full of absurdity and still you feel at the end, it does kind of wrap it all up nicely. So I still have my criticisms of that movie, but I'm just saying it can be done and then you can see that absurdity is clearly a feature. And now I felt that sometimes it was a bug. But how do you see that, Cassidy? I'm just curious. Well, I think that at this point in time, there are so many movies trying to sell you a message that it starts to feel like propaganda, where what I think Greta Gerwig did is leave a question that would pull you in to go on your own exploration to understand it. And that's why I think it's brilliant, because a lot of what she was criticizing is this idea that my story of patriarchy or manhood or whatever sort of absurd version she put in the film, there's more to the story. And what we're really asking out of all of this is embedded in that song in the last part, "'What Am I Made For?' And the fact that they paired that with these images of basically home videos of these little moments of what it actually is to be a woman, like that would never make it on the screen generally. Like she's calling, she's drawing you in, calling you very subtly to ask that question, "'What Are We Made For?' That's the question we need to work together to figure out. She doesn't want to give an answer because she probably doesn't have the answer herself. And I can respect that, because there's so many people saying, "'I have the answer, let me put my flag down and wave it and make everybody come behind it.'" I mean, this might just come down to then whether or not you are good with a movie or a story ending in a ambiguous question, as opposed to being... Because I don't like that. I don't even want necessarily a message, but I at least want a moral or a theme or something like that. And so I don't... What do you think of Inception? Yeah, exactly. I didn't like Inception. I didn't like Inception. What about the ending of The Sopranos? I'm not sure if you watched the show, but that's... I didn't watch The Sopranos. I watched it and I didn't watch it. But yeah, I didn't like Inception for this reason, because I do crave that at least a pointing to, and it wasn't even clear to me what the question was being asked in this movie. So I ended with it was, I'm not even sure what I'm supposed to be questioning, nor do I know what direction they're trying to point me to. So this was very unsatisfying as an ending for me. Again, that said, there were some things about it that I thought were really well done, but yeah. Maybe this just comes down to, I don't like ambiguous question movies, and I don't like... I think you would even be too high of a compliment to say that the ending was the ambiguous question. That could have been a really good ending if everything ties together with the bow of asking the question, what have I made for? And it does, but it doesn't. And if that was the clear end of the funnel, was that moment, that could be fine, but I don't even feel like it quite did that. And actually, to add to that, what you said, Cassidy, that you feel that all the other movies, they wanna have this message, and therefore they come off a little bit as propaganda, I actually felt in some sense that was the problem of this movie, is that it still had this message, but it was sometimes buried beneath propaganda. That you felt like, it's kind of distracting from that story that you're raising, that I actually think is very beautiful. But usually when I hear a good movie interpretation, like the one you just laid out, I'm like, oh, right, and now I wanna watch it again, but no, I don't wanna watch it again, because I know there's plenty of stuff in that movie that completely distracts from the point you just made, even though I do agree that's a beautiful thing. Here's the thing, I think she had to slug through that, because Barbie is inherently political. As a toy, it is a feminist, I don't wanna say propaganda tool, because I think that's too strong, but it's meant to be- It's cultural, right? It's meant to drive women to feminism. So if you're gonna make a movie about Barbie, you can't ignore that part. And I think she did something really brilliant by making it so absurd, and so sort of plastic, that you recognize, oh, okay, there's something complex here. And she did the same thing with sort of the manuscript, the fur coats, but she did it in a way that wasn't degrading to that, but was sort of, kind of, okay, kind of, but she did the same thing with the Barbies too. Not as much, but again, I think most of us can agree, some of the extremes that come from the Man of Your Stuff, like Andrew Tate wielding a sword, is not necessarily the equivalent to a high value man or a virtuous man, yet so many men are attracted to that. Why? That's the question we have to address with. And you men are not that way. I don't see any of you having swords in your hands. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I've heard that Tripp has multiple swords. Oh, I've got that. Tripp has multiple swords. I don't know what you're talking about. And Sam said he was like- I wanted to jump in here, because you asked this question ultimately, Cassidy, which I found is fascinating, PVK, I can't believe it. And I'm not even the target audience for Barbie, but what I've picked up on is the things that I've seen a lot of Louise Perry talk about, but this issue and watching this, I have a 24 year old stepdaughter. And so there's all these crazy things. It's like, ultimately, what am I made for? The fact of the matter is, is that women were made to create. We were all made to create. And at its fundamental core, motherhood. Let it be unto me. You talk about mother of God, Taylor Swift couldn't be the exact opposite of that. But girls have fallen into this lie, right? And then we've got the minute too, this consumerism, this all this other sort of stuff. And so at this fundamental nature, these poor girls are struggling to figure out how to make it in this thing we said, all these other things are important. And I did ask the question, is it marriage at the end of being a Christian person? I would say we're two come together and become one. And when I think about marriage and say, well, what does that mean? We can play that game here. No, the marriage I'm talking about are Paul's grandparents who were come together in marriage and the depression and people were paying them with butter and they still tithe and they figure out a way through it. And it's not easy. And like people wanna figure out who they are. No, get married and commit to a life of sacrifice and you'll figure it out. None of us have it figured out. Wait till you're 40 to have kids and you'll lose 20 years of life. You'll be dead and miss 20 years of their life. And your grandparents life. We have got so far away from the essence of what matters. And I think what Barbie probably did was, these are difficult times and we created these crazy upside down inverted things that young women are trying to deal with and young men too. And so when I asked that question, I think, is it like we've in the whole attack on the traditional family, it is not wrong to commit yourself to a life of being a mother. And when I think about what the picture of marriage is, like I always told my boys, I say, you're looking for a 10 camel woman, right? So if you wanna look at that, you wanna look of a woman who has a heart of service, but then boys, here's the thing that you need to do. You need to be willing to be, the mystery is you have to love your life, your wife like Christ loves the church. So you have to be willing to be crucified. That's the picture of marriage. And that's unpopular in today's day and age. People want what they want, they wanna have their careers, they wanna have all those things, but that's not gonna lead you to any sort of happiness. So I think I see what Barbie is doing here, but you asked the question, what am I made for? Made to create. To be fair, like I do think that the mother daughter thing is fairly central in the movie nonetheless. It's not saying yes, every woman should become a mother, but it does fairly like acknowledge that aspect of it. And I also think like what was brought up previously is that it's not the right time to perhaps make that movie and be like, let's say super popular at the box office, because right now people's conception of marriage is that it's completely based on romantic love and finding your ideal partner who you're romantically in love with as opposed to indeed all the aspects that you're bringing up. So I also think like what Cassidy said, that it's fair that it's just now being at this point, like, wait, that was sort of a wrong conception of what it means to be a human being. Maybe I should first figure out what I am, but then hopefully indeed like let's say the next aspect in the coming decades, who knows, will be like, wait, yes, fundamentally we're exactly what you said, Lance. But I understand why the movie didn't go there. Let me put it that way. And I know Paul, you're trying to land the plane, but I kind of think it's a similar thing that Peterson is doing with religion. He won't go all the way and say, be a Christian, but he's pointing towards, he's planting the seeds and what is it doing? People are becoming religious. I think this movie has the potential to do that for marriage and commitment and better relationships between men and women and seeing each other as humans and the process of coming together as human making for the two individuals in the marriage and literal children. Then if it went all the way. Okay, I wanna say Cassidy, I really, really hope I'm wrong and that you're right and that happens. So like I really, really, really hope that that happens. Well, I think where we're gonna see that is the actions we take. What are we gonna do to embody the actions and take those seeds and make something beautiful? Because that's what's ultimately gonna end up. I mean, Taylor Swift, what happens to her in 20 years between now and 20 years, like that's gonna tell us a better story than what she's telling us right now. And that's what we get from her music. And the same with Greta Gerwig. What happens to her in 20 years is gonna be a better story than what tells us now. But we can take these stories we consume and use them to inform our lives to live a better story. And I think that film was a really interesting one to get us to ourselves wrestle with the idea of what is a better story for men and women. All right, I'm gonna give Cassidy the last word as I lay on the plane. Matriarchy. Boom. So thank you all for joining us. Those who watched, those who participated in the hive mind, those who came onto the screen and thank you all. I will end the transmission. Thank you so much.