https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GCH1dlgs-U0

 Welcome to That's BS. I'm Jordan Meyers and today we have a special guest. We've got Paul VanderKlay. So Paul, I want to welcome you to the channel and open it up. Please tell people a little bit about you and your projects and what you're interested in. Okay. Well, as you said, my name is Paul VanderKlay. I'm a pastor in Sacramento, California in the Christian Reformed Church. I've been doing that for a good number of years. Lately, whatever fame or notoriety I have comes from doing commentary videos, mostly on the work of Jordan Peterson, but a lot of other things connected with him. I've also been interested in doing meetups of gathering a dozen or so people in a room to talk about Jordan Peterson and what they've learned from him. Although I'm very interested in the work of Jordan Peterson, probably my primary interest is in the phenomenon around Jordan Peterson and why he has had the impact on people that he has. And so on my channel, I do commentary videos on his work and on anything else that's interesting to me. And then I also do conversations with individuals about whatever they want to talk about. And to me, what they select in terms of Jordan Peterson's interest is always interesting to me. What hit them, why, how it changed their lives, so on and so forth. So that's a lot of what I'm doing recently. Yeah, it's interesting because we've covered Jordan Peterson a little bit on this channel. And it's interesting, I really, really like about what you know, half of what he says, and I really, really hate half of what he says. So I want to hear which half. Yeah, yeah. No, so I love his everything that he says about personal responsibility, you know, improving yourself iteratively over time. A lot of his you know, anti SJW anti Marxism, you know, support of free speech, all of that I'm totally on board with, I totally love. And his, you know, discussion of gender differences across different groups, biological factors, things like that, totally on board with all of that. The second half that I really dislike is his, you know, he's doing this lecture series on the Bible, his views on religion. I think, I mean, this is something interesting we could discuss, I think that he's not very clear sometimes on what he's saying and what he's not saying. So that's, that's the part that I am very, very distasteful of. Well, where do you come at this in terms of your own personal religious or spiritual beliefs? Yeah, so that's a that's a great question. I should just be 100% honest, I'm a I'm an atheist. I grew up going to an evangelical church. So for the first 18 years of my life, you know, I was immersed and engulfed in just a very classically American religious upbringing. You know, it was, it was a Church of Christ, not I'm a I'm kind of aware that there's like a cult version of that and a kind that's not I don't believe I was the cult version of that. It was just like a very standard evangelical church. You know, they they tried to follow the word of the Bible, as literally as like a you know, a 21st century person can, and, you know, believe that Jesus was the Son of God, you know, it's it's pretty basic. So I would say that I, I don't know, I had an interesting experience with that. Because I would never say that I was 100% on board, even from my earliest memories. But, you know, definitely was like, it was an interesting experience to not know, for you know, the first many years of my life that there were people who were not Christians. So I sort of thought that, you know, like the doubts I was having or the disbelief that I was experiencing was some sort of defect of my own personality. I had no idea that there were people who weren't Christians or people who were, you know, atheists, let alone other religions. So I, I think I was officially a non believer. I sort of, you know, came to that conclusion myself right around the age of, you know, 15, 16, 17, something like that. And I'm 22 now, just for reference. Yeah, sorry, if I rambled on. But so that's, that's my, this is, this is what I do. So this is what I do all the time. Yeah. I'm very interested in your story. I'm very interested in the interplay of church and religion and especially Christianity in your story. I'm interested in people's transitions in and out of different categories and identified as Christian. I went to church, but I never really believed. And then often, you know, when I got out of the house from dad and mom and had a little bit more space, got into college, then, you know, I could explore in a whole variety of ways, including no longer going to church and so on and so forth. So I, your, your story is, your story is very common. Yeah. It's a lot of the people I talk to and it's usually when they get into their, their twenties and usually somewhere in their thirties that they start having a different perspective on the stuff that they were taught when they were young. They're far enough away from it that they see it in a new light and often they see it with a new utility. And Jordan Peterson has really facilitated that experience for many, many people in, in March, 2018, mouthy Buddha, who does not, you know, he's, he's not a Christian in any way. Did a, did a really, he makes very beautiful videos. It did a video on how basically Jordan Peterson is capturing Sam Harris's audience. And, and I think there's a lot of truth to that. Many of the people that I've spoken to have a story similar to yours. When Sam Harris came along, they really got into Sam Harris. And then when Jordan Peterson came along, they didn't think so much of Sam Harris. So that's been the story. Yeah. Actually the, the, the first of the four horsemen to capture my attention was Hitchens actually. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He was, I think he's the cleverest of them all. I mean, he had their role, but Hitchens was definitely the, the most articulate, the cleverest, the most literate of them all. Yeah. He could turn an English phrase like no one else. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So he was really the, the one who sort of, it was interesting actually, you know, the other, the other host of this channel, none of them could make this time slot today. But Adam, he and I have been best friends, you know, basically since we were in kindergarten and both of our families were pretty religious. And it was this sort of interesting experience of both of us. Sort of, it was like, it was almost, you know, this really interesting reasoning from first principles almost when we, you know, started exploring different ideas other than Christianity. And it was this really sort of, it was actually, I don't know if you hear this a lot, but I, you know, a lot of people, it was, I hear like it was a big wrestling experience, you know, like leaving the church and they were really torn between like, well, these are the values I grew up with, but this is what kind of makes sense to me now. And there's this, there's this really tough tearing apart. And what I thought was really unique and interesting for both of us, but for me especially was there was sort of none of that. It was much more of like an immediate discovery and an immediate shift from, you know, believing or at least not disbelieving, you know, Christian ideas to discovering these arguments against Christianity and being like, oh wow, these make total sense. Like it was just, it was sort of just an immediate shift with no, there was no baggage, no emotional distress that came along with it for us. And for me especially, I thought that was interesting. Was there, what were the implications in terms of your family and social circles? That's a good question. Well, my family is, you know, extended family included, they're all still just as religious as they were. And there was a big, I was sort of naive at the time and thought, oh wow, you know, I guess like, you know, religious people just haven't heard these arguments before. So if I, you know, cause I hadn't. And so I was like, oh, oh, well if I just, you know, share these arguments that I've heard, well then, oh, everyone's just going to realize that this is wrong too, you know, just like I did. And so, yeah, very naively, I sort of, you know, trotted out these arguments and fully expected everyone to have the immediate realization and change that I had had. And obviously as you can guess, that didn't happen. So there was, you know, there were a few years where I was sort of dumbfounded by the fact that any religious person who I met, who I showed these arguments to didn't just initially do a full, you know, mea culpa and just say, okay, I was wrong here. You know, I was sort of shocked that that wasn't the case. Cause it had been for me and, you know, with family at this point, it's sort of a, I guess like a don't ask, don't tell situation where it's just understood that, you know, we differ on this point. And I think that, you know, for my family, especially religion is so integrated into the rest of their lives that it's pretty inseparable. And I think for me, I lost belief very early on, relatively speaking, I guess. And it just became, it was never integrated to the extent that it was with my family. So it really, for me, didn't affect much outside of the actual beliefs of the religion. None of that surprises me that the initial euphoria and desire to evangelize your own atheist, your new atheistic perspective, you find people who become Christians from non-Christians back Christian background have exactly the same impulse and, and new Christians are often the most ardent evangelists because they've just found this new thing. And so then they go to all of their atheist friends and share that and sometimes get the exactly the same experience, but on the opposite that you had. And I think your point about, I think your point about the, the lack of dislocation with respect to when you changed this belief and the rest of your life didn't change, that speaks a lot to the, the continued secularization of the culture. If, for example, you had been born, let's say in when I was born, which is in the early 60s, that would have been quite different because not only was the overall fabric of the country different, it was, you know, for example, in when Jimmy Carter won the White House in 1976, the big, the big piece of interest about him publicly was that he was born again. And this identified a transition between, between kind of a mainline Cold War church posture to a more evangelical expressive individualist posture. But, you know, so that was in the 70s, you get all the way after 9 11 and the, whereas during the Cold War, we, the country recruited God to help fight Godless communism. 9 11 was a point of demarcation that now God and his allies, in that case, Islam, they are the enemy and they are suspect. So in a sense, you know, dear God, thank you for very much for helping us defeat the Soviets. We don't like what's happened with Islam, so we don't need you anymore. And just in very rough terms, you can see some of this playing out in American culture. Yeah, yeah, that's interesting. And I think, you personally too, it is weird because, you know, like you said, it's a common thing to see people get super excited about like new arguments for or against Christianity and then go try to spread them with people. And what's interesting is that was, you know, arguments against Christianity were sort of the first iteration, but that really hasn't stopped at all with me. I mean, that's why, you know, this podcast was, was, you know, formed amongst four friends who just like, we just naturally talked about, you know, interesting philosophical arguments, or one of us would read a paper and be like, Whoa, this is so interesting. This argument about normative ethics is something I've never heard. And we, you know, just share it with each other. And, you know, that's like the basis of what we're doing. And that's like the basis of all of this, you know, this project that we've done. And so I wonder, so do you think that that is, I don't know, I, because my, my religiosity and my church was very belief oriented, it mattered what you believed and why you believed it. And I guess to harken back to, to Peterson a little bit, it seems like that is not as much his focus as principles of action are. So it, I mean, we were talking a little bit before we went live, but I guess, so the one thing that I'm really confused about is why he doesn't make it more explicit about what he's saying, right? Like, I don't know, to be honest, I still, I've watched a ton of Jordan Peterson, and I still don't know what he actually believes about metaphysics or the existence of a God or not. I understand like his principles of action arguments, but I don't know what that says about his metaphysics. Well, by virtue of having a channel where I discussed Jordan Peterson, I now have the real advantage over most people that when he says something that's close to the kinds of things I've been picking up on, everyone sends them to me, which is, which is really helpful. Yeah. And just recently in a question and answer program in Australia, he again was asked the belief question. Now, I think part of this and your own story can testify to it. The concept of belief as it is usually assumed within the church isn't functioning the way the church imagined it would. And it isn't functioning the way that churches tend to assert it does with respect to their entire system of who's in and who's out. So churches will tend to say, here are a list of propositions that if you ascend to them, if you say, I believe in this, then suddenly your life will also conform in a whole bunch of behavioral ways that are supposed to somehow line up with those beliefs. Now take classic Christian beliefs of the Apostles Creed. I believe in God the Father, Almighty maker of heaven and earth. Boom, right there, you have a dislocation between what, especially if people are growing up in a culture, that's part of the reason why evolution and those kinds of questions and the fundamentalist modernist fight of the late 19th early 20th century becomes so important. Because right away you have dissonance between this thing that you say you believe that's supposed to change your life and what you grew up formally, just kind of defaulting to saying you believed that didn't really have much relationship with the rest of your life. And then you bump into all of these other factors that say, well, you don't actually believe that at all because you don't act it out. And so when Peterson gets asked about his beliefs, I mean, he gives a few different answers regularly depending on the context. If there's a context where he clearly likes the person who's interviewing him, like his conversation with Tim Lopp and his conversation with an Israeli journalist recently, he will try to flesh it out. But for example, on this Australian question and answer show, he basically says, it's kind of a personal thing and I don't like sharing it in public, which is a fascinating response. That's interesting. But most of what he says when he talks about this, a lot of people say he's being coy, he's being duplicitous, he's gaming. I don't think that at all because when I listen to him, sorry about the noise my dog is making. When I listen to him, I think he is being absolutely as honest and clear as he can be because he has done a lot of thinking in the nexus between what you do and what your talking mouth says the shape of the world is that you supposedly rationally connect with. And what he notes, along with many, many psychologists, pastors, people who watch, note that the stuff that they've discovered in the brain is very true in that when they have those split brain experiments, someone would do something with one side of the brain with one hand and the other side would make up a story that had absolutely nothing to do with the context of that situation. Now that has been happening as the culture continues to change. That has been happening and being manifest in churches and I think more and more people get to the point of saying that's BS. I don't understand this belief in God. Y'all act pretty much identical to your neighbors that don't go to church. Show me how this thing that's supposed to change your life really does change your life. And that was built into the rise in evangelicalism in the 60s and usually when you have a movement in that you'll have a lot of non-conforming behavior that because if you're making different noises, if you're not behaving differently, people are going to experience dissonance. Now what's happening in the culture now though as increasingly, especially for some conservative Christian and other religious groups, their moral systems become increasingly far, increasingly distant from let's say the moral systems of people who don't identify with a religion. That process will probably start turning the other way because Christian people will get weirder and weirder not just in terms of the things they say but the things they do. And that will actually amongst religious groups, not just Christian groups, that will likely bring what they say and what they do into closer conformity by virtue of social pressure. So I think we're going to see continued evolution in that and it could very well be that part of what's going on beneath the Jordan Peterson movement is the beginning of that process. That it's really interesting because I mean there's a lot that you said there that's really interesting. So if like if someone asked me though if I believed in God, my answer is one word, my answer is one word, it's no. You know what I mean? But then if someone said I don't know, it just maybe I'm missing something but it seems like it should be possible if not easy to differentiate between a metaphysical belief because you know I'm sure you know one of his responses is well it depends what you mean by belief, it depends what you mean by God, so on and so forth. So then you know I'm shocked that no interviewer, well at least that I've heard maybe you've heard an interviewer this happens, but no interview just then turns around and says okay well God is a supernatural entity, maybe even take the Christian God if you want, that actually created the universe that's actually you know still omnipresent within it, still omnipotent within it, and who is actually in control of whether our immaterial souls go to heaven or not. And then by belief I mean what do you at this moment in time if you had to bet your life on it or whatever do you think is actually the case? You know what I mean? And I think that that question is pretty easily separable from an empirical investigation on what a person or what a society acts out. It just seems like you should be able to differentiate those in principle and I don't think he does. Do you agree with that or not? You just set up the premise for the first conversation in Vancouver with Sam Harris and Brett Weinstein and when that conversation reached a conclusion Peterson sits down with his computer and maps out what he believes. Now when I did my commentary on that video I said there's sort of God number one and God number two and what Jordan Peterson is doing is via Darwin and evolution re-establishing God number one for the culture. Now the difficulty that you have is I recently played some of this video to a class I was giving to Christians and as I was playing the video because of that context I was listening to the video as I imagined they would listen to it and most of what Jordan Peterson said was unintelligible. And what was very interesting about that first conversation with Sam Harris in Vancouver most of what Jordan Peterson said was unintelligible to Sam Harris. It was intelligible to Brett Weinstein which was very interesting because Brett understood what Jordan Peterson meant by God. And so if you were to say I don't understand what's so hard about this my response to you would probably be so when you say you don't believe in God describe for me the being that you label as God in terms I can understand. And that's exactly so Jordan Peterson goes through his description of what I call God number one and Brett Weinstein or Sam Harris stops him and says now wait a minute all that you just described is not God and nobody would that's not a historic understanding that doesn't relate historically to the term God. The problem Sam Harris has is he doesn't know enough history and he especially doesn't know enough religious history because what Jordan Peterson laid out if you can understand the terms he used but in older symbolic and theological language he very much described the underpinnings of what not just Christians or Jews or Muslims but people throughout the world assumed to be this being called God. You know it's helpful to remember that except with the possible exceptions of perhaps a few Greeks and actually fewer Greeks than people might imagine almost no one before the last few hundred years didn't believe in God. What happened was that our ideas of this being and the role that this being plays in the world changed. So can you clarify what's the so God one would be the classical God that I was taught was real and then God? No that's God two. That's God two okay okay. That's God two and that's the God that the new atheists usually debunk. That God is highly relational and what that what has happened to that God especially since the 60s if you listen to a sociologist named Robert Bella wrote a book in the 80s called Habits of the Heart. Robert Bella also coined the term political civil religion when talking about JFK. Robert Bella used the term expressive individualism to describe what has become the default assumption of goodness in American society. That expressive individualism so another sociologist around the year 2000 named Christian Smith did surveys of teenagers and asked them about their spiritual and religious beliefs and what he discovered that it didn't matter if they grew up Muslim or Presbyterian or Baptist or Catholic or Jewish or outside of a home their basic matrix for spiritual assumptions were almost identical and he called that worldview religious belief moralistic therapeutic deism which was basically an outgrowth of this expressive individualism and that basically is God number two and the celebrity atheists as Jordan Peterson calls them have basically continued to debunk that God and what Jordan Peterson has done is come around and say but there's a God that was assumed by almost everyone throughout history and and see the difficulty that I have is when I say God I've already triggered God number two in your mind yeah but so when Jordan Peterson describes him and when Jordan Peterson fleshes him out people begin to say wow why what has been selecting how has that gotten into our genetics how has that how has that been making the choices all along through human history part of the problem is that we so we say no no it was random okay but if you pause and you think about that term random the god of the gaps argument is exactly what happens with the random argument because what we mean by random is a a process a semi-Newtonian mechanistic process too complex for us to describe map or predict yeah yeah that then came via Darwin in place of God selecting and what Jordan Peterson essentially does is say it hasn't it's been it's been less random than that and we are unfolding increasing layers of randomness we are opening up these black boxes and this and discovering that there's a lot going on that has actually been built into us and the language most appropriate to talk about these things is actually theological and because we don't really have the technical know-how to penetrate them so that's really what's at heart of his whole project and why I think he's having the impact he's having on people even if they don't know it consciously honestly I wish he would bring you on tour with him and just lay out the difference between god one and god two for the audience I mean I think that I mean the way you described it is is pretty good in my opinion it's just you know god one is you know you could call it the archetypal god or like this emergent property of what selects what it's this it's metaphorical right it's an idea that's right and then there's god two which is the classical metaphysical god right no that is the expressive individualist god it's also the historic christian god yeah yeah so so jesus is very god too because you can look at him he's relational he's and his his his public relations image in contemporary society tends to be fairly positive and a little bit woke okay yeah don't now don't you think so so I totally agree I'm not going to fight you at all on that distinction I think that's a great distinction to make but don't you think that given so if Peterson like just really took on board the context of the time and the country and the society that he's talking in it just seems to me like I think he should realize that there are a lot of people who actually do subscribe to very antiquated beliefs and I think by not laying it out in a sort of you know philosophy seminar way of this is exactly what I'm saying and this is not what I'm saying I just think that would be a bit more responsible of him a lot of it depends on what his agenda where his interests lie and what his agenda is and I think his public agenda has mostly been to to try to resist sort of a simplistic I mean that's what you hear him talk about in 80% of the interviews with him and when he goes on stage I've been to three live performances of his that tends to be a lot of what he talks about that is his interest the fact that people he that's so that's one of his interests his other interest as a clinical psychologist is to help individuals live better lives those are the two things he's very interested in and so that's what he's focusing on all of this other stuff that I find most interesting about him oh he's obviously deeply interested in it but for him that was sort of doing the the behind the scenes stuff in order to come to the conclusions of the two poles that he's interested in as a pastor I'm interested in the other stuff because what I've seen is that what has happened with Jordan Peterson is almost a sub an exercise in you know back in the 50s they had all of this interesting talk about subliminal advertising that if they were showing the movie and they just put you know quicks oh here they're drinking a coke and suddenly everybody gets thirsty yeah yeah the movie advertisements right and so what that says is that well you've got this little part of your brain that's conscious and then you've got the rest of your brain which is far more of your brain actually that is actually managing things and taking in stuff and doing a lot of the real thinking for you we're we're not sufficiently we don't we're not sufficiently aware of that part of our brain but when Jordan what Jordan Peterson is doing is talking to that part of the brain and a lot of people and they might listen to him and if you would ask them to sit down and really outline and describe what he says they would have a really hard time with it but something deep in their gut says you know this bible that there's more to it than i thought there was and i when i i find that when i start studying it and thinking along the terms that Peterson is i feel happier my life i sense more meaning in my life and once they start to feel that they want more of that and so then suddenly and of course i'm really focused on the little slice of people that are getting really turned on by that and so then sometimes they find their way to me and then the conversation continues yeah no i mean i would never i would never argue that there's not you know great wisdom and beautiful poetry and um you know really you know cinematic amazing stories that can be found in the bible it's just interesting to me i guess one of the first things i realized was that it was such a mixed bag though there's prescriptions for you know barbarism there's terrible things that god either directly does or commands his people to do and then there's wonderful precepts that can be found in there um and it was just it was interesting to me that in the context i'm sure i mean i'd love to hear what you think about this but in the context of um church and a pastor preaching to an audience it was very selective in what he preached right like no no church that i've ever heard of starts at genesis 1 1 and goes to revelation whatever the last verse is um and just talks about every part they go through the story with you know god sending the she-bear to kill the you know the israel or the the children uh who are mocking elijah yeah yeah they don't go yeah yeah that's right they don't go through um where lot sells his daughters uh as sex slaves or is that no no no his daughters get him drunk oh that's right and yeah and have him pregnant themselves yes because they're afraid they will not they will not um they will not be able to to have children and their line will not continue and that and they then become the the two nations next to israel that's right but yes bring up whatever examples you want to uh you know there's lots of them yeah and so there's a ton but then i could bring you just as many examples of really you know just great stories um stories of mercy of justice you know everything right so there's these two big baskets that you could fill up um and then there's honestly a third basket there's a ton of boring stuff there's lineages there's you know just stuff that i i've never heard anyone be interested in before right um and it's just it seems like you not you but people are importing their own interpretive motives and external belief systems and they're kind of picking and choosing and getting the best bits and leaving out the rest and that seems like a very secular project and not one that most people who ascribe um or would describe themselves as christians would would um like absorb they wouldn't take that on they wouldn't answer to that name yeah well i we should be fair i mean i preach through the bible in the way you've described i'm really i haven't i haven't strictly gone through everything but i a while ago i most what happens in a lot of churches they do these series five ways to have a better marriage six ways to so and so i got really tired of that a number of years ago and said i'm just gonna i'm just gonna start i'm gonna start in genesis and then when we get into like the easter season and the christmas season i'll jump into some of those seasons and do things in keeping with their seasons but i but i very much had that had that same understanding and i wanted people to have a better understanding of the bible because the bible is a very foreign book the the important thing to recognize when when anyone comes to the bible and says well there's the good stuff and bad stuff the person coming to the bible already has a pre-baked filter of what is good and bad and what people seldom do is ask themselves well where did that filter come from well i got it from my parents okay well where did your parents get it from well they now suddenly you're doing history because you start marching these filters back and you begin to look at the fact that people a hundred years ago had very different ideas of what the good parts of the bible were and what the bad parts of the bible were and in fact being a pastor who gets a chance to listen to what people's opinions of the bible are you find that very that individuals themselves tend to have conflicting ideas of what the good parts of the bible are and what the bad parts of the bible are you know for example i was using darrell davis has a has a documentary on netflix where this is a guy this is a black musician who has built relationship with clansmen and his goal is to basically love them out of the clan yeah and so he had this i was using this as part of a sermon illustration my church's significant portion african-american and i made the comment that you know he was in fact he's been so determined on this effort that when one of the somebody in the clan was complaining how the bus companies would never rent them buses because sometimes they do these rallies and everybody throw rocks at the buses and so the bus companies didn't want to have all that damage and darrell because he was a musician had a bus and he loaned his bus to the clan and you know so this african-american woman in my church comes to me and says did you see me giving you the stink eye during the sermon i said no she said you know i was giving you the stink eye something awful it was not right for that man to loan the clan his bus so you know there's a lot right in there and and what the so people look at the bible today and they say boy this is a really strange book and it is it was written to very different cultures than our own what i often try to tell people is but consider this the strangest thing about this bible is that people over an enormous diversity of times and cultures have all regarded this book as special in fact you know over the in the 20th century a lot of there was a big emphasis of translating the bible into indigenous people groups and so you'd have these missionaries from often from an organization named Wycliffe would go out into the jungles of Vietnam and i remember meeting a guy who did this you go out to the jungles of Vietnam into these tiny little tribes nobody knows their language because it's a group of about 100 or 200 or 1000 people they spend years learning the language they never had written language they write it all down and then they translate the bible into that language which is just an incredibly difficult thing and then they give the people the bible and i'll tell you for just about any other book you could think of the tribe that would receive that by that book would probably say is it well maybe it's good at starting fires and maybe you know cleaning up after i you know yeah do something in the woods but and and so then there've been these stories that basically so then sometimes the missionaries hand them the bible and they have to leave because of political reasons or something and then you come back a few decades later and these people are in some ways connecting with this book and you'd say well that's weird because name any other book that you've ever read and especially the books that you found you know very helpful in terms of you know chicken soup for the soul that the tribe would have long abandoned that book but this bible how can it connect with so many people well part of the experience you have with it that says well there's good stuff and bad stuff you bring it to another cultural group and they're going to say there's good stuff and bad stuff but their lists are going to be different and so some of the things that people have found is a lot of people when they read through the book of genesis there's all these genealogies so and so we got so and so so and so we read that they're like oh gosh why on earth do they have this in here yeah you bring that to certain african tribes those are their favorite parts because they're they're they're cultural their cultural is all about these ancestors and see what peterson gets into is peterson says now there are these archetypal there are these archetypal frameworks all around that are universal with human beings how are they universal and peterson wants to get at kind of the biological underpinnings of them because that's very old and this stuff has been embedded in the bible and it's for that reason that this book has this dynamic and doesn't go away and that just whatever whether if you're a secular say i don't believe in anything supernatural that is a data point that is really interesting and peterson is curious about it and so he's trying to figure out so then he looks at these stories and he says you know it's these these stories and these patterns in these stories keep coming up why do people throughout huge diversities of time and huge diversities of culture connect with this there must be something that's even biological about it that's been encoded into it and that's a that's a crazy idea but people listening to peterson begin to say i think it's true well what does that mean especially for this idea of god number one yeah don't i mean don't you think i mean i i'm not going to disagree with any of the empirical facts there obviously you know the bible everyone knows what book the bible is right um but it's weird that there is a certain aspect of all this that seems very arbitrary to me like i i you know wrestled with the bible because that happened to be the book that my culture you know believed but i have no doubt that i mean you know everything we're talking about here is the counterfactual which we can't really know we have to guess at but i mean there's no reason to think that if i had been brought up a muslim i would have wrestled with the quran just as much as with the bible and we'd you know i wouldn't be talking i'd be talking to the muslim analog of you right now you know and it it seems like everyone and i'm not necessarily ascribing this to you but has this soft spot for their own religion of their culture or their birth and it it just seems to me like we could we could say nearly everything you said about the quran or about the bad vagita or you know any other religious text you want to take and it's i don't see so like it's weird that we can say that to more or less of an extent per religion you know whatever you'd like but i don't know what it certainly seems to me it certainly seems to me like no metaphysical conclusion can be drawn on that because everyone just believes in their own text so then if we move to um you know the archetypal the sociological the meaning portion of it the god one um it seems to me like that's saying that there is there's wisdom that is is culturally held in individuals and in societies and a lot of the times people are just looking for a book that like you said maybe translates something that they subconsciously know is true into a conscious way to express it and i don't know what that really says i don't know how much good things that says about the book itself as opposed to the human wisdom right maybe maybe these books are just a medium that simplistic creatures like ourselves need to kind of translate that subconscious to conscious but it just it seems like a lot of people take the argument way farther than that yeah well think think about it this way and basically the argument you just you just round it and said well okay so somehow some book found its way to be this we can think let's let's translate this into a different sphere of life let's say you're you're a heterosexual male you're attracted to girls you could say well you could be attracted to what's that i said an example that we'll go with girls with it yeah and you you might say you know i could i could marry any girl i could you know i could marry any girl i could be attracted to any girl but here's the funny thing you're not just attracted to any girl you are in fact attracted to certain girls more than other girls and ironically whereas there's plenty of variation you know what's your type well i prefer girls who look such and such what's your type act for girls who are such and such okay those people who are running let's say okay cupid they have a huge problem because guys stack up in terms of and you know it was the hot or not hot it was the beginnings it was the proto facebook you know hot or not hot who's hotter this girl or that girl now you might say well i could i could be attracted to any girl oh but you're not in fact they all stack up now let's take it another step further jonathan height has these these taboo disgust has these taboo disgust things that he does which are really interesting so then i could ask you brother and sister experiments you're talking brother and sister experiment i say okay well you know here's here's a funny thing people are most often attracted to to people who have very similar features to them um you know why why is it taboo why is incest taboo because oh here's an irony that well you've got lots of availability availability to a sister you know because you if you have the same parents your sister is sort of the same as you on an attractiveness scale which would make you a proper bond i mean there are many many reasons why your ideal choice would be your sister and culture after culture after culture after culture it's taboo to have sex with your sister now if you ask a contemporary if you ask an american about that with their own frame of knowledge they will say well something was biologically built into us to avoid you know we want enough dna diversity so as not to and that may very well be true but we discovered dna like historically two minutes ago and this has been a factor that's near universal in human behavior and in human consciousness for reasons we don't know for a very long time and so you'd say well is that arbitrary and you might say probably not now explaining why it's not now now here's the funny thing about the bible so i just did i do these conversations on my channel with people and that a conversation i just posted this week was with a guy named eric and he asked me what's the second most printed book in the history of the world the first is the bible by this enormous degree i mean there's nothing that's even close the second most printed book is mao's red book with like eight or nine hundred million copies and we all know why you know that got duplicated in a crazy way because of a particular political situation that's fairly close to us so that makes sense for that he said well actually the most the most published book the second most published book in the after the bible is euclid's geometry now we'd have to say well why would that be well and then he began to say a few things about euclid's geometry where euclid's geometry starts with a point and then it starts with two points to make a line and and from from that which is most self-evident it constructs basically a a mathematical system that a huge diversity of cultures found enormously useful and couldn't argue with and you would you would hear that and you'd say boy that would it would really make sense that a book like that would endure through time be massively cross-cultural that makes sense then you have to ask the question why isn't euclid's book number one why is it a far far far far second to the degree that this one particular moment in time this one particular country could mass produce a book with more copies of that than euclid's geometry even though euclid is i mean how much of us is based on math our our society so yeah so right there again you have to have to ask the question this book the the facts about this book throughout human history regardless of what you believe about the content is is about as compelling as asking the question why would your parents be really upset if you had sex with your sister and i know that's a really icky illustration yeah yeah i have a sister unfortunately but but you know but there's the point i mean in terms of all these other things well i could i could marry any girl but you don't want to you're attracted to certain girls you should be attracted to your sister but you're probably not and and it's a that's we're not going to go into that whole conversation but yeah for the record i'm not okay good but here's the thing we we tend to tell the story that says it's very random but the story of the quran and everything that's around the quran is very different from the bible and that's the same for let's say some of the some of the hindu texts or some of the other ancient texts and so just even even if you say i don't even if you knew nothing about the contents of the bible a space alien comes in and is just kind of doing a study about human beings very quickly they would that bible book what's going on with that and just like the question of incest you might pause and think something has been built into us that connects with that book and there's a connection there and really what a lot of jordan peterson has done is try to work on that connection and again it's just been very interesting that when i talk to people a lot of the people have called me have had issues with depression and they will tell me things like i've struggled with depression all my life i started listening to jordan peterson and especially his biblical series and i wasn't depressed well what's with that you know we understand taking a pill and brain chemistry and and we understand oh i just got into a new love relationship and i have this euphoria in the first part of the relationship that we understand but listening to this guy and if you listen to his lectures i mean they're hardly linear i mean he's all over the map yeah why it's weird but it's there so just look at the data yeah so okay so i've got a few questions so if you um so to go back to your analogy of um you know you talked about how incest is not um we have like this guttural reaction to it right and that's but like you said we've only understood dna for the past what maybe 100 200 years since mendel since darwin um so you know to the to the hypothetical situation what if we had a book that had been passed down from generations to generations and it was called you know on not having sex with your sister or something like that and and it you know it had um this sort of flowery language in some parts it had some things that were historically verifiable some things that weren't but the core tenant of that book was don't have sex with your siblings right we could say that um in the same way that the bible maybe is sort of a a container for moving cultural wisdom we could say that that book is a container for you know transmitting in a succinct package across generations this idea of don't have sex with your siblings right well so if that were the case once we discovered dna and we can sort of say well you know look your your kids are probably going to be a little slow and then their kids are going to be really slow so you know don't have sex with your siblings and we can give more defined um maybe better reasons why at that point it seems like that book would become archaic and not useful and it seems like for more and more of the bible that is becoming the case like um another example that people often bring up is um you know well the bible says not to eat certain foods because you know they carry parasites you know pigs are unclean things like that um and that would have been very wise at the time but now that we understand the science of disease and things like that and we can give a scientific you know reason and constraints and say here you're 165 if you cook pig to here you're okay you won't get trichinosis or whatever um that part of the bible becomes not as relevant now are you are you agreeing with that and then making the argument that we don't have that meaning um anecdote or whatever you want to call it that that scientific meaning or that new cultural meaning so that we can push it out of the bible or or push the bible out of our sphere of what we think is useful or are you saying that we're never going to get better than the bible i'm saying well first of all if the the story you told presumes that someone at some point has an agenda which is you know tell people not to have sex with their sister um and so they're then they're going to construct a book around that in order to achieve that outcome over time i know that's not emergent yeah but that's that emergent quality see part of the question and again peterson lays this out in his biblical series is even the fact that the book has taken on the shape that it has one of the things that for example over the last hundred years authors you know people who studied the bible very carefully because this bible took such a high priority in our culture when the scientific revolution came on we got all enamored with our approach to knowledge which is science a scientific approach to knowledge people began taking that and applying that to the bible and a lot of theories came about which i think are quite true that there were probably a lot of other documents that came together in the bible and there's some parts of the bible that are explicitly that way for example the book of jove was likely a book that was in a variety of cultures and the hebra's adapted it it's part of wisdom literature so there's there's a whole lot of prehistory to the bible yeah but it it isn't the bible just kind of emerges through history and and it's even difficult let's say step out of a a church situation if you were to ask someone what is the bible for that's a really hard question to answer is the bible for inspirational reading is the bible for telling you how to behave is the bible for learning history of ancient peoples we can't even answer that question now now part of the difficulty of when people read the bible today and is we bring to the bible some assumptions that we might not even know we have about what this book is for and i as a pastor find that because people and in fact i have big disagreements with many people in churches about this because they'd say well what the bible essentially is is a list of a list of rules that tell you what to do and if you follow this these rules then this then this man in the sky named god will say oh they followed the rules when they die i will give them a really nice place to live with harps and streets of gold and stuff oh they didn't follow the rules i'm going to send them to a fiery place with devils and pitchforks and i'm going to torture them for eternity and i'm going to love it i don't think you find that story in the bible there are elements of the bible you can use to construct that story what what actually happens with the bible throughout history is that different groups churches mostly but but many other religions too take little bits of the bible and construct much more culturally appropriate and relevant sub stories from the bible that are useful within their historical contexts and that's actually what the work of theology is but why they keep going back to this source material and usually adding things from their own culture and so if you so that that tribe in in the jungles of vietnam that you go back to 15 years later you drop the bible off they're gonna there's gonna be some similarities to what you'll find in churches they'll be talking about this jesus they'll be talking about this god some of those basic ideas but their expression of what they find in this bible will also be completely culturally unique and so people from other cultures will look at that and say well this is classic of what happened in missionaries european missionaries came to africa and told all those women boy you really got to cover up yeah and and in some countries what they didn't realize was that the women who covered up were actually prostitutes so you've now basically culturally made all the women of your village prostitutes well that wasn't a good thing yeah yeah but there's there's again this is very dynamic mysterious thing just constantly happening around this book and and actually your is again part of this process and what's happening is that the the overlay that your historical community had on this book you no longer found compelling and so you walked away from it but who knows 20 years from now you might just find yourself in a particular situation that and then something in your mind will say boy there's this bible story about that then you go back to that book and you start reading it and off you go and this just kept happening throughout history yeah i think at this point it's it's more likely that i i would say to myself oh there's this interesting philosophy paper about this maybe you should go with that but i mean no you're right it's always possible that anyone can find their way back to um to a religion i just have good reason to think that probably won't happen watch what it'll be careful you might marry someone you said you never would true no people can always change yeah that happens yeah we'll check in in 10 years and see if i'm still right well okay so here i want to see if you would agree with this statement then so if i said the bible is a book that is this massive compilation from a ton of different cultures a ton of different authors it has a ton of different messages in it and each culture who has come across the bible has found like you said these different things to pull out of it to add to it and it's this really open source there's flowing in there's flowing out and it is this and it is this it's a pretty dynamic work right it's not stagnant um okay so would you agree with that statement just i would say yeah well it doesn't come from a ton of different cultures it came from a few cultures and has been modified by a ton the mystery of it has not been the diversity as much as the cohesion that's and it's not you know a perfect cohesion but but the cohesion has been the surprising thing about it that what has come out of it amidst all the different cultures we would assume that our lives would be radically different from north africans in the fifth century we would assume that what's interesting is are the ways in which they are the same and the nexus connections through that book that's what's peculiar what do you mean by cohesion um because i could pull up a a list of a ton of different contradictions in the bible so so what do you mean by cohesion well it'd be something it'd be something again similar to the number of cultures in which incest is a taboo so you mean there's a ton of cultures that value things either directly explicitly pulled from the bible or that you could find in the bible well well part of it you know part of it part of at least jordan peterson's argument is that there's no question that what what happened especially during the colonial period and the rise of this this rump of asia which is europe uh terribly diverse terribly fractured you know almost continuous warfare arises from the ruins of the roman empire a civilization which begins to develop tools on ways of behaving that in very short order conquers the world and one of the commonalities all of that has is with this book and we can't we don't quite know why that is now some of those connections you'd say well you know david in david conquered his neighbors just like napoleon conquered his neighbors but conquering neighbors is nothing unique to that book people conquer their neighbors all the time so i mean part of it is that there are these broad trends and patterns that we can recognize but we can't quite distill them down but over time they tend to stack up in in ways that show these patterns and repetitions like is it is it the case well let's again go back to incest uh let's look at families where there are incest and families that there aren't well generally speaking families that there aren't incest produce happier healthier children who thrive on all different aspects let's look at let's look at say a family with a father and a mother and their biological children those families generally speaking outperform families of other permutations uh monogamy men most men are not by nature monogamous that that's that's an achieved that that monogamy is an achievement for men more than women and again brett weinstein will go through all the biology of that yeah why do monogamous cultures why have they tended to outcompete polygamous cultures cultures in in vast scales that doesn't mean you can't find a polygamous culture that you would prefer to a monogamous culture somewhere but generally speaking so and and then the bible seems to be the jordan peterson's point is that the bible is somehow under this and we don't know why but it's there and you can't really argue with that data so it might be worth looking at i wonder it seems to me like i'm curious why he says the bible is under it as opposed to over it i mean why why couldn't it just as plausibly be instead of the source of wisdom a distillation of past wisdom right like i i guess i'm trying to get at if you think the is the wisdom internal to the bible and we pull it out or is external and we've put it in or is it sort of both where people who wrote it put it in and we are now taking it out what's the relationship there in your mind well i think jordan peterson quite rightly would say both okay that he would say that ancient peoples all of this wisdom you know got distilled into the bible and i would argue that see it's you've got genetics and epigenetics and so in many ways the bible or is the genetic code but then there's this layer of epigenetics around it which is the church theology all the conversation that that also then enhances it and applies it and so you'll get differentiation at the epigenetic level to to usually adapt to different cultures and technologies and all of this change but no wisdom got encoded in it and again you would have you know it'd be so say your father says don't have sex with your sister okay is that wisdom from above or wisdom from below well he probably was told it from his father maybe see here's the funny thing nobody ever says it temple conversation yeah that's right by the way here are the rules of the family yeah nobody even has to say it and then you have to say well that's weird because and but but as a kid you know there's all of these rules from the household you grew up in that nobody ever told you but you all know what they are yeah but but we're all not living in one household so that stuff gets imprinted into the bible and it's found to be true but again the bible isn't really a list of rules and that's not really how the bible works it's much more a story which is far more compelling than the rules because if you if you sit down and say oh boy this bible something else i'm going to read through it you read through genesis you kind of skim over the genealogies you get into exodus and there's some cool stories then you get to the middle of the book of exodus and you stop because you have all these rules about behavior and then the furniture of the tabernacle and you say what the heck is this then you jump you know a few bits and numbers you skip all of leviticus there's a lot of you know summary and deuteronomy and then oh joshua's got some cool stuff and then you got all the numbers so i mean it's it's it's a crazy book yeah well what you said there was interesting because you said you know we don't have to have these conversations that say uh you don't have sex with your sister or whatever people just you know they you grow up already knowing that well if i don't know to me that seems like if there was this book that had been passed down from generations and one of the central themes was don't have sex with your sister isn't that sort of not needed at that point especially once you i don't know it just seems i'm not finding a compelling reason why we would still need the bible and i understand that you know it like you said a lot of people are deriving um you know great meaning from it they're they're you know changing their lives um but it i guess to take like a really scientific approach wouldn't that only diagnose a problem in a society and not tell you which solution was right like we don't know if our society were different and better because i'd i'd sign off on every dotted line you want to give me that talks about how terrible our society is for you know meaning and well-being and and like a a Aristotelian like you daimonia feature of life right it's so superficial i'd agree with all of that but um i don't know why that wouldn't say that okay we have to fix our society as opposed to saying okay we need to instill the bible do you know what i mean yeah well in many ways in my experience pastorally the bible unless you're already committed to a religious project for a whole host of reasons for many people the bible is a just-in-time book in other words they their life isn't going so well they've um they've just gotten a divorce uh their relationship with relationship with someone is is on the ropes and they they have it they have a sense of that they have a sense that something's wrong but they can't they don't know what to do about it and you know somehow in the back of their mind you know the lord is my shepherd i shall not be in want he makes me to lie down by green pastures he leads me by still waters he restores he you know and and these things just start to echo in them and so then they're drawn to it and then they read another psalm and then they get a little curious and they go to youtube and they look at the bible project and it's like oh oh there's a there's a lot to this book i remember one of the people that i baptized in my church he was in his 70s he had grown up in a christian he was african-american grew up in the bible belt moved to california had a family worked you know had kids so on and so forth his wife his wife was a member of the church she was a committed believer i went over to visit them one day and he had like four different versions of the bible mapped down on a on a coffee table he hadn't himself made a decision to become a christian but he was investigating this and you know it wasn't until his 70s that he began to pause and say well there's there's some i i see something in this but i don't know what it is and i'm curious and i and i want to look at it and that usually tends to be what happens and and that's part of the reason why so many people become christians in prison well you've almost made the perfect place they got all kinds of time in their hands they got nothing to do you know you can get bibles you know oh gosh here's a bible and they start reading these stories and boy these stories are crazy and and you know even even the incest thing is there a rule against incest yeah but it's probably more compelling is when you find some of the stories of incest in the bible such as you know the sons of david um amon rapes rapes dina is it dina or tamar who is these names keep getting repeated and and then absolam kills him and that sets up this entire story and as jordan peterson notes one of the most interesting things of the bible is if you only know the bible from learning it in sunday school and then you read the bible itself much later as an adult you're usually quite surprised because usually churches do a really bad job with it and they make the bible all these moralistic stories and then you start reading that you know jove fleas sawdom and he's in a cave with his daughters and they get him drunk in order to rape him you know they're obviously not doing it for sexual pleasure they're something in their culture is driving them to to need male children and you start peeling that thing back well well what's going on in that culture and and what does that mean and and and what's and and then they become nations and those nations are related i mean it's an incredibly nerdy thing and a lot of people get stuck in that nerddom yeah yeah it's like the ultimate uh star trek series or something that's right that's right yeah it's the mother of all of them yeah so hmm all right so i gotta ask what do you um so so tell me what am i missing in all this then so what do you think that i'm missing that i'm not a believer well it's it's really hard because i really don't know you and so i couldn't i couldn't look at your life i'm a this frustrates people i'm a i'm a calvinist and so i i'm not particularly anxious about you i my thinking is you think you're in charge of your life i've got my doubts and if god wants to get a hold of you and do something with you uh he will and my only advice for you is don't play chicken with god because if if if he wants your attention and you don't want to give it to him um he's he's got ways of of getting your attention that you might not like so i i'm a very patient evangelist and that you know here's an interesting story out of the new testament the apostle paul holds the cloaks of the people who are stoning stephen basically giving approval to his murder yeah the apostle paul goes on a rampage hunting down getting arrested and probably killed christians and he's quite successful at it and on one trip to a mass to damascus jesus stops him reveals himself and changes paul's life well here's the question why not two years earlier i mean come on god why don't why why would you why wouldn't you stop this very successful anti-christian from his rampage i don't know i can't answer that question yeah you might ask tolkien why why not have bilbo kill golem so that frodo doesn't have to deal with him well and it's not slightly disanalogous i mean the the tolkien story is everyone accepts they're just a myth right but i don't or would you would you wouldn't put the bible on the same level as you know the hobbit would you you're you're elevating the bible to be fair i wouldn't put the bible i wouldn't put the hobbit on the same level as the bible lord of the rings gets closer but see i would argue you are you are living in the myth that's what myths are you're living in the myth it's just you're just as blind to the whole story as frodo was to his story and you have to be because you're in the middle of it yeah yeah you can't get behind your own self and and watch from a third person perspective and you don't have i mean even a work of fiction i use this analogy because it shines lights on certain aspects but even a work of fiction is fairly flat compared to the enormity of life as we see it but i i use that illustration to point to the fact that we are we are for the most part clueless about this world and our lives and the older you get the more you realize that certain decisions you made at some point that you had i mean all anyone who gets married i mean marriage is the craziest thing in the world because what you're doing is choosing to connect yourself to another human being and that relationship probably children are going to come out of it that relationship is going to govern your future in ways that your 20-something self who spotted that chick because she was hot you could never have imagined those outcomes life is like that and so so no you're you're in the midst of your own mythological adventure and you're just getting started yeah i think that's a great place to wrap it up um i think you know we we differ a lot on different questions but um i uh i i really enjoyed this um well i've enjoyed it too yeah and i um you know what i think i i would love uh sometime in the future for you to come back on um because i think uh especially adam but especially uh well also the other two would enjoy talking to you a good bit and i think there's a lot to explore um but so i i want to give you the chance um tell people where they can find more of your videos more of your work everything like that okay uh if you go to youtube and you just type in paul vanderclay and you can put that link in the it's just my name type in paul vanderclay you'll find my youtube channel and that's probably what will be of interest to most of the people listening to this i am doing a conference in melbourne australia on march 30 and if you i i should i should figure i'll i'll post some more videos about that pretty soon um about jordan peterson the jordan peterson phenomenon but yeah just find me on youtube and um i'm easy to pretty easy to find on gmail if you just google my name you'll find me and you'll be able to get in touch with me yeah i'll leave you yeah links for everything in the description of this video yeah yeah yeah yeah all right well thanks paul this has been a ton of fun and um i definitely learned something well thank you jordan it's been a pleasure and to everyone watching uh you can you know check out more at our uh website at our youtube everyone's heard this spiel a bunch of times so i'll go ahead and go ahead and end the stream but to everyone who watched thank you for watching