https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=i8RUJ2Yv7tQ

 Last week when I was, actually earlier this week when I was in Southern California, I made a little video about the Slate Star Codex piece on Jordan Peterson which was really excellent. Another really excellent one came out, this one from a Christian perspective. I don't know much about this guy, but he wrote a terrific piece and begins with this quote from C.S. Lewis, a man who disbelieved the Christian story as fact but continually fed on it as myth would perhaps be more spiritually alive than the one who ascended and did not think much about it, which I think is just a drop dead excellent quote about Jordan Peterson. And this piece which was written after the Slate Star Codex piece, just as a terrific summary blog post, it's pretty long, but it hits all the right portions. Who is Jordan Peterson? A little biographical and up to date information. Peterson's existentialism, Peterson's phenomenology, Peterson's individualism, Peterson and Jung, which is something that because many Christians don't have much background, Christians like me don't have much background in Jung, it's hard for us to kind of get a handle on Peterson and Jung, Peterson's Darwinianism and how he goes about myth and what he does with the Bible and recovering a mythic world and a bit about his theology and a bit about his church attendance and what should Christians make of Peterson. All in all, a terrific blog post. Part of what I struggled with before I started this channel was the relative impact of blogging versus doing YouTubes and I still continue to wrestle with that because the writing medium, I know I mentioned this book, Amusing Ourselves to Death, I think about it almost continually in this process. You can do some different things in a written format, but I think this is an outstanding take on it. This guy is very balanced, hits a lot of the right notes, is informative, shows wisdom and it's a terrific piece. Especially if you're a Christian and you're trying to figure out Jordan Peterson, that's an excellent article to read and I'll put the article in the notes.