https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_digFdHCI44

 Hi, this is Paul. This is my part of my rough draft to Sunday series where I basically walk through and edit my Sunday sermon beforehand. And so comments are welcome because feedback is good. And I've actually been talking to a number of pastors about what I'm doing here. And they're pretty amazed because being a pastor, it's really hard sometimes to get feedback. And so if you can actually get feedback before you have to preach on Sunday, that's a good thing. Although, as my son pointed out, he said more people see these videos than see your sermon on Sunday, but that's OK. So here we go. Last week, we talked about Martin Luther and Martin Luther was making his way through the woods at night and a terrible thunderstorm came up and he was terrified by it. And if you've ever been stuck in the woods in a thunderstorm, you know how terrifying it can be. And he cried out, Help me, St. Anne, I will become a monk. Because in that time and place, becoming a monk was the surest way that you could ensure that if you died, then you would go to heaven and not to hell. And so as the as Martin Luther continued to to work through that, he finally discovered texts like these in the New Testament. Last week, I talked about a lot of other different ways that the Bible talks about salvation and a number of other things. And you can see the sermon from last week online. But but eventually, Martin Luther settles on, For it is by grace that you have been saved through faith. And this is not from yourself. It is a gift. It is a gift of God, not by works so that no one can boast. For we are God's handiwork created in Christ Jesus to do good works, which God prepared in advance for us. And as we talked about last week, we often set up faith versus works. And part of that is because of the the James passage that we read last week. But but in some ways, the real contrast is grace versus works. And and here in this in this passage, I think that's that's really what the contrast is. But one of the things I really wrestled with when I when I went to college was was the question of this word saved saved from what? And and it's just so absolutely broad. And part of my frustration is that it's used in in Christian circles and in churches as kind of a as kind of a catchword for going to heaven and not to hell when you die. And actually in the long history of Christian thought, many people, including people like Nietzsche, complained of the church that the church was was too focused on the afterlife and not enough focused on on this world and what goes on here. And but, you know, as the more I thought about that and the more years I've I've gotten under my belt, the more I see how broadly we use this word. And we should talk about that breadth. Jesus is my savior. What do you need saving from? Sometimes people just need being saved from the latest power bill. Here here at the church, we often get benevolence requests from people who are behind on their smud. That's our Sacramento Municipal Utility District. And they come in and they need help with their smud bills. And and their whole life is revolving around they need three or four hundred dollars because they're behind and they're going to turn it off. And and it's in winter and it's going to get cold. And so, you know, Jesus saved me from my smud bill or, you know, Jesus saved me from slipping and falling in the shower. And you might say, well, I don't know if you need Jesus as much as a I don't if you need Jesus as much as you just need a, you know, you just need a bar installed in your shower. And then what does that say about Jesus that, you know, Jesus is kind of equivalent to a to a shower bar or or global warming. So so if you believe that the the climate is heating up because we're pumping massive amounts of CO2 into the atmosphere, well, what's Jesus supposed to do about this? Jesus isn't the one running around in an SUV. And what about nuclear war? I mean, surely if there was a human made calamity, we didn't just walk along the street and find plutonium one day and figure out how to make a hydrogen bomb. And and look at destroying the world. We're doing this. And so why why talk about Jesus with any of this stuff? And it just goes on from there. And, you know, as you work with people, you begin to realize that many of the things that that really that people really need saving from are things inside themselves. Alcohol or shopping or gambling or porn or or overeating or you name it. And when you sit down and you talk to people and and they finally kind of are ready to to to tell you their stuff, these are the things that come out. And so and so in many ways, then the church, you know, always talking about hell for many people, that's that's the farthest thing on their minds. And and so so what is hell is hell, this existential experience. And a lot of people say, yeah, I know hell. I'm living in it right now. But then we have these other conversations about afterlifes with with pitchforks and and flames. And and that, in fact, has been the focus of a lot of churches ministry in my church library. I found an old copy of Evangelism Explosion. And this was a this was a very popular church growth evangelistic method that was used towards the end of the towards the end of the 20th century. And basically you would go up to someone's door and you'd knock on the door and you'd ask them a question like, if you were to die tonight, what assurance would you have that that Jesus would let you into his kingdom? Now, now, obviously, the reason this worked was because the vast majority of Americans were formed by this this Christianist this Christianist culture. And so many of them had been to church maybe during the Cold War. And so they had they had backslid away from church and they weren't going to church. And so the job of a lot of churches was to try to activate people. But you notice that all of the languages is nested in this worldview. And as we've as I mentioned during last week's sermon, as we you know, as we move on from these worldviews, well, you go to you go and knock at somebody's door and you say, you know, what will you say to Jesus to let him into your kingdom? And you're like, you know, what are you talking about? You know, who is this Jesus? Or, yeah, I've heard about this Jesus. This whole thing is just a, you know, this is just just a scam made up by pastors who want job security and and Cadillacs to drive. You know, and so many people, even even the the outline of common religion, which is which is still quite pervasive in our culture. Few people go to funerals and and say, oh, I found Dorothy and my cat next door or go to funerals and say, yeah, they're dead. They're gone. They might live in your heart, but, you know, that means they die when you die. Most people don't say those kind of things. They think, well, good people go to heaven or a better place or some kind of thing when they die. And, you know, bad people go to hell. But bad people got to be really bad people because, you know, you know, most people mean well. And that should be good enough. But but here's the thing. Our relationship with threats are funny because you just look around in in the public sphere. Now, if you're an ardent believer in in global warming because we're pumping CO2 into the atmosphere and these greenhouse gases are are heating up the world. If you believe that that we are doing this and this is manmade and it needs to be stopped and this is a this is a vital threat, then then nothing is frustrating. You then then the 40 percent of your American your American citizens who who are in this with you that are saying it's a hoax or if maybe, you know, pick your poison. Maybe you're really, you know, nervous about immigration and, you know, Mexicans are coming up, you know, taking our jobs and they're drug dealers and rapists. And and on we go from that. And, you know, maybe your liberal friends say, that's a made up problem. And immigrants are wonderful people and we need them for our country. You know, these threats that we feel are, you know, what do we do with these ideas? So one guy feels this threat. One guy feels that threat as a pastor. I wind up dealing with this all the time. Somebody smokes all their life and they say, ah, smoking is fine. It doesn't cause cancer. And the doctor keeps wanting me to quit, but I'm not going to listen to the doctor. And but then others, I remember right after 9-11, one one person said to me that that she was terrified that Osama bin Laden was going to get her. And I thought, well, good grief, you're not living in the Pentagon or the World Trade Center. You know, you're you're about as safe as anybody from from Saddam Hussein or or an asteroid strike or, you know, the I remember when, you know, someone was getting a getting surgery in the hospital and the doctor told them, yeah, the most dangerous thing you're going to do that day is drive to the hospital. You know, we have very we are very poor judges of the actual threats that we face. And truth be told, most of the threats that we face are common. And many of the threats that we face are are of our own making, whether as a community or as individuals. Now, when we talk about saviors, we also recognize that there are there are a lot of saviors among us. You know, a lot of people who are politically oriented get greatly invested in a in a politician who who comes along and and brings the change that you think is important. And I'm I'm usually quite dismayed every four years listening to presidential exception, you know, acceptance speeches and inaugural addresses, because to to listen to these people, you would think that, yeah, this new president is going to, you know, he's going to change everything in every way. And, you know, sometimes people, you know, I, of course, have my own political ideas. But if people ask me, well, what are your political ideas? I usually say I'm a political skeptic. I've got I've got low expectations in terms of what you know what we can really accomplish, despite the fact that, you know, governments have in fact produced quite a bit over the last couple of hundred years in terms of making ordinary people's lives better and and having less And having lived a fair amount of my life in the third world, I'm I'm very cognizant of what a well run government and what a relatively on low levels of corruption can do for a society. Yet, you know, I remember, you know, I listened to when I listened to presidents who are just elected talk about the things they're going to do or those running for office, the things they're going to do. I listened to it and I think that's a bunch of hogwash. And then scientists and engineers solve huge problems. And that's true. And they, you know, many, many wonderful problems can be solved. But but as we've seen again and again, you solve one problem and another comes up DDT. It was supposed to, you know, fix our bug problem. And then we just saw we discover that we're poisoning the rest of the ecosystem. And then we discover that these bugs in this ecosystem are stuff that we really need to depend on. And and the more in fact we destroy these things, the more we're, you know, the more jeopardy we're putting ourselves into. Or maybe your neighbor is is someone close to you. It's your neighbor who turned the water off. You went on vacation, were afraid you left the stove on and they came over to your house and and turned it off for you. And maybe that's your savior. Or maybe it's a therapist or a book or an author who who helped illuminate your trust issues or or figure something out. And, you know, all of these are in some ways legitimate failures. But what we begin to see is that none of these failure, none of these saviors really scale well. Those of you listening to this are probably fans of Jordan Peterson. And one of the ideas I really picked up from him is is this idea of the, you know, via Piaget, this, you know, equilibrated game, how how things have to work for me now. But they have to work for me today and tomorrow and five years and ten years in the future. And in fact, this scales all the way. They not only have to scale in terms of horizontally, let's say time is the horizontal axis where it's got to scale for me now and later and in the future and so on and so forth. And so we really think about these major games and these meta narratives. Well, they they had to work in the past, too, and they had to work with with very different cultures. And so then we get the vertical axis on this. It not only has to work for me and my spouse and my family, it had to work for my parents and my friends and my coworkers. And it had to work for my city and my nation and for my ethnic group and then other ethnic groups and other shared groups. And and basically these things scale out and go all the way out to the edges of existence and the edges of the human story. And while my neighbor who turned off the water, you know, I might come home and say, boy, you're a lifesaver. Thanks for turning off that water. Well, it didn't help my parents and it won't help my children. It helped me today, but it won't help me tomorrow. And and what you find is that all of these saviors that we have, they just don't scale. And then we begin to realize that this this is not only true. And this is kind of the point that Peterson makes. This is not only true for for our saviors, but these are true for our actions. We make a decision today. We decide to move to this town and not another town or take this job and not another job or marry this person and not another person. And and and the consequences just ripple through our lives. And and and we have no real way of knowing before we do any of this. And and if you're paying any attention at all, you really have to come to the decision that you are not in control of your life and all of the ways that you thought you could manage things by by studying and knowing things ahead of time and being very scrupulous. You know, this illusion of control is is folly. Sure, you can control some things and and yes, you must control a lot of things and to and to to rightly control the things in your life that you're responsible for is in fact far better than not doing so. But but even doing so, maybe you live, maybe you you eat all the right things and you don't smoke and you don't drink and you're you're careful in all your ways. And boom, cancer comes up and and boy, you're gone. And this is the way life is. And this is what I what I talk about in with with the reference of the age of decay. And then and then there's all the funny judgments that we have here on the top. There's a picture of a slave owner and we look back at him and say, oh, gosh, what a you know, what an evil man he was. And we don't pause for a moment and think about how nested he was in in his society and how blind he was to other ways of thinking. And and, you know, you know, we might say today, oh, well, he, you know, how could he not have known that it was horrible to imagine you can own other people? And, you know, I completely agree with that idea. I'm a person of the 21st century, just like the rest of you. How horrible an idea it is that that we can that you would imagine you could own another human being. Yeah. You know, let's take the ancestors of the of the folks that were carrying him and and put, you know, put them in an affluent American Suburb and give them a nice SUV to drive and a, you know, a wonderful job and and everything that their their slave forebearers could never have imagined. Well, what are the people 200 years from now going to think about them? They might well say, you know, how could these people have been so blind to take this amazing thing called petroleum and to and to put it in a gas tank? Because, you know, every every gallon of petroleum you burn creates 21 pounds of CO2. That CO2 goes into the atmosphere and that CO2 gets absorbed by the oceans and and and this this nice well-meaning family that didn't think a thing of driving, you know, driving their cars around, you know, destroyed the planet. And now we're all living in a water world 200 years later. Well, we don't think about that today because we're we're sitting in our own little bubble. And so and so now suddenly what kind of savior do we need? And now suddenly what kind of salvation do we need? 200 years from now they'll say, well, you needed a savior who would get your butt out of your car and have you walk because if you know, probably if you walked more you'd have you know those those McDonald's hamburgers you ate wouldn't have gone straight to cholesterol in your arteries. So so who are your saviors? Is it the government? And you know, many people more on the left or, you know, the, you know, the more the state can control everything, the better life will be. Well, you know, governments do do some things well if it's a good government. But governments also do some things horribly. And we've seen in the 20th century some totalitarian governments who have been horrible to their people. And you might think, yeah, well, once people learn that, they'll fix it. Well, most of us wouldn't trade our government for the the government of the government of Russia. Governments that have bad periods don't necessarily shape up, you know, are the governments of of other places like Iraq or Iran or those better governments than ours. You know, how can government really be your saviour? Well, medical science. Yeah, well, medical science is a is a wonderful thing and it certainly helps us. But, you know, I'll tell you, you get to a certain point and medical science hasn't solved death. And we're going to get a little later and we'll ask, well, what would happen if medical science solved death? Would you in fact really want that? Well, I believe in the the human spirit and its ability to overcome. And I listen to that and I think, well, maybe I'm a cynic. But the human spirit, well, the human spirit, that's the same spirit that, you know, puts a man on the moon. It's the same spirit that builds gas chambers for Jews. That's that's the human spirit. The human spirit is is exactly what we're talking about. All freedom, the idea of freedom. Well, yeah, freedom. People use their freedoms to do a lot of things. Or maybe it's your pile of cash and investments and you think that's going to save you. But but I talked to many people who many people who don't have the the pile of cash and they they worry and they scrape. And it's a pain. But I see a lot of other people who have piles of cash. And, you know, it doesn't save you. Then suddenly you're worried about your money or, you know, you get cancer and you know you're going to die. And then what happens to your pile? Read the Book of Ecclesiastes. You know, finally, for many of us, our final savior is ourself. And if you if you really think about that, you'll have to come to the conclusion that we are crappy, crappy saviors of ourself. Because so often we're not we're not, in fact, our saviors. We're our own worst enemies. And then I want to bring you back to this idea of scale again, because can any of this scale in the age of decay? And as the author of Ecclesiastes says, you know, everything we build gets torn down by time. Every newborn baby gets eaten by gets eaten by time. And and so what on earth are we really saving each other from and for? Now, not only does this idea of decay scale, but but this idea of law and love scales to Lords Day two of the Heideberg Catechism, we've talked been talking a lot about the Heideberg Catechism in this series. How do you how do you come to know your misery now? Now, this idea of misery is going to scale to because, you know, what kinds of miseries are there and why do suicide rates rise when when levels of affluence rise? And so how do you come to know your misery? And the Heideberg Catechism says the law of God tells me and look look back again at last week's sermon on and on laws and and and pluralism and how that all works. Well, well, the Heideberg Catechism is a Christian document and and it's a reformational document. So they're going to go back to the Bible. And so what does God's law require of us? Now, you can go back into the the Torah and the Old Testament and and find six hundred and some laws. But Jesus in Matthew twenty two sums it up in this way. Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, with all your strength. This is the first and greatest commandment and the second is like it. Love your neighbor as yourself. All the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments. Now, we know this idea wasn't unique to Jesus. This, in fact, was a fairly common answer in Jesus time in terms of what the law is. And what we find is that, in fact, this idea of love scales. Now, when you get down to details, it can become as as many of you know who who love a person who is tormented by mental illness or alcoholism or or is doing a lot of evil things. Love is no simple thing. And knowing exactly how to love someone is no simple thing. But this idea of love scales and it scales well. And it scales not just about me in my time right now, but me in the future and and on to the end of my life and my ancestors before them. This idea of love scales, you know, in all different directions and it scales quite well. And this is where, in a sense, Jesus and the hypercatechism following Jesus really showed a remarkable degree of brilliance because it says, OK, well, let's let's boil down this question of ought. What ought you to finally do? You ought to love God. And I know for some of you, that's a problematic. That's a problematic idea. And it's by no means simple. But but OK, let's let's let's leave God to the side and say, love your neighbor as yourself. Oh, boy. Oh, boy. I, you know, and a lot of people are quite rightly say things like, well, first I have to learn to love myself because a lot of people do have difficulty loving themselves. And that is part of the matrix. But when it comes right down to it, most of us are really pretty determined egotists. And we are finally in it for ourselves. And in fact, our entire biological nature predisposes us to that thing. And so in a sense, Jesus says, well, this is the law that scales and it scales like like any other. And so if you really want to know why you're miserable, it's because you don't know how to love. And and in fact, it's not just a matter of information, because when I say you don't know how to love, it's it's that you don't practice love. And this is at the root of your troubles. And you might hear that and say, huh, I got to think about that. Or you might reject it out of hand. And so what we begin to see is that the problems are inside of us. And you see this often with the people you live with. And it often happens with spouses that this person that you stood up one day and promised before the world that you would marry and you would love forever. You know, within just a few years, this person became your enemy and you can't stand the sight of them or or you want to avoid them. Or you'd just rather watch a TV show so you don't have to listen to them. And and on and on this goes or it's your political and social enemies and you imagine yourself to be a good person. But the kinds of things you'd really like to do to your political social enemies is, well, first we want to shut them up. And because people are so hard to shut up, well, then we're going to shut them out by taking away their vote or taking away their voice. And, you know, the idea of the Internet was all this is going to bring democracy to us. Yeah. But, you know, do you really want to hear what everybody thinks? Just open up the Internet and find out. You find a lot of things that that you don't like what they're saying. And so, you know, then along the progression is, well, then you lock them up and you discover that locking them up is a tremendously costly way. And the quickest way to simply be done with them is to kill them. And if you really want to if you really want to get rid of them, well, you know, then you just you've got to kill them and their family, because if you leave their families alone, then and you know, societies have done this. You've got Rwanda, you've got you've got the totalitarian regimes of the 20th century. You've got Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union and Maoist China. And and this has all been tried because the problem is people. And if you've never seen Jean Paul Sartre's No Exit, you can find it on YouTube, a BBC adaptation of it. And, you know, you think, yeah, lovely people in a wonderful art gallery when they don't have to eat and they, you know, they don't need bathrooms, apparently. And they they don't have anything. All they have to do is sit in a room, one with each other and a man and two women and and, you know, one is a lesbian and and, you know, hell is other people. This is this is what I deal with as a pastor. People come to me and they, you know, they've got worries about all kinds of things. But usually what's really on their mind is I've got this person in my life and they're making things chaotic and I can't stand it anymore. And I don't know what to do with it. I was I was watching a Jordan Peterson video this morning and he was kind of telling telling his own origin story about, you know, looking at the Soviet Union and the United States and and we're about to destroy life on Earth. And so we wanted to get to the bottom of it. And what's at the bottom of it? It's us. And can we save this world from ourselves? One of one of my favorite illustrations of this is is C.S. Lewis's The Great Divorce. And it begins with a with a bus scene. And here in this world, no one gets ill and no one was is hungry and no one is really aging and and no one can die. But they get on a bus and the bus is actually going to heaven. And you think, well, this this should be exactly what they all want. All they need to do is get on a bus. And you listen to the people and they're they're quarrelsome and they're petty and they're self-obsessed and they're preoccupied. And and this gets into the you know, this this idea that actually Kierkegaard got into too, which is, you know, take all of your problems away, give you an infinite amount of money, give you an infinite amount of power, give you an you know, whatever all the things that you imagine you need. Well, that finally make you happy. And I think all the best answers say no, our our problems go go way deeper. So so can your power saving can your world saving power scale? Can you can you save the future? Can you save your family? Can you save your loved ones? Can you redeem your past? Can you change your character? You know, what size savior does the world need? Because let's imagine you find the way to be happy or or whatever it is fully enlightened or whatever it is yourself. Well, you've got the rest of eight billion people on the planet with you scrounging around doing what we all do. And what you begin to realize is that the Christian story when it's talking about saving is talking about a scale that is beyond what what most of us even began to think about and what any of us can comprehend. And that's why in the Christian tradition we talk about grace and I hear grace talked about often as as things like second chances. It is that that is such a cheap way of viewing it because the truth is in any relationship. What grace means is that you take the hit for someone else. Someone someone plows into your into your yard and tears up your yard. Grace means you pay to fix your yard. And this is why this little acronym that I was taught when I was a kid grace means God's riches at Christ's expense. This is just some little cheap pastor trick. But it you know it works. Some of the cheap little tricks work the best sometimes. God's riches at Christ's expense because because here Jesus says the most audacious thing at the end of the Gospel of Matthew. He he stands up on a mountain. Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go and when they saw him they worshiped him. There's an alarming thing for a bunch of Jews to do. But some doubted and I love the honesty of the Gospel of Matthew that here after the resurrection after they had all seen Jesus die. After Thomas puts his hands and touches put his fingers and then nail holes in his hands and touches him. And there he is on a mountain and and and we're like yeah yeah that's that's that's what I would need to really believe. I would need to see the resurrected Jesus and I didn't need to touch his hands and I would need to ask him questions. And the truth is no that's not what you would need. That would be insufficient. You need something bigger and stronger and deeper because here all of these people his disciples they're standing there looking at him and they still don't get it. And that is us. And then Jesus says to them Jesus then came to them and said all authority in heaven and earth has been given me. And people say to me why I don't know if I can believe like the miracles in the virgin birth. Try and believe that sentence that that all authority in heaven and on earth now pay attention to the heaven part there because again these are this is the this is the idea that there are there are spirits. There are little godlings that you know there are there are these embodied spiritual forces and whether you think about them in terms of a spiritual realm or whether you think about them in terms of human avarice lust greed. These kinds of things that kind of get platonized into forms or whether you think of them in terms of cultures all of this stuff is beyond us and Jesus says all authority in heaven and on earth. That means the power to command has been given to me. And we have to say well well why. Well because of grace. Well what is grace grace is grace is taking the it is receiving a gift that is undeserved. The apostle Paul says this therefore if you have any encouragement being united with Christ if any comfort from his love if any common sharing in the spirit if any tenderness and compassion then make my joy complete by being like minded having the same love there it is again being one in spirit and mind with each other. You mean I got to get along with these. Yeah I'd like to use some words I got to get along with these people. I got to get along with these people. Hell is other people. Yeah being in one in spirit and mind with these other. Yeah. Do nothing out of selfish ambition. Or vain conceit out of out of what I want for myself for this this this magnified vision of myself rather in humidity mility value others above yourself. What are you asking me to do. Not looking to your own interest but each of you to the interests of others. Well that sounds like a recipe for disaster in your relationships with one another have the same mindset as Christ Jesus who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage. Rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as man he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death even death on a cross. And God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue acknowledge him knowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the father. This story says grace. It is God's riches for us at Christ's expense will you say well what do you mean riches. He's asking me to to love. Yes. Well that is it. You say well well I want I want to be loved but what you don't understand is that it is more blessed to give than to receive and then the business about love is that it is better to love than to receive love which is what we all want. And if you think about all of humanity in two great lines there's one line to be loved and the other to love the line to be loved stretches you know around the world many times but to love you have infinite opportunity to love you have opportunity to love the people you're living with you have opportunity to love the person you promise to love you have opportunity to love your neighbor you have opportunity to love your stranger you have opportunity to love even your enemy and that's what you want. The craziness of this says that is in fact the kingdom and you say well how can I have the power to do this for it is by grace that you have been saved through faith and this is not from yourself. It is a gift of God. This is something that's given to you not by works that we can boast for we are God's handiwork created in Christ Jesus to do good works. This is what we were made for which God prepared in advance for us to do. Well what must you know to live and die in the joy of this comfort three things first how great my sin and misery is you begin by recognizing that we you are the problem just like I am and that it is not the bad people out there that are creating that are destroying the world that all of those bad people are just like me and and you are the problem. And to them I am the bad person and that it is not monsters that were capable of of hatred or bigotry or or killing Jews or gulags or whatever whatever image you have of real evil that that evil is in me and that misery is in me. So the first thing I must do is recognize how great my sin and misery are. The second is how I am set free. Now again it's not how I free myself how I am set free from all my sins and miseries. Well how am I set free. Well you're set free by someone whose salvation can scale big enough to a degree that yours can't. So it begins with him. Well how then does it tie to me. Third how I am to thank God for such a deliverance and that's where the action comes. That's where the action comes in terms of doing the very very hard work the kind of work that really nobody wants to do of trying to love my enemy and trying to love the person that speaks poorly of me and trying to love the person that is calling that is calling me a bigot or a hater or a or whatever evil name is the great evil name in your context today. And that doesn't save me. Certainly that practice strengthens me and certainly that practice transforms me into the kind of person that I was made to be. But first thing is knowing myself and my sin and misery. Second is how Christ has done this for me. And third what I am to do with it. You might notice I'm going in reverse order through the beginning of the Heideberg Catechism. So what is your only comfort in death. That I am not my own and this is completely opposite the American credo. Completely opposite the credo that says I am my own and I am the master of my own destiny. And this is going to make you happy. Well if you are your own savior good luck. Because I've got doubts as to whether or not you can save yourself. And the reason I know this is because I have learned I can't save myself. So what is my only comfort in life and in death that I am not my own. But I belong body and soul in life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ. He has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood. He has fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. Yeah he's still out there. Yeah he's still tempting me. Yeah I still fall. Yeah I still stumble. He also watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head. Look at all the hairs I'm missing. Without the will of my Father in heaven. You mean even my miseries? Even my miseries you're going to turn to my good? Even my sin? Even my calamities? All of this you can use to change me? Yeah because it begins with my misery. In fact all things must work together for my salvation. What do you mean salvation? Slipping in the shower? Well yeah you can probably draw that far enough back to Christ. But it's this huge scalable salvation that's not just hell avoidance. It's not just in the after knife. It's not just in this life. It's the equilibrated state for me going both ways in terms of my life and time. And me going this way in terms of my life in this world. All this must come together for my salvation. Because I belong to him Christ by his Holy Spirit assures me of eternal life. It's not even by me because you know I'm with the disciples up there and you look at me saying all authority? Eh. Really? Really? Yeah that resurrection that was a neat trick. I'm still not totally convinced of it but yeah. Because I belong to him Christ by his Holy Spirit assures me of eternal life. And makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him. And I certainly wish I could say that that is my present experience when most of the time I'm a bad dog on a chain. And I'm reluctant and oh someone calls and I don't want to deal. I don't want to listen to their complaining again. Or I don't want to go and clean up this mess one more time for someone who should not be living in this mess anyway. And it's the government's fault and it's my neighbor's fault and it's because they were raised or it's their stupid religion or it's their stupid addiction or what have you. Because I belong to him Christ by his Holy Spirit assures me of eternal life. And makes me wholeheartedly willing and ready from now on to live for him.