https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lIxNgDsqwTs

 Well, Carlos, I appreciate you waking up early in the morning. It's 5 a.m. in the Philippines. So I'm flattered that you would get up to talk to me at this incredibly early hour. I'm used to it. You know, someone, I do have a lot of colleagues in the U.S. It's worse if they're in the East Coast because then they have to meet them either really late at night or really early in the morning. Sometimes the guys who are over there in California, they go ahead and say, okay, I'll meet you at my six o'clock, which would come out to be at something like my nine o'clock. Oh, that's not too bad. Yeah, that's not too bad. But I have to meet those guys who are over there on the other side of the continent. Yeah. One of us has to give it. But anyway, I'm used to it. I'm an IT guy. And you've probably talked to dozens of us already. IT guys, artists and math people. These are the three common groups I talk to. It's very interesting. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. So tell me a little bit about yourself, Carlos. So, OK, right before we started recording, I already said, OK, it's five o'clock in the morning over here. I'm in the Philippines. So really cool. Born and raised here, right? And I still live here, obviously. I still work here. And I'm a dad. I'm 30 years old. I've got two kids. Congratulations. Yeah, thank you. I've got a two-year-old son and an 11-month-old daughter. Oh, wow. He just turned 11 months today, actually. That's wonderful. It's wonderful. Yeah, it really is. And gosh. It's something that I would not have imagined having kids, being married at this point in life. Why? I don't know. It just never crossed my mind. You know, my wife actually asked me one evening, are you shocked that you have two kids by now? I said, yeah, yeah, I am. I totally am. How old were your parents when you were born? My dad was 28. We actually got married and had kids around the same age. But it's something that never crossed my mind. What was crossing your mind? What were you doing that you weren't thinking about having a family, having kids, just having fun? I don't know about having fun. Maybe making lots of money. Oh, okay. Yeah, like, you know, the usual life script that everyone tells you in your 20s, even over here, right? So I would say I'm firmly, socioeconomically speaking, I'm firmly upper middle class at this point, right? So we've assimilated all of the American bourgeois values. I grew up in a very different context because it was always Christian values, assumed you'd get married, have a family. Making money was never pushed on me, certainly not by my parents, but even by my culture. So I never focused much on that. But I see a lot more people do now. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, a couple of generations back, that certainly wasn't the case. My grandparents, my paternal grandparents, there were 10 of them, right? And they were Chinese immigrants. They arrived in the Philippines, in the southern Philippines during the early 20th century. I think my great-grandmother got married when she was 17. But anyway, a couple of generations later, it was all, okay, you go out in the world, conquer the world, be successful, make a name for yourself, get a career, right? And right now, if you ask me, is career the most important thing in my life? No. I've even told my wife once, sometimes we get into a fight, and he told her, hey, look, we've had a few fights that have to do something with work. I said, what's with your job anyway? And she said, hey, look, I can divorce my boss, I can divorce you. Wow. I told her that. Wow. Right? I'm Roman Catholic, right? Like nearly four-fifths of all Filipinos, I'm Roman Catholic. But my family isn't very strict. My family grew up, I think it's been described as Christer Christians, right? Show up on Christmas, Easter, there's a wedding, right? My wife's family is a bit more conservative. My mother-in-law actually attends daily mass. And really, I would have never imagined being where I am right now. Now I'm very interested. Where have you been and where are you are now and how did you get here? Okay. It's a long story. I guess I'll start. I will start. Something like 10 years ago, right? I attended university in 2005. And I attended the University of the Philippines, which is the prestigious state university. I studied computer engineering. And it would have about the same reputation as any prestigious state university in the US, right? Extremely left-wing, you know, those godless heathen places where everyone worships Darwin and Marx and that sort of thing. And you know what they actually told my mom? I spent six years in Catholic school and they actually told her, oh, I got into UP and I would be really glad not to see the face of a priest again ever. Like I'm sick of them. I'm attending this school, right? And you know, my mom being... If I told that to my great-grandmother, she would have locked me up, probably. But my mother's like, okay, do whatever you like. And I guess I didn't officially declare myself atheist or anything. I just didn't care, right? I just didn't care. And let's just fast forward to three years after that. And there was this girl that I met who attended an evangelical church in university, right? And so yeah, I liked this girl. And my friends who happened to be evangelical who attended that same church kind of picked it up. So they just started inviting me to their services. And so after a few weeks of pestering me, so finally, okay, I said, I'll go. Because they said, hey, we have this guest pastor from the US who's coming and we would like you to come. So, all right, okay, fine. I'll go. And I went. And I went. And I still remember what the sermon was about. The pastor was preaching about the blood of Christ, right? So he was reading from the passion narratives and making very vivid descriptions of Jesus while he was being flogged, while he was being crowned, crucified, etc. Okay, it was here in the Philippines, if you say evangelical or born again, right? It can run the gamut from being a Baptist up to Pentecostal, but it's going to feel everything is going to feel Pentecostal. That's how we are. That's the culture here, right? Everyone likes to stand up, raise their hands, jump and sing. And I could fall asleep in the middle of worship. Yeah, no, not at all. And so it was about two hours of that preaching and standing up and singing. And then, so remember, I was raised Roman Catholic. And so I asked my friend, when do you guys have communion here? Every few months? Yeah, he actually did say, every first Sunday of the month we have communion. Are you guys joking? Your pastor was just preaching about the blood of Christ, right? And you guys don't have communion. And I guess that lit the fire in me, I would say. And I actually started doing research on what do Christians really believe. And I came across this website called, of all things, right? I came across the website of the Ontario Centre for Religious Tolerance. So it was a, they claim not to be sectarian or anything, but they seem to be really cool with the Unitarian Universalist. Yeah, yeah. Not surprising, I guess. Yeah, not with a name like that. Yeah, yeah. And I came across this passion saying that, okay, Roman Catholics believe that Holy Communion, or the consecrated host, literally and objectively, is the body of Christ. And I was thinking back by that description, it's like, I spent six years in Catholic school, and nobody's explained to it like me. Of course, they're going to say, okay, it's the body of Christ. I had to think about that. It's like, this is insane, right? So why would anyone believe this? Right? Which led to even more and more research, which led me eventually to reading a lot of, I actually spent a lot of time reading Catholic apologetics, especially those with regards to what did the Church Fathers teach about the Eucharist? And I would say it was pretty conclusive that, historically at least, the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox are closer to the, that's my conclusion anyway, to the historical belief than the evangelicals are. And especially how casually we have it first Sundays, sometimes. And that was the thing, right? And what happened next was, at that point, I think I attended the Church once or twice after that. But then one of the things that, well, I was also looking for an excuse not to attend church. Because I said that I wanted to get away from all of this stuff anyway. I told them, hey, this is nice guys. And I told them I like religious people and they all reflexively told me, we're not religious. We have a personal relationship. We have a relationship. We have a relationship, right? I'm not scared of the R word. I don't know if that's a good word. I'm not scared of the R word. I'm not scared of the R word. Which to me was kind of strange because, hey, what are you guys doing here anyway? You have your Bibles and you have your sermon and you have your worship. What the hell are you guys doing here? So anyway, what happened next? I couldn't explain why. So anyway, what happened next? I couldn't explain why. But then I started, there was a noon time daily mass. Look, this is strange. In our godless hidden university, there are actually two churches. There's inside the university, there's a Catholic church and a Protestant church right next to each other. So I started attending the noon time daily mass. Daily. Right? I was just sitting there at the back. There's a sitting there in the back view wondering what the hell is going on here. I started bringing a Bible with me and I had no clue why I was there. I just showed up there every single day. I think something inside me after reading so much about the Eucharist and also reading about Eucharistic miracles. Okay, so I might start believing this if I saw a real live Eucharistic miracle. Maybe. So I don't know. I don't know. But then I was really troubled by people coming in and out of the church. They seem to treat it very casually. They're just talking. I guess they'll just sit down and kneel and say some prayers. But then nobody seemed to be paying attention to the box in the back of the church. But then one day, okay, one day, one fateful day, I saw a girl come in. I knew who she was. She was my classmate. Who was your what? She entered the church, classmate. Oh, classmate. Okay. Classmate, yeah. She entered from the side of the church. The layout is hard to describe but needless to say, it was around like 20th century church. The altar is in the middle and the tabernacle where they keep the Eucharist is a few meters behind it. So I'd see people come in. They bow and genuflect to the altar, which means it's interesting. But then this girl came in from the side and then faced towards the direction of the tabernacle and genuflected and crossed herself. She said, oh, I know who this person is and she seems to know what she's doing. So I approached her. Said, hey, well, we know each other. I actually told her, I have no idea what I'm doing here. I'm in the church. I've been attending this daily mass for a few weeks and I'm holding this Bible and I have no clue why I'm here in the first place. Can you help me? She said, okay, sure. Can you just give me a few minutes to pray? The mass is about to start. I'll talk to you after mass. And then after mass, we were walking back to class. It was noon time. We had a 1 p.m. class, I think. She gave me this. Well, not this thing, but she gave me one of these. I don't know what that is. Any Roman Catholics will know what this is. It's a prayer card. It has the face and the name of a saint on it and a prayer that you can pray. Okay. Saint Josemaria Escriva, founder of Opus Dei. Okay. So she said, hey, you pray this and there are confessions every Wednesday after mass. That's all she said. Okay. Well, we were talking about other things, but with regards to how can you help me, that's all that she told me. And then we started talking about academic stuff. So I actually did show up the following Wednesday, a few minutes before mass, with this thing. And so I said, so I went to one of the pews at the very front and I knelt down and I said, and I prayed this prayer card. I said, okay, Saint Josemaria, I need your help. I want to know if Jesus is in that box. And if he is in that box, then I know the deal. So I haven't been to mass or confession in five years, but I have no idea how to go about it. So if Jesus is in the box, then I need him. That was the actual prayer that I said. And when you said you need him, what did that mean? I don't know. I don't know. I just said, I wanted the Eucharist, but I didn't know what that meant, but I was really drawn to it. And so at that point, I really felt like an idiot. What the hell is going on? I don't know. What am I doing? But I went in line for confession anyway after mass. I still don't know what the hell I was doing. When you were going every day in there, were you taking mass or not? Well, I was standing mass. I wasn't taking communion. I was just sitting there in the back. You were just sitting there in the back. You were watching. I was watching everybody. But I was raised Catholic enough to know that if you haven't been attending mass, then you shouldn't take communion either. And if you haven't been doing confession. Yeah. Right. So remember. Remember that prayer. I haven't been to confession in five years. I have no idea what to do here. So I fell in line for confession anyway. And a few minutes later, I heard somebody calling me. It was another one of my classmates. And then this guy said, hey, how are you? I mean, I see this guy every day. But we're not really close friends or anything like that. And he said, nice to see you here. I have something for you. And he brings out his wallet. And he brings out a little piece of paper that says how to go to confession. When he left, I was holding that piece of paper in my hand. I was looking at it. Looking up to the sky. Like looking at it. I was looking up to the sky. I was like, shit. I was like, OK, OK, OK. I get it. I get it. I get it. You win. So you went to confession. Yeah, I went to confession for the first time in five years. And I felt great joy. And I was sleeping out of the box when I came out. And I said, I'm home. Now talk to me about before the five years when you went to confession. Did you go to confession just as part of your family? Or why had you gone? You had gone to confession before? No. I went to Catholic school. So they usually have confession every month. And they said, OK, so they're going to suspend a class period just so people will go. So it was part of somebody else's program. This is the first time you went because as an adult, you decided to do it. Yes. That's right. And also the priest told me, hey, you know that guy who brought you here, right? Patrick was his name. You talk to him. And you tell him that you went to confession with Father Mike. And I want to see you again. And it turns out this guy was an Opus Dei priest. Interesting. So right there, at that particular moment, everything, shall we say, Roman Catholic came together. Communion of Saints, the confession, Eucharist, right? So again, I'm not making... This is my personal journey. I'm not making any apologetic saying that, OK, this is actually what works, but it works. Remember, I think it was Rachel Fulton Brown, this baptism work. Right? That's our view of the sacraments. They work. Whatever the heck work. That's the question. Whatever you mean by they work. Yeah. But it's more than some ceremonial thing we do because Jesus said we should do it. But here's the thing. I started attending the Opus Dei formation activities. Which if we ever put this out on YouTube, will probably mean that I'm... I'm not weirder than one of those Knights of Columbus guys. I'm secretly training to be an assassin monk or something like that. Anyway, it's what I tell the guys. So I'm an Opus Dei member. We normally don't say I'm an Opus Dei member because we don't consider it a brand. It's not a brand. We just consider it, OK, we're just regular Catholics who happen to be called by God to do this and that. I can see just from the Wikipedia article, I knew nothing of Opus Dei. I know some of the Protestant intramural fighting, but I don't know any of the Catholic or Orthodox intramural fighting, but I can certainly imagine they're there. I didn't know anything about Opus Dei or anything about it. So, well, in a nutshell, right, so again, I mentioned Jose Maria Escriva. So he was a Spanish priest who back in the early 20th century, around the time of the Spanish Civil War, he said... Because at the time, Catholicism, two-speed religion, he said, hey, if God wills that everyone be saved, then it cannot be the case that you have to be, yeah, that you necessarily have to be a Franciscan or a Dominican or a Jesuit or a Carmelite to become a saint. What if you were a carpenter or an engineer or something like that? You know, might sound very Calvinist, I guess. Yeah, yeah, yeah, very Calvinist. Right, right. So, but then, you know, he's a Catholic priest, so a Catholic priest, they're company men. I could go Calvinist. So he said, there has to be some way this can fit the tradition, right? And then, I guess at the time, he was... Because the competition between the various religious orders can get pretty intense for provocations, especially nowadays where there are not so many of them. So he started getting branded as a heretic. And so, like, hey, but since he wanted it to be legit, right, so he kept coming to Rome, and eventually in 1983, that was seven years after he died, he officially got recognized. Well, Opus Dei got recognition for various things, but said, we're not a religious order, really. Right, so here's the funny thing about Opus Dei, at least now, right? So the idea is Opus Dei is not going to be the only game in town where this is the case, but there are priests in Opus Dei, but they actually report to a layman director. So we have them because we need priests, because we need people to celebrate mass and we hear confessions and do anointing of the sick, right? But mainly, they're just another group of people who are supporting the overall mission, which is really bring people to Christ. That's really the name of the game. The goal for you is to go to Opus Dei. When I actually first started attending Opus Dei activities, he said, maybe I want to become a priest. They actually told me that, maybe not here, right? It does sound very Protestant in terms of emphasis. Yeah, so the emphasis is on lay people, lay spirituality, regular folks going out into the world, light of the world, salt of the earth sort of thing, right? So if it is too speed, it sort of flips the whole thing. By having a priest report to the lay person. Yeah, it's very interesting. I emailed you and we're talking now because of the Jordan Peterson stuff. Yeah, so it gets from Opus Dei to Jordan Peterson. Yeah, you know when I first started listening to the Jordan Peterson lectures, I said, is this guy Opus Dei? Really? Interesting. Yeah, and where do I start? I don't know. The first, you know, there's a lot of talk about Jordan Peterson, right? And well, how did you find him? The suspender video. Okay, what impressed you about the suspender video? Okay, he was there. He was very intense, but at the same time, he had himself together. While he was being attacked by, he seemed to me like a very integrated person. And which led me to what else does this guy have? Which led me to the biblical lectures. Which led me to the personality and maps of meaning lectures. Which led me to, you know, that's how it goes, right? Some of the things Jordan Peterson talks about, you know, the first thing that they told me when I started attending in the Opus Dei Center. So I said, okay, so every night you pray three Hail Marys, right? So, okay. The second thing they told me is every morning you get up at the same time, you set a time and you get up within the minute. And chapter one of 12 rules, Jordan Peterson says the first thing I tell my patients is you should set a time in the morning that you should get up and you get up at that same time. All right. And he said, make a schedule. And the way he, and in Opus Dei, they tell you to make a schedule. Of course, you do your regular activities. You fit in mass in there, you know, the usual Catholic stuff. Morning prayer, evening prayer, read the Gospels, pray the Rosary. But the analogy that- The daily office. Yeah, yeah. The analogy that they use is your schedule should fit your hand like a glove. And the analogy went over my head because in my country, not even the aristocrats wear gloves anymore. But then Jordan Peterson comes around and said, and says, you know, the problem with most people is their schedules, their tie around, it should be your friend, right? And it should be, and I, and I told the Opus Dei guys, hey, how about if we say it like this? And said, hey, that's nice. Where did you get it from? Oh, you listened to him too. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. He's, I find that young and old in Opus Dei, either they haven't heard of Jordan Peterson or they have heard of him and they like him. And the most, to me the most shocking thing that Jordan Peterson said, I mean, I'm shocked to hear it from someone who is not a Christian in a traditional sense. Why should you sort yourself out? Why should you nobly carry the burdens of the world, pick up your cross, so to speak? Because you're a divine son of God. Where does he get that from? Where does he get that from? In, I mean, I've been in Opus Dei for a few years now. And we, there's a lot of emphasis on, you know, what we call divine filiation. You know, you're, remember you're a son of God. So, so you should, you should act like it. Mm-hmm. You should act like it. There's a, there's a, an infinite dignity to that that one should live up to. One should be, you know, I mean, there's a lot of controversy in the, you know, in the Christian intramural fights when Catholics say co-redemption. Like, oh, there's only one Redeemer. Well, that's true. That's true. But, you know, the way that the Catholicism formulates it is when you become Christ-like, you literally start becoming more of Christ and less of you. And this is, this is from St. Paul, right? Yeah. That's right. So, which means all the good that you do comes from Christ. So, so that, that, that, that, that's where you're getting the co-redeeming stuff, right? So, so, so you, you may make the world better. You're, you know, and, and one, one, one reason why you got my attention, Paul, is, is when normally, regardless of what denomination, I haven't, I haven't heard very many pastors explain what they mean by heaven, right? And you say, okay, so what, what we mean by heaven is we actually want to reconcile heaven and earth, right? We'll put it back together, right? They did. I've since, since then, I've been to confession literally dozens of times and the, the prayer of absolution starts like this, right? So I think it goes something like, I've heard dozens, dozens of times that they have it memorized already. I'm not a priest, right? So something like, God the father of mercies, through the resurrection of your son, you've reconciled the world to yourself and sent the Holy Spirit among us for the forgiveness of sins. So when, when you go to confession, that's what you hear from the priest, which is in contrast to, and I'm not saying they're wrong, but, but it's, it's a contrast to the evangelical formulation. Uh, except Jesus is your personal Lord and savior. Yeah. Yeah. We believe that we accept that. Yes. But, but first of all, it's God that's moving, right? Certainly in my case, I had no clue what's going on. It's like, but then I said, at the end of the day, say, okay, you got me. Right. So, mm hmm. And second, it's not just you personally. It's not, it's not, it's not me and Jesus. It's, it's God, Jesus, the whole world with you in it. That's right. Right. Right. So, so if, um, I, I've, I've watched, uh, Bishop Baron has this, uh, uh, the pivotal players series, uh, on preview on this, on the word word on fire website. The first episode was on St. Francis of Assisi. And, and he, he entered the stories there about, about, uh, Francis, uh, preaching to the birds and, and, and, uh, and, and the story about that wolf that was terrorizing the town. He went out the, the, of the walls to, to talk to the wolf and brought it back and okay. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. You, you, you guys feed the wolf and he's not going to bother you. That, that, that is the sort of thing, right? Right. You know, we, we rebel against God, nature rebels against us. That's right. Right. Right. Very few pastors put it that way. I mean, so what do you mean by heaven? And the people have this vision of this fluffy cloud heaven with, with angels in white robes playing harps. Well, no, heaven looks more like this. That's right. Right. So, so, so it looks like this, right? So this is, this is my home office. It sort of looks like that, except somehow without all of the bad stuff. So, so, uh, and, and then I was thinking, this is, it took me so many years to realize that, and, and say, this is what, you know, you read the gospels, you read the rest of the scripture and there are, you know, there are cities and there are banquets and like, this is, this, this is not Nirvana, right? This is not Nirvana. This is not annihilation, right? I don't, I don't think there are cities and banquets in Nirvana because there's no desire. Right. Right. So, so that, gosh, I, and, and I'm still shocked that I am married and have kids. Why? Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean, it's just, it's just something that, you know, I wake up, I wake up in the morning and I'm always grateful for it. Oh, and, and, and, and, and, and they couldn't imagine because it's, you know, um, which brings me to the topic of vocation, right? And we, we, uh, Christians in the modern world sort of, you really can't help it, right? We live in modernity. So we sort of, it comes to us by osmosis, whether we like it or not. That's right. You know, and, and, you know, uh, you, you, you guys out there. So, so for, for those who may be watching this on YouTube, the Benedict option guys and stuff, you know, you're doing great stuff. Um, but I don't really have an opinion on the Benedict option per se, you know, the, uh, rod, rod, rod, rod, and he's, uh, yeah, seeing, but you know, we, we live in a particular context and, and, and, and Catholics and Orthodox particularly should be able to understand this. We live in an historical context and just cannot avoid thinking so certain ways, right? We ask our kids, right? So I think we still have 15 minutes, right? So I like, I like, I need about five minutes in between. So, yeah. Yeah. So we, we ask our kids, what do you want to be when you grow up? Yeah. Which is not, which is not, it's not a bad question to ask, but we'll make it the question to ask, right? Right. Which is, which is the wrong, which is the wrong question to ask. Yeah. Which is the wrong top question. Yes. The top question is this. Who am I? What am I here for? Right. Right. So, and, and, and, uh, in, in the old, in the old school, uh, Catholic catechisms that comes right after who is God. Right. So, so, so you, but that's the question that needs to be asked really. So what, what are you for? Who are you? What are you for? And then the who am I is like a good heurist, or not the who am I, what do I want is sort of a good heuristic because as Jordan Peterson says, right, there's some problems out there that seem to attract you. Right. Right. And that may be because it's inviting you to come and address it. It, you know, you know, and the, the, the problem with what do you want to be when you grow up as a top question is it doesn't work. It doesn't work. Uh, like I want to be, I don't know, I want to be a doctor, I want to be a lawyer, I want to be an investment banker. And, and then people get there, they're successful, they're at the top of their game, they make lots of money, they're miserable. Right. The, the, there's an article in the New York Times about this recently. Well, it is successful and miserable. I'm not sure if you've seen it. No, I haven't. Yeah. I'll, I'll, I guess I'll email it. Yeah, send it to me. Yeah. And the, the author, I forgot who it was. And it was a few months ago. Said that actually I know of successful people who are happy, but these are the successful people. The successful people who are happy are those who failed in some way. They, they, they, they attended the prestigious school. They got out of there and they didn't land the job at Goldman Sachs or they didn't land the job at Apple, you know, interest. So they had to figure out what they needed to do. And that's what made them happy. Right. Because here's the problem. When, when we make it about what do we want, we have no idea what we want. I thought I wanted the Eucharistic miracle. It turns out I just wanted to go to confession. Hmm. Right. And God knew that. God, God, God, God knew that. And he set up the perfect trap, right? Set up the perfect trap to, to, to, to get me into confession. Right. I didn't, maybe if I really wanted the Eucharistic miracle, he would have given it to me. You don't test God, you know, he, he does whatever the heck he wants. Yes, he does. Right. Yes, he does. But it turns out I, I wanted this, some, some, some grand gesture, some, some, some spectacular miracle. It turns out they didn't want it. Yeah. So I wanted it, right. Yeah. And I didn't imagine, it's not that they didn't want to get married and have kids. I didn't, just didn't cross my mind. Hmm. Right. But, but, but now I'm here and it's, you know, and people keep asking me, this is a very, I guess it's a very telling question. I've been asked this many times now. Don't you ever get tired? People ask me that. Right. Don't you ever get tired of, you know, not getting enough sleep, you know, picking up toys, changing diapers? I guess that's what they mean by, by. Well, the short literal answer to that is, yes, I do get tired of it. Yeah. But to me, it's like, why are you asking me the question? You know, there are articles on Buzzfeed that say, Hey parents, you're not going to get enough sleep until your kids are six years old. Yeah, I know. But you know, everything is worthwhile in this world, you know, because we're, we're outside the garden. So it's just, it's just original sin. It's just an effect of the fall. Everything is going to be difficult and tedious. Right. That doesn't make it. You can carry your cross or not. Right. Either way you die. That's right. That's right. Exactly right. Either way you die. But you can die in a noble way and expect the resurrection. Or you can just die. I think I know what I'd pick at this point. Right. Well, you're, you're living out what you pick. Yeah. And, and I didn't think I'd pick it. No, that's the funny thing. That's really, that's really the funny thing. I didn't think I'd pick it. Yeah. That's, that is, you know, that, that, that, that's, that's vocation really. I mean, that's what, you know, you know, I, I watch your videos and you say that, Hey, I, I didn't choose to have you say, okay. So Paul Van der Kley didn't choose to have people knock on his door and say, Hey, I think I want, I think I'm interested in the Bible now because Jordan Peterson's been talking about it. Yeah. Yeah. You and I, and all of the other people that I know in Opus A are asking the same question. What the hell is going on with this Jordan Peterson guy? Yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. And for me, and I know a lot of Christians are really anxious about Peterson, whether he's a Christian or not. I'm not really, I mean, I pray for him obviously, but to me, the case of Jordan Peterson is really straightforward. He has all of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, except faith has been withheld from him somehow. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. Because the faith is a gift of the Holy Spirit, right? And if God doesn't give it to you, well, you're not going to have it, right? It's, you know, it's, it's what in, in the Catholic formulation, we call that the theological virtue comes from God. So for whatever purposes that it serves him, the Holy Spirit did not give Jordan Peterson faith yet. Because I don't think he's a bad person, right? He's a, I don't know. Yeah. He's, he's, he's, he's somewhere between, you know, I mean, S. O. Riley calls him noble pagan. Yeah. I think, or I've, Jonathan Padjo calls him a heretic. Yes. I think he is both of those. Yeah. Yeah. Right. So I think it's both of those. But really, if, and, and, and I think folks like Vox, they have got it wrong, right? So I mean, Jordan Peterson is not saying things in the exact formula that you want, want him to say things. Right. And then he said, that doesn't mean he's preaching a false gospel. I mean, you, you, you test him, you just go test him. Right. So, and, and Jordan Peterson, so far, at least he, he's being tested. And what's, what are the fruits? You know, I, I was suicidal and now, you know, I'm, I'm recovering. Right. I didn't have a job and, and, and now I, and six months ago, I got the job and I just got a promotion. I haven't been talking to my mom in five years and I'm talking to my mom. So I'm, I've been, you know, I, I'm in the, I'm, I would say I'm in the 25% of, of, you know, the Jordan Peterson says, okay, the people I talked to 75%, thank you very much for, because of the things that I just mentioned. Right. And 25% are those folks. I put myself in 25% who I never knew how to explain this, but you, you gave me the words to, to be able to explain it. Right. So, so you said you couldn't explain it, but you have, I mean, you've told your story. Yeah, I have, I have. Yeah. And, and, and let's say Opus Dei helped me sort myself out. Yeah. Jordan Peterson gave me the way on how to articulate that. Yeah. Which I, which I think is why a lot of people, a lot of my friends in Opus Dei seem to like him. Yeah. I, I, I think that is the reason why. Yeah. Right. So because, because some other Christians, they're kind of leader of him, like this is the, that, that weird psychologist who talks about this and that. Right. Yeah. But, but Opus Dei people, they seem to like him. And I actually gave a short talk, precisely about vocation, really, to, in an Opus Dei retreat for young people, right. This is, this were universities students. And I asked them, who among you here has heard of Dr. Jordan Peterson? Something like a sort of the hands went up. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So it's astounding. Yeah. Yeah. Has he been to the Philippines at all yet? No, I don't think so. I don't think he's any, he's been anywhere near here. And he doesn't seem to be as big here as he is in, in the US and Europe. Yeah. I think it's also maybe because of the cultural context. It's like I've heard you mention that in the Dominican Republic, I haven't heard of a single suicide among those Haitian immigrants. Yeah. Right now, the, the, the, we're getting affluent. I'm certainly way more affluent than my parents were. Yeah. And I'm also seeing in my generation, the suicide rate go up. Interesting. Yeah. So, so maybe that's where Jordan Peterson uh, uh, fans. Where he'll find his audience. Yeah. Well, that's where he'll find his audience among the younger set. Yep. Yep. Well, Carlos, I have to wrap this up because as you can see, the next guy popped in the room because I forgot to lock the room again. Yeah. No problem. And but this is delightful. Thank you so much for sharing your story with me. You're welcome. And thanks for, you know, I want to schedule another talk. I want to talk, I haven't gotten around to the topic of uh, fatherhood. Okay. You know, I, I, it's something I want to talk about because it's just been, you know, it's just been, it was so much of a joy and also Jordan Peterson has helped me a lot with it. Chapter five is my favorite in 12 rules. Right. So, and I think it's another talk. You just gotta, it's gotta get in the queue and I'll be gone for a couple of weeks. So the, the spots are going to be, everything's going to look full for a while, but then once I'm back in the swing of things, things will open up again. So, yeah, no, no, no, no problems. And you can go ahead and post this. I don't mind this. All right, I will do it. Probably I'm kind of queuing them up for when I'm on vacation so that I, my channel isn't empty when I'm not making videos for myself. So it'll probably be, but yeah, that, that, that's fine. You know, I can only watch maybe three or four hours a week. So not everybody has that much time, but I got to run. So Carlos again, thank you so much. I got to take my breakfast and coffee now. Okay. Take care. Thank you so much, Paul. Have a good morning. Yep. Talk soon.