https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZCLLGAhM1qo

 Hi, this is Paul. I did a teaser on my series on abolition of man, and I want to do some orientation, because I think if we understand some things about how secularity works and its limitations, in fact Sam Harris demands these limitations more stridently than anyone in the course of his conversations with Jordan Peterson, I think we can better understand why C.S. Lewis makes the choices he makes, and why I think in fact Peterson and Lewis have a lot in common, but Peterson hasn't yet gotten to where Lewis is. Let's take a look at that. Now some basic orientation, and orientation is a very basic thing. There's up, and there's down, and there's before, and there's after. So there's above, up, heaven, or the heavens, and there's below, down, earth, down here at the ground. Now up on the top in a sense is from above is reason, and rationality, or rationalism. From below is empiricism. Now beginning obviously is the source where things come from. There's time and process in the middle, and then there's end, or ends, or destination, or telos. This is your basic orientation, up, down, before, after. So those are those are two axes that we're going to work with. Now I want us to again begin Vancouver 1, because in many ways the first few minutes of the first conversation were some of the best, because here Peterson lays out orientation, and establishes agreements that there are. Now again, as we're going to see very much in this video, Peterson has a project, and it's an important project. And just as Mr. Plinkett says, you might not be aware of it, but your brain knows your your the the other the other elements of your consciousness committee know that Peterson is doing something important, and this is why Peterson is having such a dramatic impact on people, because he's actually working on problems that are very deep and very important that we are aware of. Now where we're aware of it, I'm going to sound Jungian, but in our I would say in our collective unconscious, we're aware of these things. Now Christians, don't panic Jungians. Moderate your excitement for me to use this term, but it's a good term in terms of understanding, we can use zeitgeist, understanding the zeitgeist, understanding why Peterson has had such a dramatic impact in the community that's listening to him and paying attention to him. It doesn't have anything to do with not nothing to do with, but it's not primarily political. It's primarily philosophical and religious, and Peterson has exposed, and I think in some ways for secularists is making progress in the collective unconscious, helping them to understand what is going on. And Peterson in many ways is marking the end of Sam Harris and his tribe in terms of what they believe, and he's just simply exposing what the philosophers exposed at the beginning of the 20th century. And here's the thing, these things move slowly. They move, they take multiple generations to move, and we're actually within a process that has been going on for for at least 500 years. So those of you who think that these things turn in a year or two, no, they take multiple lifetimes to move. So let's, we're going to listen carefully to the beginning of this, and I want you to pay careful attention to orientation and the boundaries of the secular. So the first thing is, I think, I think that partly what's driving you, if this is accurate, is that you want to ground a structure of ethics in something solid. And there's two. Now pay attention. Solid is a metaphor here, right? We're, and metaphorical language, look at Ian McGilchrist and meaning, we only understand things when we can connect them to our physical reality. And this is very much the same for right now, think club and rationality rules are going back and forth, and it's hilarious to watch. But it's, unless we can, look at all our language, look at all the language the materialists use. You want to ground it in something solid. There's two things you want to avoid, two catastrophes, let's say. One is the catastrophe that you identified with religious fundamentalism, and the other is the catastrophe that's associated with moral relativism. Okay, I'm gonna, what I'm gonna do is I'm just gonna switch back and forth with the PowerPoint. So the first priority is objective value. Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein want to ground things in, they want to have an objective value. They want moral realism. They want this stuff to be as concrete as, hang on, I gotta close my screen because there are mosquitoes out here. They want to ground these things. They want these things to be as real as the matter in our hands, as the stuff in this chair. Sam Harris wants a morally real world. Amen. I'm with you, Sam. I'm with you. So, so is Peterson. Sam Harris fears religious dogmatism. All right, Sam, we understand. We all, you know, you're a little neurotic in that, but who am I to judge? And he wants to avoid relativism. We're going to talk about that. Is that, is that reasonable? Yeah, that's good. Okay, good, good. Okay. Well, no, but this, okay, so it's crucially, it's crucially important that we get this right. Now, so, and that's something that I think we really agree on because I've conceptualized that slightly different than you and that might be relevant, but I think of that as a pathology of order and a pathology of chaos. So the terminology is slightly different, but I think we're working on the same axis. Okay. And again, this is what we expect from Peterson. He conceptualizes it as, as chaos and order and chaos is about change and potential and, and chaos is anti-dogmatism. If you've got too much dogmatism in your system, you need some, you need some chaos to shake it up. And order is about structure and endurance and anti-relativism. So if you've got too much chaos in your system, you need some order to tighten things up and 12 rules for life and antidote for chaos. And of course, these things tie into a lot of different things for Peterson, some of which get us, gets them in trouble. But, but now pay attention. We're looking at orientation here. We're looking at there's not a lot of orientation in in either of the schemes so far, but pay attention to time because especially in Peterson's conceptualization here, which is a bit richer. Again, what we see again and again in these talks is that Sam is gripped by fear. All right. He is afraid of some things and and Sam is in a sense a philosophical neurotic. Because he is he is obsessed and perhaps possessed by his fears. And so he's always running away from them. So he's running away from religious dogmatism. We hear plenty that he doesn't like that. And he's running away from relativism because that's bad too. Peterson ironically has a much more positive conceptualization here. There are two, there are two things that are not goods in themselves, but well, they're not the ultimate good. Order isn't the ultimate good. Chaos isn't the ultimate good. But they are they are goods and there are problems with them. And that's what Peterson notes. The good thing about chaos is it brings change and potential and can shake up dogmatisms. And the good thing about order is it gives structure and endurance through time. In fact order is resistant to decay. Individuals, and this is kind of the sense, and this is one thing Peterson has never noted, but if you take this Oz Guinness quote, without individuals nothing happens. Without institution nothing lasts. And in a sense you can place individuals and institutions on the on Peterson's chaos order grid. Because individuals are a bit more chaotic. Institutions are a bit more orderly and we need them both. Anyway, let's keep going. So so so that's the first thing and then in order to do that it seems to me that's your first priority. And then maybe your second priority is something like, you know, you see undue suffering in the world. Plenty of it. And you would think that things would be better if that wasn't the case. And that this morality, whatever it's going to be, is at least going to part ground itself in part on the presupposition that the less undue suffering in the world the better. Is that is that also? Okay. So the second priority, the first priority is objective value. That's what they're looking for. The second priority is suffering. There is undue suffering in the world. The grounded order will reduce undue suffering. The less the better. Now implicit in this, let's let's let's expose that which is implicit. Is that there exists an order objectively. Again, we want to be moral realists and you're going to hear Sam make this point again and again and again. That this exists now right away for a materialist. You're already being exposed to the weaknesses of that platform. Because morality doesn't exist. He wants to say there's an objective order, an objective moral order that's exist as real as this chair. But by virtue of his system the chair is foundational and any let's say moral abstract moral values struggle to exist. In a materialist system, you would have to ask what is their substance? What what what and and actually if you go back through the history of philosophy and the history of religion substance comes into the conversation a lot because what what is this thing that is moral order? Now Peterson is going to Peterson's system in terms of his his comparison with Sam. Sam says Peterson begins Maps of Meaning by saying you can think of the world in two ways. One as a place of objects and the other as a form for action. There is way more possibility of objective value imagining the world as a form for action because values are all about actions and choices and choices are also actions. And so right away Sam is bumping in to the poverty of his philosophical commitments. He you are really hard stressed and you'll see this throughout the four talks. You are really hard pressed to find a substance and I'm using that word theoretically to find a substance upon which you can construct or identify or establish or derive objective value in a materialist world. Now those are the limitations of asserting that reality is primarily material and actions are secondary because actions and especially choices require mind and you're a long way from the big bang once you get to mind. And so right away then you have time in the mix because again Sam Harris's imagination is of a monarchical order which tends to be sterile outside of time. And so there are there are real issues. The poverty of materialism is exposed by Sam's need for objective moral value and there are real issues as to whether this philosophical system can actually accommodate objective value. Now Peterson begins with a forum for action which already is an improvement on a world of objects because implicit in it is the capacity for choice and action and better or worse within it, which is obviously what objective value is going to be about. Objective value says doing this is better. Feeding the homeless is morally better than killing the Jews, two extreme examples. Kissing your spouse is better than beating your spouse. Extreme but less extreme. Moral that it is difficult to conceive of moral values apart from a philosophical system or a worldview that from its beginning appreciates action. And as my friend in South Africa, I'll just call him that because he lives in South Africa, as my friend in South Africa notes and as note in the network notes, Gilchrist talks about Sam Harris saying he is a world of nouns and his world of nouns has trouble with verbs. Objective value is all about verbs. It's all about action. It's all about choices. Okay, that's where you get your hierarchies. So second priority is there's undue suffering in the world. The grounded order will reduce undue suffering the less the better. And implicit in this is that there exists an order objectively. All right, we just finished talking about that. That there are that we are failing to live by it or achieve it. Sam Harris says this again again, the world could be a better place if we lived by this moral order, if we employed reason in the space for objects and used reason to achieve a better world. And in a minute, we're going to see how reason functions for Harris and where reason comes from. Again, we're using orientation. If you think about empiricism versus rationalism, rationalism is from above. Via Plato, it stands above the decay and particularities and chaos of this lower empirical world. So reason is from above, stuff is from below. That's built into this and we're now we don't lose these conversations. That changes in mind and culture and action can achieve this. That this is something we can do in a space that not only has objects, but again, I think Peterson has a better conception in a form for action. Because this change, part of the problem with the space of objects, is it's sterile. It's a clean room. It's outside of time. Now the difficulty with outside of time is that there are really two modes of that. One is the moment. Moments are outside of time, but there's also eternity. Now eternity is bigger than moments because eternity endures. Moments are just moments. But this is, Peterson is trying to establish, you know, get on the same page as Sam. And now Sam's can have a little rebuttal here, but it's a small one. Reasonable? Yeah, I would just add to that the positive side of the continuum as well. So as you know, the phrase I use or the word I use for this is well-being. And I know from having, I don't think we spoke about this on my podcast, but from having seen you in other interviews, I think you think that phrase doesn't capture everything one could reasonably want. But I think it does. I mean, I just, you know, it's an elastic suitcase term for reason and it's actually, in reading your book, I realize there's a point of contact here because you use the word being, capital B being, as though it were imbued with significant gravitas. So for me, and I agree with you, that's an appropriate use of being. And for me, well-being is simply just the positive side of being. You know, there's the negative side, the suffering we want to mitigate. But I think however good consciousness can be in this universe that well-being for me subsumes all of those possibilities. Okay. So Sam says, well, your conception is a little negative. We want the positive. We want well-being and an elastic suitcase term for reason. So this is where the conversation with Lewis is going to get very interesting because Lewis is not only a Christian, but he's also a Platonist. And that gets complicated. Now, Lewis is by no means the first Christian Platonist. Augustine was a Christian Neo-Platonist. Many of the church fathers were Platonists. So the fact that Lewis is a classicist, you know, doesn't make this unexpected, but there are going to be consequences to Lewis's Platonism. One of the upsides is that in many ways Lewis and Harris should be able to speak together because I would say that as we go through Lewis and the abolition of man, Lewis is going to expose Harris as really a very poor rationalist. Harris's rationalism is really second rate and because Lewis is is far more rational than Harris and far more consistently rational and I think has a better understanding about what rationality actually is. So so Harris wants to say, okay, yeah, it's suffering, but well-being is an elastic suitcase term for reason. Keep that phrase in mind because remember reason comes from above. I want to look at the positive side of being and he's trying to connect up with with Jordan Peterson's Heideggerian use of being capital B. And and that's very complex in terms of Peterson, in terms of Heidegger and and this this phenomenological world that is at hand. However good consciousness can be in this universe, well-being subsumes that. Okay, so well-being for for Harris is in a sense his kingdom of heaven term. All right, so so this is what we're shooting for. But now implicit in this and now again, we're going to bump into the limitations of Harris's philosophical worldview is that Harris likes to bring in consciousness, but consciousness lives in the now, okay, and and as I said before, there's there's two aspects. There's the now and there's eternity and and consciousness lives in the now and so Harris is really trying to get at well-being and consciousness in the now and also pay attention to Sam Harris's limitations in this universe. He's a materialist. So there's his frame. So not only does does action and objective value struggle to live in a materialist universe because there really isn't philosophically a way to house it naturally as there is even in Jordan Peterson's form for action conception. So that's a struggle, but but you've got all the limitations of this universe and you've got the limitations of now. So I might be having a great day and the sun might be shining and and you know, I'm getting along my relationships are really feeling fruitful and my I put out a video and it got 10,000 views and on and on and on and on right there in that moment in that now I am feeling the well-being, but down here below in this universe that well-being is threatened. It's threatened by age. I'm growing older. There's only limited number of moments I can have that my 80 year old body or I'm not 80 I'm 55, but my you know 80 90 year old body can achieve and so what we tend to see in this and we're going to get into NT Wright's epicurean vision what we tend to see are the succession of of moments and so in this world view not only do you have a bias towards objects in space which has limited capacity for objective value. You've also got limitations in this universe of how good can well-being actually get because my well-being is going to be limited to the experiences I can derive in succession of moments in this world now. All right. So I focused on the suffering element. I think as I've done in my own work because I actually think it's easier to zero in on in some sense like I think it's easier for people and I think you lay out the argument in the moral landscape kind of like this. I think it's easier perhaps to gain initial agreement between people on what might constitute a generalized ethic to concentrate on what we don't want. I'm not saying that what we do want is unimportant, but it seems to me to be harder to get a grip on. We don't want Auschwitz. We don't want the Gulag Archipelago. So and and there are and those and I would add to just closing the door to moral relativism here those who do want Auschwitz are wrong to want Auschwitz. I mean it's obviously Auschwitz only. Okay those who do want Auschwitz are wrong. Okay he wants to be a moral realist. He wants to say well what does he want to say? Well Auschwitz and the Gulag. Those who do want these things are wrong. These are objective values that now we're going to bump into the edges of his phil the capacity of his philosophical system. What these are that these are wrong in any worldview within this universe of objective value. Okay that they are wrong. They've always been wrong. They're always going to be wrong. There are things about them that make them always wrong. You cannot have a justifiable conception within the objective values of this universe. Now remember he's a materialist so this is this is all got to come after the Big Bang. This has all got to be a result of the Big Bang. This has to be all a result of physics. Go back and look at Matt Dillahunty's conversation with Jordan Peterson. The laws of physics are the ground of these objective values. Now again it's real difficulty being able to find how your space for objects can have the capacity for this philosophically and Peterson sees this problem clearly. In fact this this has been Peterson's life work. Sam Harris I don't think fully appreciates the magnitude of that problem but again I think consciously he might not see it but out there in the zeitgeist out there in the collective unconscious of the now people are seeing it and that's why Peterson is gaining listeners. That's why Sam Harris people are beginning to say something's wrong. I don't know what to do with it. I don't know where to go with it but I can sense something's wrong and I'm slowly my my motivational structures are bringing me to listen to more Jordan Peterson. They're bringing me to think about religion. They're they're bringing me to ask questions. Now remember this is about orientation. There's up above heaven. The heavens rationality is up there. There's down below earth empiricism stuff. It's all down here. There's the beginning the source where things come from. There's time and process in the middle and then there's the end ends destination telos which is Greek where things go. Now secularism let's talk about secularism sources and ends. Secular demands nothing from heaven and throughout the courses of these talks Sam Harris is going to reiterate this ad nauseam. No books from above. No revelation from heaven. That's out. That's out. I won't tolerate it. I will walk off the stage. I will mock you. I have made it my life's work to ban these things and in many ways he's in keeping with what western society has done. Western society has said you can have your religion but you must keep it private out here in the public sphere. We will only allow allow what allow that which well it's actually three rooms the source. We can go back in history and look at Darwin. We can look at matter from below and we'll take reason from above. We won't take revelation. We'll take reason. Okay reason does come from above. So we have before and below. We can have historical knowledge although it's tough. We can have empirical knowledge from below. Science. So science in a sense is timeless. Not really but we want to imagine that. Rupert Sheldrake comes along and says yeah but you know those variables they keep moving and gravity isn't quite spaceless. So we know that physics isn't quite as timeless and stable as we might like it to be but good enough. We'll go with the pragmatics. Good enough. We can have historical knowledge and that's the point that N.T. Wright makes. If you go back a couple videos about my video from N.T. Wright in his first Gifford lecture he says hey if you're going to do natural theology you're going to have to do natural theology. You're going to have to do natural theology. That includes history. So you can talk about Jesus and you can look at Jesus from a historical perspective and that has been done now within secularism for quite a long time. People coming up with varying answers about the historicity of Jesus so on and so forth. That's part of the reason why in conversation the historicity of the resurrection still keeps coming up because again it's from below and what is permissible in the public square is that which is historical that which is empirical and even though we don't like to think of it from above reason. All right and that's kind of how we orient our universe. The big missing piece however in secularism are ends our destination because well here's what here's what we say about it. In secularity in the materialist frame there is an end but it's not a terribly satisfying one and this is where the simulation conversation comes in because part of the reason I think the collective unconscious is being drawn to the simulation is because it isn't out from the ends that we fear because we are looking at we are looking at well what are the great filters nuclear war well we got through the Cuban missile crisis climate change are we going to get through this maybe maybe not but there is an end we can't get through and that's the final filter and it will come and the whole universe will get there and so part of us we don't like to die part of us we have eternity in our hearts book of ecclesiastes part of us wants to imagine well if this is a simulation then just like Walt Mossberg said to Elon Musk at the at the code conference or recode then we can maybe be rebooted so this is the this is the problem of ends in secularism it comes from the ends come from the future and our future in materialism well we know what it is and it's nothing individually it's nothing in terms of the universe it's nothing it's just different time frames that is why we have a meaning problem in materialism because meaning is almost always rooted in the future mean it the future pulls us into it and that's what gives it purpose when you're working for a paycheck the paycheck which is in the future is what you're working towards that's what gives you meaning here's an old pastor story two people working identical terrible jobs one person works for minimum wage the other person is going to get a million dollars at the end of the year what are the two sense what are the two experiences of conscious well-being during the same miserable job the person working minimum wage is depressed because at the end of the year they're just going to survive maybe the person who's going to get a million dollars is saying i'm going to grind through this i'm going to work hard on this but there is meaning and purpose to this and at the end of this i'm going to get my million dollars and this is the problem of secularism and ends is that once you have once your only end is death the big sleep or the universal death meaning has trouble and this is why i had in my i'm adding slides as i go that's part of the reason why i'm pausing because i'm very pressed for time so if there's no future meaning pulling us to it this is why suddenly meaning has to be found as an experience as an emotional experience within the conscious now and this is why the anti-religious materialists keep saying this and if you saw my teaser on cs lewis destroys sam harris i know some of you didn't like the thumbnail it was a joke of course it's a joke cs lewis has been dead since 1963 but this is why you will hear materialists keep lodging well-being including sam harris as fundamentally an emotional experience within a moment so i don't need god to experience wonder and meaning but what that does implicitly is relocate it from something which actually has substance something which actually has ontology within a form for action well in terms of materialist well how can you have it well it has to be an emotion that is dependent upon a physical brain able to generate it that's the only way to get there from that philosophical system and what that does is it reduces wonder and meaning into emotions and as you already know from the teaser cs lewis is going to go right at that and he's going to say if that's the case you're fundamentally a relativist because you can get there any old way you want okay there's another little teaser for the abolition of man because this is inherent in the philosophical system and cs lewis knows it because he used to be a materialist atheist and he says part of the reason i gave it up is because i want there to be a real world full of meaning and beauty and when i look at the waterfall and say it's sublime i'm seeing something i'm not just talking about my emotional experience a little more teaser for you let's talk a little bit about hagel there's a real strong hagalian in my comment section that comes in now and then interesting guy hagel in the future in the 20th century 20th century was a was a was a century possessed by hagel there are three humanist 20th century progressivisms now harari makes this point in his books there are three humanist 20th century progressivisms there's material racial progressivism which is nazism the nazis believe that the story of humanity is a materialist racial story of progress and that's why you could exterminate not just the jews but the slavs and others and and why exterminating them why killing them why destroying their bodies and sterilizing them and cutting them off in a darwinian fashion had for them metaphysical benefits you know if you if you read bloodlands by timothy sneider and you read so often how counterproductive you know nazi germany could have done a lot better in the war if they didn't have this religious bias of materialist racial progress they they expended a huge amount of resources to do this work well why well the same reason that ancients built temples this was they were furthering the cause that they truly believed in it was their religion that they were going to make the world better because the human story is one of racial progress and that of course is tied to darwinism and and spencer and so that's part of what they were working out and nicha you know all of those have ties into nazi ideology that's one of the progressivisms but again here you have an end in mind well what is that end that end is racial purity second 20th century humanism progressive humanistic marxism material social economic process marx said the history of the world following hagel hagel is deeply into all these three things here hagel says well the story of the world is a materialist progress towards economic equality and social equality and labor equality that is the story of the human race and the soviets imagined this story was inevitable when joseph stalin did what was pragmatically disastrous and cost again read timothy snider's bloodlands when joseph snut stalin starved the ukraine and belarus and peterson talks about this a lot when he starved them when he did what was crazy in terms of food production he did it because you had to instill the dogma upon the world and stalin again was was just as much a now sam harris might you sam harris folks you might be hearing points here stalin acted religiously in that well we're going to deny the evidence that these kulaks are actually growing great food and that all this tremendous misery well you got to break some eggs and so we're going to starve these people we're going to reorganize these farms we're going to reorganize the world because our ideology says this is the wave of the future the future is pulling us into it so racial purity pulled the nazis into auschwitz labor utopia social utopia economic equality social equality utopia social utopia economic equality pulled the soviets into the starvation in the ukraine and belarus because that was what they needed to do it's just as religious as someone from the jehovah's witnesses not getting a blood transfusion okay and sam harris to a degree rightly says this is religious now peterson's going to nuance this and harris's and weinstein's going to nuance that but but yeah that's religious but you have to when you're using religious then you can't on one hand say religious is only about supernatural dogmas from above but over here religious includes the soviets who denied supernatural dogmas from above you have to be consistent with your definition of the world religion but there are three 20th century humanist progressivisms and the third one is the one in the west secularized christian post millennial progress and if you listen to anti-right's skifford lecture one anti-right is going into that because that was what had developed in the west in the english-speaking world in america in britain to a degree in france and germany and in the other countries of europe that we are in the millennial we are in the millennium christianity is triumphing and this had been going on in europe for a couple of hundred years and n.t. right walks through that i think what's really clever about what n.t. right does is notice the connection with epicureanism so so this has lately now after the cold war after we recruited god to help fight the nazis and then the soviets and then we were attacked by islamic fundamentalism that flipped sam harris and now we're anti-religious using the small definition of religion okay and but what has happened to the progressivism what has happened to this secularized christian post millennial progressivism well it's morphed now since our struggle with islamic terrorism it's morphed now into an epicurean progressivism and now n.t. right again notes that this progressivism is not greek you can't get this from epicurus because remember the greeks and their timelessness well they're going to live in the moment and they're going to experience they're going to experience pleasure the kingdom of god in a sense comes in into all these little epicurean communes and go on to youtube and look up epicureanism and there's some really good youtubes out there explaining what it is and to your right notes that this ethos of well-being which is basically harris gets fused with a progressionism and harris is right there in this harris believes that we can employ reason from above with what we know from the past and darwin and what we see in the stuff of earth and empiricism and we can achieve greater well-being in the world now it's severely limited because it's limited to the individual once i die no more well-being it's just nothing and once the universe dies no more well-being it's just nothing but until then let's be epicurians and let's add some progressivism that we bring in from christianity and say it can get better from christianity and from hagel who also gets it from christianity and this is dominant in the west right now now progressivists imply ends as i've been saying nazi end is progressive racial purity marxist end is economic social equality progressive epicurean end is happiness equality now pay attention in our cultural conversations we are even look at the cavanoff ford thing going on in washington what possesses us when we listen to dr ford we go into that moment and feel her terror now whatever happened in that situation whatever 17 year old was on top of her grinding on her covering her mouth her experience of fear of being raped was real this sucks us in why because we are looking for happiness equality and it's got to be in consciousness and it's got to be in the moment more conscious than flesh which is race or matter which is marx and this is what makes sam harris interesting to jordan peterson i think jonathan peugeot has that right because harris much more has the zeitgeist at least i think the zeitgeist that is beginning to decline but the zeitgeist that what is most important is happiness equality and now what sam harris wants to do is is be the well-being evangelist that we can produce happiness equality with reason out into the world and make the world a better place and and we will not have matter equality or material equality you know it's not it's not um it's not bernie sanders but there's a there's a relationship there because we say well if you have more material equality you'll have more happiness equality because of course less material equality poverty can lead to unhappiness but material doesn't necessarily scale up so we're going to be smarter with our happiness studies and we want happiness equality this is sam harris's project but how will you ground it that's the struggle so here we have the advantage of religious narratives because stories have beginnings and endings and you see it in the movies there's happily ever after once upon a time to happily ever after you have source once upon a time and you have ending happily ever after and that ending gives you your meaning your telos your goal your purpose and as we've said already materialism has a real problem knowing how to locate objective value and it also has a real problem with ending because there is no happy ending it's just nothing secularists and post-moderns are skeptical they come from have are skeptical about religious narratives because they come from heaven now reason will take from above but not revelation all right also from heaven comes authority now authority comes from rk which is source and hierarchy status on the hierarchy and authority again these are religious narratives they impose meaning on matter ends eschatology pulls history towards it it has gravity in a sense and darwin can only push so now we're looking at push and pull eschatology or ends or future pulls us towards it the person who is working this horrible job because at the end of the year they're going to get a million dollars they have meaning they have well-being it's the future of their million dollars is pulling them towards them darwin can only push and and this is where we begin to see the poverty of a system that can only rely on darwin now natural theology is in a sense a tower of babel project and and if you've listened to my past videos you know that reason is like a chain or reason is like a tower and and in that sense reason has the above and below orientation because you have your ground and you try to build your tower to the heavens if you look at my nt right video natural theology is trying to what jordan peterson is really doing is trying to do natural theology and establish god number one in quotations or the gods all right you are building a tower with reason so you're going up you're building a tower with reason up to god you have bottom and you have source all right and you have reason so you've got three you got three sides of this thing you want to get to god or mythos so that you can energize the top and the end and that's why peterson is focused on meaning he wants to energize the end because the end pulls us towards him and even if you look at jordan peterson's his is his future authoring his self-authoring project he knows that in a sense you're energized by fleeing that which you fear and pulling towards you that which you want peterson understands push and pull and you've got a lot more power if you have both push and pull so peterson wants to get there and that's why he's so intent on getting to the gods and getting to mythos you lose meaning when you don't have pull you can have far more strength and i think again and the collective unconscious of the zeitgeist our brains are picking this up this is why we're attracted to peterson because we're seeing the power we're seeing okay we've got push but darwinian push moves us towards an end that is just death there's no meaning there if peterson can energize the pole well now we've got something now we've got something exciting now we've got power peterson knows this but sam just keeps trying to sneak it in with well-being and it's unconvincing remember he called reason from above but he still doesn't have future but let's take a look at the foundations one of the things on jordan peterson's reading list is the metaphysical club read that book it's a good book it's an important book one of the key observations that menon makes in the book is that darwin didn't invent evolutionary process the significance of darwin is the elimination of mind from the process for a species that is the process for a belief that species evolve is not incompatible with a belief in divine creation that's the divine mind or with a belief in intelligent design that's the divine mind progressive adaptation might simply be the mechanism god had selected to realize his intention that's theistic evolution it's been around a long time i'd say it's probably the majority christian position what is radical about on the origin of species was not its evolutionism but its materialism darwin wanted to establish something even his most loyal disciples were reluctant to admit which is that the species including human beings were generated by and evolved according to processes that are entirely natural now we're knocking on the door of c.s lewis's book miracles chance generated remember chance is a metaphysical assertion what random really means is too complicated for us to know and what we have no guarantee is that god isn't smuggled in there and god doesn't sneak in there remember miracles there's a trap door from below from below and blind no one sees it it's not governed it's not guided there is no mind that's darwin's key move right there and and that's the key move that inhabits the middle to late 19th century and really takes hold and that's the move that energizes harris and all of the atheists that's fundamentally their assumption that there is no mind there is no telos there is no end because in their system the only end is death individual death and universal death that's the only end there cannot be anything pulling it and darwin cuts that out he had in order to do this he had to do more than come up with a new set of scientific arguments he had to develop what amounted to a new way of thinking that's what darwin contributed now here's the question can peterson get back to mind that is peterson's project to discover the gods just think about values though because we want objective values are our values found are they are they real harris again and again and again wants to say i'm a moral realist values are real okay sam but you're really running uphill you could make things a lot easier if you would change your philosophical system which i think is exactly why so many people are changing in a sense from harris to peterson like mouthy buddha notes in his video because peterson's philosophy has more capacity for value than materialism it's just that simple because values are found seen and discovered and what i said before about the freedom from religion people that they they because they have so much difficulty locating values they have to the only way they can be the only way they can be located and seen as real would be real emotions but they can't get beyond emotions dependent upon the mind of the creature and that's the limitation they don't want to say it but it's right there are values projected by the mind that's where they'll go because if all minds go away those values go away too is the sublimity of the waterfall seen or are we limited to feeling the waterfall produces in us and see here's the thing about lewis lewis knows where the chinks of the armor is and he goes right there he begins his book miracles right there with a ghost story and he begins his book the abolition of man right there with the waterfall story because lewis knows exactly where the problem lies because if if values if objective values the sublimity of the waterfall the horror of auschwitz the wrongness of the gulag is not simply dependent on the perceiver and the emotion they have about it if we are to have something more than moral feelings but there be moral ontology you need to have a system a philosophical worldview system capable of sustaining it and lewis knows they don't have it they keep wanting to argue we're moral real realist and peterson and lewis keeps saying how can you substantiate that you want to be an evidentialist you want to say here as here is evidence show me the goods show me the substance that you have in your philosophical framework that can possess and support objective value right away if you conceive of the universe merely as a space for objects you've only got nouns you don't have verbs a form for action they have nouns and verbs okay your world of nouns doesn't there's a big problem value is expressed in action in your materialist world where is that choice how can it be hosted you have no substance for it there's no orientation for it this is a real problem and lewis goes right after it and says if you don't have if all you have left are moral feelings you are lost in subjectivity there needs to be something real outside that okay you what see here harris rationality rules wants their correspondence theory of truth all right that's what you want there needs to be something in that waterfall that corresponds to sublimity and it isn't in the water and it isn't it has to be more than just social convention and this is why the conversation goes to elton john's glass and elvis's guitar it has to be more than social convention because social convention can be arbitrary and harris wants this he keeps saying well you can't just have the christians you're gonna have to have the hindus well guess what lewis in the abolition of man establishes the tau as transcultural he's going to talk about hinduism he's going to talk about confucius he's going to say the dao is transcultural so peterson knows this is a real problem so he's using bottom beginning and push to try to get to mythos so that he can justifiably bring in the treasure of the past which includes end purpose and meaning he wants to create a story peterson is trying to re-energize mythos harris can't see the problem and his solution just raises more problems lewis is going to expose the problem he goes right after it sam's problem with ends can well-being discredit an eschatology of race if if if well-being is what you're looking for well the germans when they looked at the piling up numbers of jews and slobs and others they were killing felt well-being they felt purpose they felt they were improving the race even if they died every jew they killed wouldn't reproduce and that felt like meaning and purpose and well-being to a nazi can well-being discredit the nazis i don't think he has enough objective value can well-being discredit an eschatology of material equality that's the struggle actually that sam harris is in right now except for his anti-religious struggle because jordan peterson the intellectual dark webs enemy are those who really are saying material equality will yield happiness equality we can have them both they're also saying that material quality is necessary material quality is necessary for happiness equality and harris and peterson and the intellectual dark web are saying no it's not enough material quality isn't sufficient in fact this quest for material equality is disastrous and that was exposed in the soviet union now can it establish a conscious end of timeless moment not eternity well-being this is progressive epicureanism to justify exclusive exclusion of individuals who find joy in racial superiority or material equality or just about any other ideology including religious ideology if my my religion makes me deliriously happy and gives me a deep sense of well-being sam harris's system doesn't have enough to discredit me even for all his talking and i think everyone gets that you listen to sam harris and you think okay sam you don't like my religion fine don't go to church no one's making you but don't stop me from going to church because there's my well-being and that's your standard so why is he as lewis important a couple people have said what's the fascination with lewis lewis walked through all these steps lewis was sam harris and thought his way through it lewis was part of jordan peterson jordan peterson brings in some new stuff that lewis didn't have access to but lewis understood mythos and its power and lewis was able to integrate mythos christianity and the dao okay and when we get into abolition of man some of the christians and this is true in the past you can find abolition of man is a well-known book and there's a lot of discussion of it on the internet some christians get there and they they're worried about lewis that he gives too much credence to other traditions and cultures and religion but you have to understand lewis's progress and you have to understand how lewis saw christianity as the climax of myth and i think part of the reason we're seeing the association between lewis and jordan peterson is that peterson also sees christianity as the climax of myth but he's not quite there you work because he's not reading lewis's books jordan read lewis uh work to justify the full religious narrative that's what lewis does he sees secularity as unimaginative and he's with peterson on this he also sees it as incapable of yielding the ends necessary to exclude the 20th century material progressivisms lewis wrote in the middle of the fight with with communism and with nazism he wrote in that context and with the beginnings of epicurean progressivism in the west that's where lewis wrote and he was right there and he saw it happening and that's what his books are about and that's why he's terribly germane to this conversation he's going to bring back the dao he makes an argument that objective values have been universally accessible in history beyond just christianity you can find some of it in confucius you can find some of it in hinduism you can find it in islam but then you're in the abraham extreme you can find it all over the place and he says these 20th century progressivisms part of why we know they're evil sam harris is right they're evil but what sam harris doesn't have is the way to show that it's evil c.s lewis does and c.s lewis does because his philosophical system and worldview has the capacity for objective value sam's is too skinny jordan's trying to get there because lewis has a full religious narrative so you can actually energize heaven and earth past and future and it all comes together in a story and lewis does this better than most that's why lewis is important so so there's my orientation video on this it's about an hour i hope to be shorter but i'm wordy and i have i have a lot of travel this week i am going to be in denver friday and saturday i haven't really figured out my plans for denver friday i'll be working i might have some time friday night saturday i'm kind of thinking of going and seeing the rockies because i'm kind of stuck in denver for saturday day and i have to fly out at something like five so and i've got a rental car so if you've got any suggestions where i should go let me know but um yep orientation for abolition of man and i think there's a bunch of good stuff in this video i really like this one