https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=dU92jkI7eNs

 Hi, this is Paul. There has been so much good stuff out in the last couple weeks about Jordan Peterson and God and piecing this all together. I barely have enough time to listen to it But I want to cover some stuff that we worked through at our meetup last night That was very helpful to me and let's get moving. I Want to just piece put a I feel like now I've arrived at a position that I can Piece a lot of this stuff together in ways that I wasn't able to before and It's partly a result of Peterson talking to Roger Scruton recent video that Jonathan Peugeot did with David Fuller at rebel wisdom and Constantly thinking about the resurrection. I'm not going to use a lot of NT right in this video But that's the cover of his book the resurrection of the Son of God And now my I can't advance. Okay, here we go Classical creedal Christian God looks like this. He's before all things And if we think about space-time in terms of relativity It's not hard It's not terribly hard to think of something before time if you can think of something before space now This is of or before matter now. This is obviously at the heart of the materialist conversation because materialism asserts that material is foundational and Everything else is derivative from material I think in the 20th century and now into the 20th century 21st century We've seen the increasing demolition of that position as a viable option philosophically and scientifically and there's always a lag in terms of Popular conceptions of this but that to me seems to be the case The classical creedal Christian God is before all things. He's the creator of all things He creates stuff and so therefore he creates time and therefore Eternal which is of the age Eternal has no beginning and no end and so if you think about a creator God, it's not hard to think about that God outside of time He sustains all things all which he creates is subject to him because he made it in the same way that a machine Is subject to the maker of the machine the maker of a machine Puts the machine together. I don't want to get too hung up on the machine metaphor That's a much older metaphor for for the universe but he sustains all things and Now my definition of that which is most real is that which governs or that which colonizes or that which? Selects or that which controls or that which determines you can look at Jordan Peterson's conversation with Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson's what I call God number one in in Jordan Peterson schema and look back on my videos Classical creedal Christian God endures beyond what I call the age of decay in this world And this is how the Greeks sought to in this world everything everything decays every Example of love will die with death or betrayal but love itself endures Death governs the world today that's basically the idea of the age of decay death governs that I will die my physical body is breaking down all the time I decay and People well, okay, but maybe you know, how long do lobsters live lobsters live a long time We don't really know that the theoretical lifetime of a lobster. At least I don't know it Heat death however of the universe at least one person at the meetup Wanted to cast doubts on that but most most materialists today will Will concede the heat death of the universe Often if you watch a documentary you'll get the the bad news that someday the Sun will run out of fuel and you get the good News you'll die before the Sun runs out of fuel And so what we see is that this universe is governed by death All right now in the creedal Christian story Jesus resurrection conquers death and most of the time especially within contemporary Evangelical the evangelical frame This is what's focused on is my personal death. That's a function of Individualism in our context. That's the function of just the the natural Self Preoccupation when I die what happens to me when I die? Well, Jesus resurrection conquers death Roman six if you're baptized into his you're baptized into Christ You're baptized into his death. You're baptized into his resurrection That's that's Roman six and this is just kind of a quick outline of classic creedal Christian God and Just a big brief outline of the story And why my button isn't working there we go now Jonathan Peugeot this part of the reason I always use JBP for Jordan B Peterson as separate from JP for Jonathan Peugeot was because I'm always dealing with both of them and they have The same initial for their first and last names, which is why I always include the B for Jordan B Peterson well Jonathan Pizzaro had a fascinating interview with with David Fuller at rebel wisdom and I thought that this interview Brought together a whole number of things and at my meetup last night actually, we split up into two groups and one of the groups focused on Jonathan Peugeot because Jonathan has been a really helpful conversation partner in this one of Kyle from up from San Luis Obispo Who's been you know as many of the people that I talked with in this I used to be a hardcore materialist Started listening to Jordan Peterson started listening to Jonathan Peugeot and Peugeot with his ideas of symbol and the priority of which which is first the priority of material or the priority of symbol now I didn't include some elements from There's a there's a class Buddhism and cognitive science And Strawn Cummings had recommended this to me same guy that Jonathan Peugeot talked to for kike for kike for kikey Over at University of Toronto. He has an online class of that Not a lot of viewers, but he goes he does a nice job of talking about Aristotle how how Aristotle brings this in of How you have the four causes one of the causes basically gives shape to to material Not explaining that very well, but watch the video I'll put I'll put a note to it in the comment section but but here Jonathan Peugeot goes into his assertion of patterns and theism and what Jordan Peter said Jordan Peterson said in the Dave Rubin Ben Shapiro video. So let's listen to a little bit of this video What that means to some degree is that there's a a spirit of masculinity That's shaping the entire structure of human evolutionary history. That's what that means and then I think okay Well, that might just be a biological Epiphenomenon and so it would be a spirit that it's the spirit of positive masculinity that manifests itself across Across Epocle ages millions of years perhaps and it actually has shaped our consciousness Actually, and so you can think about that as a figure and it would be the figure that emerges. It's like it's like the It's like this. It's like the essential spirit of all the great men who defined what greatness constituted. That's a spirit Okay. Now that's a purely biological explanation. You could say well, that's God for all intents and purposes You might have an image of that built right into you even the sense that you can experience something divine and Paternal might be merely a reflection of that evolutionary process So that would be a biologically reductive argument for the existence of what we experience as God But then there's another possibility too, which is that that's actually reflective of a deeper Metaphysical reality that has to do with the nature of consciousness itself And I would say that I think that's true is I believe the biological case and I believe the biologically reductive case But I don't think that exhausts it I think that there's a metaphysical layer underneath that that the biological That the biology is a genuine reflection of and that's the sort of the macrocosm above and the microcosm below that we that we are really reflective including in our consciousness of something about the structure of reality itself and that might involve whatever Whatever it is that God is I now now one of the things that Kyle from San Luis Obispo I hadn't known this story how His assertion that basically how Peugeot and Peterson found each other and why they interested each other Is that both were looking both had this assumption that reality is fundamentally patterns And I'd heard this from both of them before and I was just trying to get my head around it What do you mean reality is fundamentally patterns? I had enough materialism still in me that no that can't be right because the matter is foundational and the patterns are derivative and What what Kyle from San Luis Obispo observed about about Peugeot was that Peugeot simply flips that around and says, okay Well, what if the pattern is foundational and the matter? Expresses the pattern in other words the pattern governs and the matter The matter yields and is governed and shaped by the pattern Okay, and you start you flip that around and you start thinking about it that way and then you start thinking about Aristotle and Aristotle's causes how You know you have the wood and then you have the form of the chair and together it becomes the chair Okay, so what is a chair and Peterson goes into this is a is a stump a seat Well, how does a stump become a seat and so it's a right away. You have this question Okay, what is first the materiality or the pattern and it seems very clear that that which is most real is that which governs and and pattern governs matter pattern organizes matter pattern brings order into matter and So again what Peterson and Peugeot have been saying is that well reality is patterns I think I heard that what do you mean by that? What kind of patterns and you know learned a little bit of Aristotle and started pieces together and say yeah, obviously patterns govern matter patterns colonize matter Okay, how does this connect up with creed of Christianity what we're gonna get there so now Pigeot I think that in the discussion that's been hat that's been going along with Jordan and the new atheist and Jordan You know based on discussions that I have it privately with him I felt like this is something that he had never really said in public which he had enunciated in private things that he was Trying to deal with which is that he's been able to build this bottom-up case for let's say the structures of religion or the idea of deities or the or the notion of of the Heavenly Father, let's say he's been able to build it up and explain quite well how you know Certain biological processes will lead to this this formulation or to these images But what he hasn't done so much what he was doing that there is to say The reason why those patterns brought about these images in the first place is because they necessarily have to be a representation of reality itself or Reality to the extent that we can engage with it. Okay now again. Well, what's the definition of reality now? The real Rationality rules might jump in well what he jumps in with all realities is the matter. Well, that's your presupposition that's your starting place and What's what's the reason what's the what's the justification for your starting place? What if in fact you're starting places the pattern when you say well why well don't patterns just emerge from the matter well our Observations of the patterns might emerge from the matter But that's a function of the limitation of what we have we can only see the matter the the patterns we have to discern Nationally we have to discern mentally but we only see the matter So of course in our interaction with the world it it's it's very understandable that people would say well the The the patterns are derivative from the matter, but that doesn't answer the question of why in the first place before us Those patterns exist and how those patterns exist now someone might say well they follow the rules of nature But again the rules of nature are not physical The rules of nature are not made of atoms. They are in fact patterns So even when Matt de la hunta is says well the rules of physics. Well, the rules of physics are not Are not are not physical. They are patterns and they are in fact laws They are laws that govern matter and they're not physical well then you say well, where do they come from? Oh, why do they why do they have the shape that they're having? well there they're coming from someplace and they're governing matter and in fact the rules that we through science the logos of observation that that we start to write down and Hypothesize and test and and discern and put into books and all of this. These are patterns that we recognize from The material world from the physical world, but they don't explain why the physical world has that pattern our Explanation comes via the physical world because that's what we're observing but our explanation simply talks about the pattern and the repetition of the pattern and the thoroughgoing Consistent repetition of the pattern it doesn't actually answer the question why the pattern is as it is and so what Peugeot is Basically doing is flipping it around and saying well Why don't you assume the pattern first and then assume that materiality is following the pattern? Okay. Well, well what or who? Founds the pattern. Well, what does what does instilling a pattern on? Well, what does what is the pattern instilled on? Well just rationally Pattern is still instilled upon Undifferentiated stuff. Well, what is undifferentiated stuff? Well, actually you can find it in Genesis 1 that's Tohu of Ohu That's this great sea. It's it's earth and it's earth and sea it's light and darkness It's all these elements all mixed together in Genesis 1 and then the spirit the Ruah Comes upon now you take as Jordan Peterson does you take John 1 and you bring it right there into Genesis 1 and Well, it's the spirit of God Taking the stuff and putting it into the pattern and in habitable and in Genesis 1 again read John Walton the lost world of the lost world of Genesis 1 Creation is is bringing this order is bringing habitable order Let there be light It's in in Genesis 1 now. I'm not saying God doesn't create light because God is the origin of all things That's why it started with classical theism but God calls the light day and the darkness night and that paw that made John Walton pause and say Well, that's what what isn't he called a light light and the darkness dark Calls the light day in the darkness night. Why he's organizing it. He's he's he's governing it. He's putting the pattern on to The matter and so right there in Genesis 1 in a sense you have this assertion that pattern is foundational and matter receives or submits to pattern Matter submits to spirit What's that Jonathan keep going? And so the notion is that the reason why this image is pops up and comes up bottom up is because it is participating in the structure of reality itself and so the image of Deity of deities or of of God or of the transcendent they are Capturing something about the manner in which reality works itself. So that's why when we now When he says that when he says how reality works itself, he's saying just like Jordan Peterson There's a spirit would have been by spirit. That's that's gonna get it's not really so complicated, but What it does is is we have these ideas of what spirit is in our head Via our experience via our stories and all of this which is in some ways a reduction to what Peterson means by spirit It's it's the Ruach over the waters It's that it's the breath over the waters now what is breath well in Hebrew all of this symbolism comes together Ruach Spirit is also breath is also wind. Well, what is that? Well, that's change. That's that's governing That's that's taking the matter and putting it together what we've done with making this little this little headphone case is we've taken petroleum of Various ways and we've applied logos to petroleum and and we have governed it and we have colonized it into a nice little useful Little gadget now we have a zipper here and you've got a little bit of metal here in this zipper And you've got some things from the petroleum. This is this is spirit governing Petroleum, this is spirit governing stuff. This is a pattern and it's a circle. That's nice and pleasing It's a nice size for me to hold in my hand and it's part of this hole now We've got some rubber here and we've got some metal here in the wire and we've got a microphone This is all spirit governing stuff. Well, why the patterns? Well, where do the patterns come from? Does the pattern come from petroleum? No, there's there's potential in the petroleum that we logos apply to it and create this and the Genesis story is God doing This and creating habitable order out of the world Then you might say well, well matter is derivative, but here's the question. Why does it take the shape that it does? Why is why are we so fortunate to have matter just kind of happen to produce this this amazing this amazing world with water and hillocks and day and night and now obviously We see the already made Patterns including us expressed in matter and so we take as sub creators we Discern the patterns from what we see and we write them down. That's what we do with science, but it doesn't explain Why it has the shape that it has and what what Peugeot is saying? Well that there's something underneath expressing itself In these patterns. Well, the patterns are expressing themselves. Well, what are the patterns? Well, that's what we are always talking about We're always talking about the patterns we pay especially close attention to the patterns partly because of time Because we're terribly invested in enduring through time We're going to talk about this endurance in a couple of minutes, but but that which governs that which is God is that which endures? Through time and that what that which outlasts its rivals and you know, this is something something Darwin sees this in in what he does gauge in those patterns in those structures that's why they then become a a way to make Let's say it's for humanity to thrive or for the human species to to continue now now thrive here Also has a function of our will but now will is a very complicated thing. Where does will come from? Well Peterson again, we'll talk about motivation and in sense motivation is personality And and all of this but but this thriving is part of it So we're leaning into the future and we're discerning these patterns and we're employing these patterns and we're colonizing the stuff of this world We colonized Patrolling in order to make this handy little headphone case. All right, and we've done that with plants We've done that with animals. We've done that with the entire earth In fact, we've colonized the stuff of earth and that's again why I would say that spirit see as Lewis gets into this and his His book miracles spirit governs stuff patterns govern stuff That's fundamental to our living it's fundamental to who we are. This is how we are Sub-creators, this is what we're doing. I Don't know if that makes sense well, I mean the question that comes up I guess is That that may be true and I think I think in that he also says that the danger here is that you're Explaining religion versus explaining religion away And I think Jordan in that clip says something about you can explain it this way It is a pattern of being that doesn't exhaust the possibility that there's a metaphysical structure There's a metaphysical aspect to it as well I guess but the idea is that why is there this pattern of being? That's what we got kind of come back to is that why does reality lay itself out this way? Why does and and he hits the nail right at the right place, which is he talks about how It's basically the structure of consciousness So this hierarchy that this hierarchy that he sets up is the structure of consciousness And so that's why there are analogies that say between the hierarchy sets up in terms of this idea of the spirit of the father Which kind of rises up and manifests itself as this transcendent father and also it's an it's analogous to the idea of space Which is you know you create a center of space and then you lay out a space around it the notion of a center of time Around which a cycle will will then proceed and so all these are the center of a community in terms of a chief or in terms of a of an ideal that everybody gathers around and creates unity as We're getting into the principalities and powers which we're going to talk in a bit a little bit later about how There's there's the spirit of Apple that is Manifest in Apple and you had Steve Jobs and Johnny Ives coming together and they created Apple now They created this spirit of Apple that that Dominated and it I don't have any Apple products around me Well, maybe I'll go grab one hang on I do have an Apple product around me I have a power supply for a 2012 MacBook Pro that I I Renovated because my mother found I put in an SSD and I added RAM You know Steve Jobs and Johnny well, this is the power supply for Apple And let's see if I can get the you know, you have that you have the spirit of Apple You have the logo this that compared to this kind of anonymous brick for the Dell computer that I'm recording this on But but here the spirit of Apple is manifest in this power supply and you have this clever little You can take this off and plug though the warp right into the wall with a little adapter or if you need more cord I mean just look at how pleasing all of this is Okay, this is our this is science. This is the colonization of of technology and materials and rubber and plastic and petroleum and metal and and and it's put into design now now obviously we say well and Then you have these these nice little ears where you can you know? You can wrap this cord around if you want to and you can make it You can it's just it's just pleasing so you have all of these patterns and And this all comes together and this is the spirit of Apple from Steve Jobs and Johnny Ives and they put it together now Steve Jobs is dead and so part of the reason I was excited to renovate that 2012 MacBook Pro was because there's been a lot of criticism about the new Macs and and many people believe that the The spirit of Apple I don't want to get this in this video down the down an Apple conversation But the spirit of Apple is decaying With the loss of Steve Jobs and and what he brought to it how he created the spirit of Apple how how matter was? Subjugated to the patterns and these patterns came from Steve Jobs But Steve Jobs again also is derivative of this long line of humanity and Steve Jobs employed this long line of technology And and it all came together and so you had a principality in power you had the spirit of Apple You're around this this thing that is above them and so that this idea is that the reason why And consciousness becomes the analogy to The structure of of the cosmos itself or this or the way in which we interact with what causes the universe to exist The idea is that the pattern is not arbitrary It has it's not it could not have been in another way if that's the pattern of reality, but now you should definitely listen to the whole video the whole video is is outstanding and I Haven't want to go beyond that so so at the meetup we had you know We talked about materialism at our meetup and so again what endures or what governs over life now now Darwin in a sense Says that well that which governs are the our materiality our DNA that gets promoted and You know this one species dominates another and on and on and on it goes in terms of light now This is limited to things that we know of course and and what I also wanted to pull the pull the focus back a little bit is notice that this competition between Life and death in the world that we know what do I mean by that? Well? Life is always in a competition with death Well, how does life on one hand you might say it well death always wins man Always wins over every individual life And if you assume the heat death of the universe death wins over the entire story in a materialist frame But what's interesting about life is that life does in fact colonize death birds will take twigs and construct nests We take petroleum and rubber and other Products and we construct cases like this and we make in fact Macbook Pro power supplies So so life is in that way we got light issues with this I decided I wondered if I could have enough light to deal with what's behind me It's getting brighter out there Life colonizes the material world, and I think that's part of the reason we see That motivates us to live in the ways that we live and And that's how we see living things colonizing and governing matter Worms and moles burrow We move stuff animals and human beings reshape the world read 1493 the story of the homogenizing how Humanity and the animals that we moved in the plants that we moved have terraformed the world And and the living things continue to govern on planet Earth This this this oxygen that we have this co2 to oxygen. I mean living things are going you said well all of those things come from matter Yeah, but where do the patterns come? Where do it? Where does the matter? Bring in the patterns and again read Aristotle for that and I'll put the link to that other thing So so what endures well well life endures well does life endure beyond death? Well, this is this is the race This is the competition that we're facing and it's interesting how we prioritize the living over the air organic Because we you know, we think the moon is interesting but nowhere near as interesting as earth because we the living Colonize the inorganic to a degree but not death again We're always in this competition with death life has limited dominion over the earth It's always in a war with death. This is perpetual state of war and it's a struggle with death now Reality is patterns reality is that which reality is that which governs that which governs is what's most real and Well, you can see this in terms of what is death. I've been thinking a lot about death again because of my sister's death Well, okay. So so someone Operations stop in their body what happens? Well, the body starts to break down and again other forms of life begin to colonize and begin to eat the body But the good body becomes inorganic Alright and and becomes just the stuff that the material Beneath it and so you always have this life and death struggle But reality that which is most most real is that which is governing my living body can hold this my dead body Can't my living body can move a shovel and move earth My dead body can't my living body together with with this whole civilization and logos space Community can can make things like this with with with design and with technology and with art and can bring it all together and govern the world and One of the things that's going on is, you know should we have these individual power supplies or everything should be USB C because part of the problem is This has governed for a while a few short years and they've got this ugly wart from Dell well, all this stuff is going into a landfill and There's there's issues with all of this. Okay, so but it's but but again, we're governing and we're In a sense where death works within us all of this stuff is in Christian language death works within us. I Asked a smart materialist at our meeting. I won't name him. He doesn't even like to wear a name tag How do the living beat death and he said by propagating my DNA now pay close attention to the my's and we's and I Always tell you that in the videos why? We I as an individual beat death Because I propagate myself Duplicating a pattern that I am even in this definition of what am I? In this definition of how I beat death. I don't mean me Fundamentally as a material being I think of me fundamentally as a pattern or a story Because what is a story story story is fundamentally a pattern Okay, I think of me as a pattern because the the atoms and molecules of my body continue to I trade in and trade out of them as I live until I break down It's it's like the ship that you replace all the boards. Well, this is the same ship I have a problem of identity. I am a pattern and so when I say well I Transcend death I beat death in a Darwinian it way by propagating my DNA Is it the stuff that's being propagated or is it the pattern governing and colonizing the stuff We I as an individual I really mean I Beat death propagate myself duplicate the pattern that I am beyond my individual life and I do so in my Children and so often when we talk in this frame of reference We think we have we make all these subtle shifts of identity and pattern that we don't fess up when we tell the story Because let's say I could find let's let's assume Darwinian evolution. Let's assume a some pattern of species development, let's imagine I could colonize a a biped ancestor and Can't but with that biped ancestor say we continue on through homo sapiens or would and the andrethal say we our strategy for Colonizing the world is to be subjugated by these African ancestors who are going to mate with some of us kill many of us and replace us in northern Europe Well, what is we? We neanderthals are we? Homo sapiens or what is a neanderthal but an incredibly complex set of patterns What is a homo sapien but an incredibly complex set of patterns? What is DNA well, so I looked it up okay, cuz I'm not a I'm not a biochemist Deoxyribonucleic acid a self replicating boy. That's an interesting word in that sentence and look at James Tor I believe go go ahead and Google him check him out in in YouTube. He's one of the best Biochemists in the world talking about we can't make this stuff. We don't even know how this stuff works. We have no idea Well, what is this stuff? Is it actually the the chemicals and we say well this just kind of came about well, how did it come about or Why does it have the pattern? Why does it have this? Incredible pattern that is self replicating. Well, what is replicates are the molecules replicating? The molecules aren't replicating the molecules are just all there. What's replicating? It's the pattern that's replicating even The DNA in me that gets replica all that gets replicated is the pattern. It's the Information I think it's a terrible word for it, but it's the pattern that gets replicated What is propagated isn't really the material layer. You're not making more of the molecules and atoms that make up this acid What you are doing is replicating the pattern of this acid and well, isn't that what we're doing with children? We're replicating our patterns and DNA is not really the stuff of DNA. It's the pattern of The arrangement of all of this stuff that is getting replicated. So in other words the pattern is more real Than the atoms and molecules that the pattern is colonizing and employing and governing That's what we're talking about when we talk about Darwinian evolution in this fight between life and death The stuff that makes up me goes into the ground and becomes inorganic. That's what death is the pattern stops It is the dupe it is the pattern of that matter that gets Duplicated sort of in my kid because it's not just me. Of course, it's my wife and it's in fact not just us It's all of these ancestors that we have it's this incredibly long line But it's the patterns that get duplicated not the stuff pattern is more real than material Now I have a question that I asked last night and to at the meetup what who is the most successful Propagator of himself in all of human history Genghis Khan One in 200 men are direct descendants of him and you can look that up You can easily find it on the internet or Jesus Christ who produced to the best of our knowledge No biological offspring Well Well That's it. Well, they're getting this kind because he has all these descendants. I would argue it's Jesus Christ. Well why? Because ideas logos patterns that which governs is more powerful propagation than sperm Because Jesus Christ in fact has colonized probably a good not a good many of Genghis Khan's descendants without having to Conquer nations or burn cities or rape women or have a huge harem That's how Genghis Khan did it. How does Jesus do it? Well, Jesus uses Jesus is the logos Jesus is the word Does Jesus overcome the grave better than impregnating women? Well, why is this story of resurrection so central to Christianity again to quote mr. Plinkett? This little conscious part that that's that's yakking at you There's a bigger part of me which knows more than this little conscious part that's yakking at you and sometimes This part of me again read Ian McGillchrist this other part of me. I I can't bring it into this part, but it knows and I get whispers Intimations. Well, what is that often experienced like well? the ancients and Pentecostals today even in materialist America would call it spirit of the Spirit of God Well, what is that? So read you've all Harari's Sapiens fun little book. I so enjoyed reading that little book But one of the points he makes is that story? Stories colonized story is more powerful than genetics. Why well genetics are patterned Well, story is a pattern but story morphs and evolves and mutates and governs More than genetics and again, there's a race. You've got a race between life and death You've got a race between genetics and story and I would argue Jesus Christ being the most successful propagator a more successful propagator than Genghis Khan is an example of how story beats genetics conversion Okay, Christian conversion or conversion of any kind changing your mind is a is a pattern of story Conquering genetics because once I adopt a story well in fact this Apple power supply has story built into it Why do we find it pleasing why on one hand you can put the ears down so that the shape is There's pattern to it and and there's art to it But we also have a need for practicality So we develop these little ears and aren't they cute we can wrap the wire around it So this is this is all story coming together. Now. I got one story tied up in the other Civilizations are stories. They're big stories. They're big patterns. They have logos They have principalities and powers which govern them the spirit of America the spirit of the British Empire The spirit of Genghis Khan It's the language we use the language you use for principalities and powers and they govern they propagate themselves and we all know that culture propagates if you if you live in I Grew up in the United States and I've always been in the midst of various different cultures There was the Dutch immigrant the Dutch Calvinist immigrant subculture There was the African American diaspora subculture in Patterson There was kind of the white American culture and then I go to the Dominican Republic and I'm dealing with Dominican culture and Haitian culture And then I go to California and I'm dealing with California culture, which has some more Eastern Asian influences and the spirit of California You have all these principalities and powers and all of these things are patterns and all of these patterns are governing matter and I would assert that Steve Jobs and Johnny Ives design for this power supply with this cute little Apple logo There's a bit of there's American culture in this there's California culture in this There's culture of our time in this but all of this culture all of this story all of these patterns are governing matter Now what Harari says is that stories govern DNA better than DNA it adapts more quickly. It's more powerful. It changes things more rapidly more dramatically and and this is one of the things that sets human beings apart from the animal kingdom is that we govern with story and Well, you want to know how powerful that is look around at how quickly civilization has terraformed this world and is governing it and as our power increases we govern with ever more and more power and consequence with opportunity and liability which is obviously potential now in the three creators conversation, they wanted to talk about Jordan Peterson and logos and Rachel Brown thought that Peterson had a sub Christian logos and She got into firebuck and and I appreciate some of her concerns, but the more I listened to Peterson and I think the the clear Peterson himself is the pattern that is Peterson continues to evolve on this and I think he's in fact as Peugeot recognized Rises he is as he develops this he is getting more Christian Now now I know in terms of the tribal conversations there's you know, will Peterson become Orthodox will Peterson become evangelical Of course evangelicals are it's a really tribal pattern evangelicals but part of what makes them strong is they propagate and they colonize and they evangelize and And the main line doesn't which is part of why they're dying But but that colonization is part of historic Christianity So the Orthodox do but they do it in their Orthodox way and the Roman Catholics do so they do it in their Catholic way and The Dutch reform do so we do it on a Dutch reformed way and the evangelicals do and so they do it in their evangelical way But but Rachel is afraid of Jordan that Jordan Peterson is to sub Christian as logos Well, let's look at the logos a little bit. So the logos governs materiality That's what we've been talking about and death is a brutal competitor The sword is used to silence Jesus as it's used to silence many, you know Tell me the truth or shut up. That's what you put a gun to someone's head the sword I'm using metaphorically can be a physical sword But it's a metaphor for the threat of death against a pattern bearing logos bearing Agent in this world. It's used to silence and one of the things I often say about the story of Jesus is that You had this really bloody culture war that was going on in Judea and the Galilee in the first century and you had bitter brutal enemies against each other you had you had Jewish nationalists versus Roman imperialist versus Herodian Accommodationalists and people were killing each other over this and Jesus comes in and these sides that were terribly determined to Either subjugate or destroy or get out of subjugation the other they couldn't agree on much But the only thing they could agree on was that they wanted Jesus silenced. They wanted Jesus dead They didn't like the logos They didn't like the words and and the way to get rid of Jesus the way to Silence him was get rid of his words And this is part of the reason why free speech in our current conversation is such a hot topic because word Governs it word is pattern and it's literally patterns in airwaves It's governing the air and it's colonizing and governing human beings again a Peterson Jungian aphorism You know do people have ideas or do ideas have people logos patterns words govern stories? civilization The cross the manner by which Jesus was killed actually employed word It was a powerful Roman political expression instead of just disappearing Jesus or taking him out back and Killing him or beating him to death you put him on a cross which basically employs word by saying We are the masters of this world our pattern our Roman way of life Must dominate you because it's the best pattern watch Monty Python life of Brian. What have the Romans ever done for us? This is the struggle between this is the logo struggle between words and patterns and this is always at play among us Here's the thing. Why is resurrection so central to Christianity? Resurrection beats death Death is the is the big Weapon of the inorganic against the organic. What does the inorganic in a sense employ? To silence the organic. That's the sword To disrupt our pattern so that we cannot propagate All right Logos in the resurrection beats death Logos wins. That's the message of the Apostles the Apostles go out Peter and acts 2 says Jesus who you crucified God raised from the dead now that Disrupts and Energizes the patterns in such a dramatic way that within a few hundred years It begins taking over the Roman Empire it Colonizes people and that colonization has been happening ever since it's happening in China now. It's happening in Africa now, it's It's in the West The war the culture war the war between the two countries The war the war, you know that that we're fighting is this long-term war now these wars are long long long long term the Wars of genetics go millions of years The wars of ideas go hundreds and thousands of years because they work that much more quickly Okay, that's you've all Harari's point Also the individual Jesus is alive and still speaking metaphorically and Literally when he appears to the Apostle Paul on the road to Damascus he speaks And he colonizes Paul. In fact, the whole story of the New Testament is speaking colonizing matter colonizing stories colonizing people colonizing swords colonizing buildings colonizing story Colonizing colonizing colonizing. This is the way in which Jesus Reigns and Jesus colonizes better and faster than Genghis Khan who was using the older method of Genetics. This is why word is so powerful now Oscar Wilde puts this beautiful and I get this from NT, right and Jesus the son of the resurrection and the son of God Oscar Wilde in his play Salome Herod he raises the dead first Nazarene. Yes sire. He raises the dead. He raised at the dead Herod I do not wish him to do it. Why does Herod not wish Jesus to raise the dead? because Herod's power is based on the sword and once Resurrection comes the sword is defeated and this is in fact symbolically See again the resurrection has this the resurrection as pattern as idea as story has this all built into it in incredibly compact way and and this is part of the reason why I don't think Jordan Peterson has gotten to this point with understanding the resurrection yet because the resurrection not only is a can be understood Metaphorically why we appropriate Easter eggs and Easter bunnies and all of these things as new life as the Phoenix rising from the ashes The resurrection also is the triumph of story Over matter it's the it's the final culmination of death Which is the inorganic versus the organic it is also in fact the culmination of story The the win of story power over genetic power because that's always erased too Because that's always erased too But here it doesn't want that because The resurrection unseats every paid every petty dictator that uses threats of violence. That's the inorganic Against the living that's what the sword does I do not wish him to do that because that's what Harrod's that's the principality and power of Harrod's power I forbid him to do that now. He's trying to use word To colonize Jesus. Well, is Jesus not going to do it? No Just like and that's why Jesus goes to death so he can be death. I Allow no man to raise the dead If Harrod had that power he would allow it because he would employ it But he would employ it according to his logos according to his spirit according to his pattern According to his principality and power this man must be found and told that I forbid him to raise the dead Where is this man found notice the capital M and man? Second Nazarene he is in every place my lord But it is hard to find him What do you mean hard to find him? What does he mean by that? It's hard to lay hands on him. Why? well, because the logos has now perfectly colonized The material all authority in heaven and earth has been given to me Jesus said I will be with you always to the end of the age Jesus says all of this lines up with all of these patterns and It all comes together in this story Now part of the reason that the three creators and and Rachel Fulton Brown was complaining about the logos is because Peterson is operating with this logos on a variety of levels The logos in us and you get into that Sam Harris Jordan Peterson conversations Jordan Peterson is so insistent on the a priori structure and Peterson goes into great depth about this in his book Maps of meaning and talks about how in fact How in fact logos story Rearranges this world and in fact creates the world when you clean your room you create a world and and this is what we are doing All throughout what we do in civilization and that's right Now what I think is behind some of the yeah, but is you have this older? undermining of materialism that's inherent in older forms of Christianity But some materialism sneaks into that and and and I think the older forms of Christianity Already had subsumed within it a representation of how materiality and patterns work together and the fear of listening to Peterson is that Peterson is going to go off in a gnostic direction and after Continuing to listen to Maps of meaning. It's such a hard book to work through. It's such a long book to work through. I think I less and less concerned With that about Peterson because I think he is in fact working through these issues and He is his answers are coming together in a very Christian way. At least that's what I see logos confronting the chaos of Tohu of all who creates the world and we Now this happens that variety of levels and layers it happens in small ways It happens when we clean our room and and that's a pattern of reality of these patterns Think of them kind of like fractals They in fact scale so it's true of your room and it's true of your life and it's true of civilization And it's true of existence itself. And that's why the resurrection is so foundational to this whole thing because in the resurrection Logos conquers death in the resurrection Logos conquers the inorganic in the resurrection logos conquers genetics logos in fact is at the top of the hierarchy and Colonizes all of these things and that's why it's most real and that's why for example at the beginning of Colossians and Colossians 1 Jesus is the icon of the invisible God Jesus is the author. He's the logos of creation 1.0 But he's also now the first fruits of creation 2.0 where finally the hierarchy will be set to right and the entire All of the relationships will be in line and everything will float. That's the eschaton. That's the life of the age to come. That's When you read eternal life in English if you're reading say the Gospel of John that's life of the age that is life the way it's supposed to be when Thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven That's what this entire story is moving towards and again if you want to read NT writes the Old Testament and the people of God His this first of his magnum opus is for his four stage magnum opus NT right goes into what is the story in some of these things and and actually in terms of actually in terms of Books like maps of meaning and to your rights first book there is is most like it Well, I hope the Sun doesn't get much brighter there and just really blows out this camera All right We see it colonizing and governing the inorganic now like I said, we've just been blessed with a wealth of Stuff lately and this conversation with Roger Scruton was off the charts amazing and What he said here in this piece Now they're talking about the transcendent. What is the transcendent? Pay attention how often people who are avoiding talking about Christianity use the word transcendent in Now my dog streaming so Alright, let's eliminate some of the blowout from the backlight Pay attention how often People use the word transcendent to avoid using the word God In a sense this is this is so common in What what happened in the story of the West that pluralism gave us? I Know my wife is always worried about how much I reveal about the family in the background material. I Should probably get a sheet or something Pay attention to how much There's a little Dutch spoons How often people well we don't want to say God because well now suddenly we're being too Christian All right. Well, there's there's a bad and a good part to that impulse. So we're gonna use transcendent. What is transcendent? It's it's the thing that not only Overarches everything but also ties it together that which brings order out of the chaos of multiplicity and pluralism so okay They're gonna use the transcendent and asked Roger scrutin what he thought the transcendent is now He's gonna ask Peterson and the answer Peterson gives here is I think what he's achieved here in this answer is this he's taken maps of meaning and his conversation with with Sam Harris and he's distilled it right down into The most compact Nicely compact form with a handle that I've ever heard him say and when he said this I was blown away I listened to it again and again and again. I'm just Amazing. Here he goes Well as an adjunct to that so so Sir Roger mentioned that The transcendent is what we bump up against when we realize our ignorance And so it's that which transcends our ignorance and and that in itself makes it an Implacable fact now the ultimate transcendent transcends everything and colonizes Everything and governs everything unless you believe that you have no ignorance in which case There's no point in furthering a discussion with you If you believe you have no ignorance you are immune to logos and that could also just simply be a definition of hell So the transcendent is the fact in so far as it's that which transcends our ignorance But you can also think about it technically so and and and I think we know enough about how the brain works now so that not that we know much so that useful things can be said about that I you tend to represent the world in the Simplest manner that you possibly can that works for what you're doing That's because that's because we're limited creatures and all of Jordan Peterson stuff about Hierarchies is because of our limitation we have to use hierarchies because we can't take the whole thing in In Christianity of course God can take the whole thing in and know it all at once we can't we're limited So we have to set up hierarchies, and we have to prioritize and actions prioritize us and thinking prioritizes us and Conscious prioritizes us so hierarchies are always a function of consciousness and limitation and And action that's why we need hierarchies because we can't take the whole thing in at once we just can't process it You don't actually see the world you see sufficiently useful low represent low resolution representations of the world and If they work then that's fine There's no need to adjust them and they're relatively easy to remember and to manipulate but now and then you have a Misapprehension about someone let's say and you have a conversation with them and the conversation goes sideways And what that means is that? This the thing that you thought you were conversing with is not the thing that you're conversing with and that manifests itself in error right so error is the place where the transcendent reveals itself and What is actually revealing itself is the reality that's? Outside and underneath your perceptions and so what you see in the world in some sense is a set of animated cartoons And a lot of that is actually a consequence of you seeing nothing, but your memory now again He's a psychologist He's really got this stuff down and the more I listen to him and learn from him like he's right This is this these are the representations with which we used to interact This is what Don Hoffman is getting at that we we're always interacting with icons on the screen We're always interacting with representations now these that that that's the only way we can interact with the world against because we're limited because consciousness our consciousness is limited our Actions necessitate setting up a hierarchies I need to break the egg before I can make a fried egg in the pan These hierarchies and priorities all come in and so what we're dealing with is and it's and it's mostly from memory Because we can't take in the whole thing and so we spend our you know a good bit of our our infant just trying to bring this all down and and create this maps in our head so that we Can begin to to interact with this word so we can begin to colonize it so we can begin to dominate it So we can have dominion over it so we can govern it Because your brain is organized so that instead of going through all of the difficulty of having to look at the thing in it in itself You look at what you assume to be there, and if you can get away with that so much the better But the thing in itself is always much richer richer than your apprehension of it Which is partly why you make mistakes, but also partly why you can continue to garner wisdom in the world there's always more there than meets the eye and God only knows how much more there's there that meets the eye God Or we could say only God knows how much more there's need to eye has not seen ear has not heard and You can show this even in the religious sense to some degree because you could say that there's an element to the transcendent that Instills people with a sense of religious significance you can do that by immediately Scientifically by feeding people chemicals for example that disrupt the Inhibition of perception by memory and then that puts them in a place where the transcendent tends to reveal itself sometimes an overwhelming force So this is now now what he means it now again Rachel Brown says and he's used drugs. That's what he's talking about right here. The point of that is not that If you use a psychedelic you'll see God the point is that what the psychedelics do perhaps is take a strip off the governor's in your mind and What you see it when you get a glimpse of what you can appreciate is that the world is much bigger than The world is much bigger than What you see is that what life requires of you is to make the world smaller so that you can interact with it someone who is Someone who has taken these drugs is too impaired to drive a vehicle Because in order to drive a vehicle you need to see a lot But only certain amounts and when you drive a vehicle my family always complains because we love taking trips to national parks And if I'm driving and I'm in this beautiful National Park, I don't want to look at the road I want to look at the the walls of Yosemite Valley I want to look at the vistas of Rocky Martin Rocky Mountain National Park I want to this is where I want to go but in order to drive safely for my family I have to focus on the road and what happens when you take these psychedelics is that well You'd better not be driving because suddenly your your aperture is open and the point that should be made by this is Well now you see that the world is a lot bigger than what you thought it was Okay, what's the takeaway from that? Well That that in fact These patterns are governing and in fact what we do is we limit the world and we'll make it smaller so that we can work with it So that's what cleaning your room is about again. All of this stuff just scales down It's not some fiction that this exists What's transcendent is more real than the reality that you perceive Well, let's pick and that's his that's his claim against the new atheist that this is not a fiction This is not a fantasy that dismissal that is used by the new atheist is Is offensive and ludicrous Now David Fuller in his conversation with with Jonathan wades in and says which is usually The calm thing. Yeah, but pluralism, you know, why Christianity? Because because that offends us because well, even if you say well even Christianity can't see the whole And I would argue well Christians can't see the whole because we're human beings So then the trick that's done is well, we want a broader vision. Okay, well Take a take a Take a take a Take a psychedelic and drive on a mountain road, there's your broader vision What do you need in order to navigate? Do you need the broadest division possible or do you need a broad a vision that is appropriately selective? And yet sufficiently broad that's what you do when you drive you need a vision that is Appropriate selective. I've got to keep an eye on the line in the road where the road is where my car is What's happening with other cars maybe a bear coming into the road all of this is appropriate silly selective But it's also sufficiently broad. I need to see enough of the road and and that balance has to be right There's your chaos order balance. You've got to get that right Well, but there are these other religions besides Christianity. I can't well Okay. Now we've introduced also the subjective into it because I want some things to be true. For example, look at Thomas Nagel When he talks about Christianity, I don't want there to be a god. Why don't I want there to be a god? I don't want there to be a god because once there is a god suddenly I am subject I don't want to be subject. Why don't I want to be subject? Because I want to be god because I want that. I think I want to be god I think when you get right down to it It could be that what this entire story Of humanity that we are in the midst of that the the bible attempts to be the pattern setter of that story says We think we want to be god And the more experience we have with being god The more we don't like it Because the more we realize We're not good gods We are Uh, we're destructive We're tyrannical we're We're not good gods. We're in fact lousy gods, but we think we want to be gods because well Addiction is in a sense the will running amok Pretty soon Let's say I want wine. I love wine I actually don't drink wine, but I don't drink wine because I don't like it not because dutch calvinists do drink alcohol but I want wine. I like wine pretty soon. I colonize wine But if I make wine my whole life then wine colonizes me This is the this is the dilemma of human beings and this is where again you need a proper hierarchy If you have the proper hierarchy the first things are first wine is a good thing, but not an ultimate thing And as long as wine is my servant and not my master Wine can be a blessing once wine becomes my master I no longer become human. This is jordan. This is cs lewis and the great divorce the person who grumbles all the time Eventually just becomes a grumble that the grumble has displaced their personhood It has taken too high a position in the hierarchy and now it has subsumed What should be sovereign which is their image bearing nature as a human being? So david says well, well, well, why christianity? Well, let's look at that How do other religions represent patterns because again patterns are foundational the material gets organized by patterns Patterns colonize material Well, surely there are better or worse representations. We all understand that And this we're talking an incredibly complex situation here Christians generally don't claim that other religions get everything wrong Christians claim that christianity gets it more right Well, you might say well, that's offensive well No, we all claim that whatever patterns of thought and whatever perspective we have and whatever We imagine the world to be Gets it more right because if I thought something else got it more right. I would be that We are always governed by that which we think is most right. That's what it means to Be stewarding a worldview. My worldview is that which I think is most Right, okay So christians obviously believe that they are most right people who follow other religions obvious believe that their system is most right And and I don't think that's cause for consternation I think that's just obvious in terms of how human beings get along if I sit down with a jew or a muslim or a secularist or Buddhist or a hindu they obviously think they're most right. I obviously think i'm more right. Well, I have Governance I have governance over me and so i'm going to govern myself as in the way that I think is most right It's just the way it works Well, is everything most is anything most right is one thing not more right than another. Well, we don't believe that And we don't act as if we believe that Now christians generally don't claim that other religions get everything wrong But that their vision of the patterns are incomplete or less accurate in some ways This is when we get into the question of revelation and again christians talk about general and special revelation what revelation is that which reveals that which reveals the truth and Throughout christian history there have been doctrines of revelation and how we think about it, but I often read So much of the talk about the bible that I hear in debates often between Let's say evangelic modernist evangelicals and secularists Don't really represent I think What revelation is and how it works? Because let's say the let's let's assume that the bible is the revelation of god once I approach that bible I bring my contamination to the bible and I can't apprehend it purely and perfectly they say well Saying i've the same thing with the natural world. I bring my biases I bring my a priori structure both to the natural world and to the bible and my appropriation of it is imperfect because I am imperfect It's basic calvinism Basic christianity I'd argue We have similar challenges but not similar but no similar qualms when it comes to science In fact, this is no different from how we manage science We We have okay throw away the bible altogether. You have the you have the world the natural order that is revelation Well, how do you deal with that revelation once I come to it? in terms of my subjective self My subjectivity comes on to it and now it's here where jordan peterson gets very interesting because In a sense the modernist perspective says my subjectivity contaminates it well but my subjectivity also co-creates it in some ways because and hence that's why we get duplicates in pluralism and contamination because I need that a priori structure. I need those hierarchies And and I need and that's all been built into me long before I was ever born because we needed those structures in order to apprehend the world at all and interact with it the world at all One lifetime is not sufficiently long to do so and if you go into my videos about You know god one and god two. This is what we're talking about Now if as a christian you look at the bible as special revelation you have many of the same difficulties with the bible that I apprehend the bible through a tradition of calvinism and And I apprehend the bible now through a tradition of modernistic reading and then later on I apprehend the bible through a tradition of learning from a literary biblical scholars like robert alter and you know, so the the the science the science The science of studying the ciencia studying the bible has this whole tradition and and we can't help but do that again These are these are the patterns governing the stuff but this is part of the interaction and so pluralism is always a function, but we ought not to be the the pluralistic impulse of well the bible can't be right is just simply the opposite reflection of the tribal Assertion that the bible is always right And and again, i'm not drawing judgments between those but the reactions to the same thing The the reactions that say well Now I do believe that the bible is the infallible word of god But that of course comes to me through my tradition and comes to me john calvin says it's it's the holy spirit works in my In my heart. Well, what does he mean by that? Well, there's a whole nother long conversation But that's what theology is. It's this long conversation But this this pluralist demand is just simply the mirror opposite of the tribal demand. It's it's post Christendom nervousness of of worldview tyranny But it's it's just a demand and so what you actually have to do is look at it and say well Let's take a look at these things and see who has the better revelation who has who's Who's logos based? Representations of the patterns is most true to In the broadest possible way all the patterns that we are knowing and seeing and the patterns that are enduring Now science is a logos based Representation of a limited subset of reality the attempt of of stripping away consciousness And again, this is what peugeot is constantly getting at notice how science uses numbers and words We we apply in a sense logos to try and discern the patterns My thing it showed it had stopped recording I didn't know where it had stopped recording didn't lose anything good Science is a logos based representation to a limited subset of reality with consciousness stripped away Notice how science uses numbers and words. It's a representation We we look at We watch the patterns that we see revealed in materiality. We pull them out Into a logos representations and we manipulate them and then we try to apply them to other things That is in a sense technology and and that's what we're always doing as human beings. We do it in psychology We do it in theology We take what we learn over here by this pattern and we try to apply it to this pattern and we see if it works And if it works, we think oh we have a very useful pattern. This is what peterson is talking about when he's talking At the beginning of the of the conversation with with scrutiny now DNA as pattern uses hacks and tricks to temporarily outmaneuver death Now it's very interesting in the old testament the hebrew patriarchs focused on descendants about the worst thing that could happen to you in the bible Was to be cut off Meant that your children would not endure how tremendously darwin darwinian and dna Present that my pattern will be cut off and in fact if you read the old testament you discover well teach your children the whole idea of covenant and religion and and scripture and all of this is in fact to to Continue to allow patterns to transcend through time and that's why stories and world views and religions Are so powerful even more powerful than dna, although they they often work together In that you can transcend time and you can cheat death through story All right, and that's that's what's happening When we're using well archetypes and archetypal stories when we're you know You have the avengers and harry potter and lord of the rings where we have that sense that we are these We are cheating death and that's where we have classics and works of art that These things are transcending death this you go to the the getty in in in north la and you look at these amazing Pieces of art and you begin to recognize. Wow. These are these are beating death Story logos is beating death but the age of decay works on those fibers in those paintings and And a sword can slash a painting and so there again We have the representation of this fight between the organic and the inorganic But now we have stories that can be put in our minds and told that can be sometimes represented in books But can be memorized and be passed on Well, here's the idea ideas are in many ways not subject to the sword. So then we try and kill the idea bearers whether that we we burn books or we kill people or we You know and in a sense the whole free speech conversation now is a question of can we use the sword to continue to destroy stories and that's in a sense the tyranny of The tyrannical worldviews that we are going to employ the inorganic in order to destroy the story based Well other religions use similar tricks reincarnation is attempt at duplicating a pattern beyond death the difficulty with reincarnation is that Whereas there's some people they try to go back into past lives in the christian story My memory myself my patterns Is goes into the grave Inorganic resurrection comes out of the grave and and I coming out of the grave Is in christianity the represented representation of me my pattern that is paul vanderkley with my my personality in all of this now in christian theology perfected somehow Roman catholics will tend to go to purgatory and I very much understand how that Theological tradition developed the reformers Kind of coveted on it because they didn't find it in scripture and that was the particular canon They were trying to use to purify the tradition before them but This pattern that is paul vanderkley with personality with memory with with with all that I have then gets translated in christianity Reincarnation is a part of the difficulty with reincarnation is you have to ask that what exactly is reincarnated? Not your personality not your story paul vanderkley in christianity with resurrection son of stan and barb Heir of this this tradition of dutch calvinism heir of northside chapel christian reform church in paterson new jersey And all the unique people there heir of the ministry that I did in the dominican republic Heir of living stones and all of the interactions of the personalities and and image bearers at living stones heir of classes central california now heir of the conversations that i'm having over jordan peterson at my jordan peterson meetups and via email and comment section and and conversations online heir of all of this gets resurrected and the inorganic doesn't finally Doesn't finally win over the pattern that is paul vanderkley This incredibly complex patterns and then of course not just paul vanderkley But in christianity again and again and again and and not just me as an individual but the community Which is the church the saints that's how it's represented and and on and on and on this goes Now reincarnation says well something gets recycled And there's a whole theology around that but I think christianity Is the reason i'm a christian i think christianity offers a better representation karma is an attempt to have morality transcend death and in some ways ideas of morality do transcend death Goodness and badness isn't necessarily killed by death, but it's threatened by death because the the moral hosts are threatened by death But is morality the pattern itself again? Peugeot is saying you know the pattern is primary and it gets exhibited throughout the system And and you you're not really going to answer that question based on science because what comes first is it the pattern or is it the Or is the expression of the pattern in the real in the real world now we've got play it on aristotle Dealing, you know, we're dealing with them. Karma is an attempt to have moral morality transcend death, but karma is mechanistic and that mechanism is Is a reflection of the impersonal in In some of those world views well in christianity. It isn't really karma there is a judge and and why is that judge represented in terms of a person because Whereas let's say a lot will do this you receive this penalty Well, the judge comes and says well, but the reality is more complex than Just do this receive this penalty kill someone You know receive the death penalty. Oh, but you killed in self-defense. Well that That that that changes the outcome and that's why the personal the judge the the the Conscious bearing being that can see all the factors and again in christianity the representation is that god is the conscious bearing creature Not creature, but the conscious bearing being that sees all And can correctly discern all now you might be skeptical and say no such thing will ever happen Okay, i'd say well, how do you know you can't know that I certainly hope it's true and in fact, I would argue that every every representation on earth of justice Points and tries to derive itself from that ultimate representation of justice, which is why Traditionally before we got a little simplistic about symbology Well, you put say the two tablets of the law in a courthouse You put the ten commandments on a courthouse. It isn't now people can interpret that as worldview tyranny But it can also be interpreted Sacramentally That what should happen in the courtroom is in fact as true as possible a pattern representation of the fundamental pattern of justice of the judge being able to look at all of The pertinent information and declare a remedy or a a sentence that Maintains the universe that is what justice is for Now christianity offers different answers obviously from reincarnation and karma the renovation of the materiality itself that is the resurrection of jesus jesus is the First fruits of the reserve of the of the renovation of all materiality And he embodies that in himself. He is the spirit The logos finally govern stuff and c.s Lewis does an amazing job of talking about that in his book miracles also see Uh the apostle paul in first corinthians 15 the spiritual body now now often In the in the grips of materiality people look at that and say well it isn't a physical body That's not the sense in which paul is using the word spiritual when paul talks about life and the spirit paul is talking about spirit our patterns being governed by the pattern us being in line with the Foundational pattern. Okay now part of my kvetch about the pattern talk is that Pattern lends itself again more to Impersonality and I know jonathan pcho wouldn't go there because of again that he goes back to consciousness and says consciousness our small consciousness is derivative of the large the all Consciousness that god is because our small consciousness needs hierarchies to apprehend the world But god can apprehend all fully completely through and through without limitation And again, you might say well How do we know that such such a being exists? Well read david bentley heart on god That language is in a sense Already biasing us in one way rather than the other and I would kind of use An ontological argument to say well if it doesn't exist then neither do we in a sense because This gets into the debate with materialism. It was is material derivative and spirit is such a slippery word Spirit but but it's the most traditional word is spirit foundational or is material foundational and and so Peugeot and peterson are saying pattern is foundational and materiality is governed by pattern sort of been saying throughout this whole video And as c.s. Lewis says true myth made flesh in the beginning was Logos the word And the word was with god and the word was god here. You see john Setting out the basis for a trinity the word became flesh and tabernacled among us Your pattern or your soul more faithfully transcends death than mere offspring The logos conquers death Death DNA is a trick and a hack to compete with death, but it can't conquer death Logos conquers death. There's a spirit under the world There's a spirit under morale under reality. It's a pattern Oops, I lost my slide And that's where you get logos and flesh Now this wound up being a little longer than I thought it would but I wanted to get this out And Let me know what you think of it. It's a big thanks to everyone who showed up at the jordan peterson meetup last night in sacramento Kyle I thought brought some really good stuff from san luis abispo so great having Kyle and kevin both came up and they They shared 9 30 sunday school and i haven't posted that yet forgot to hit record on the sermon So you'll have to go to the facebook page if you want to watch this week's sermon um I did the I did the rough draft to the sermon in on this channel already but big thanks to the jordan peterson meetup group because they continue to challenge both the materialists and the and those who are increasingly Increasingly interested and impacted by You know chris was there and he's chris has been coming to our sunday school class at living stones and And he was there and he's working through he's he's reading he's reading he's working through jordan peterson's book list. He's He's reading young and he's reading and also david came up from the bay area so a bunch of people came and then all the regulars joey and tyler and and rick and mike and James wasn't here this week, but the whole cast of characters in the meetups and and for me what an invaluable rich community of thinking through and And trying to discern truth and testing ideas and debating and um, I love those meetup meetings. They're they're just You know highlights of the week. So I hope this video was helpful