https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=cs0bIUEL2EI

 Hi, this is Paul. Jonathan Peugeot has blessed us with a really remarkable conversation. It's another Jonathan Peugeot modernist crying games reveal. When Jonathan Peugeot starts a conversation and everybody just simply assumes that everybody in the conversation is a nice modernist who holds all the same assumptions about how the world works and then they get to a point when the person talking to Jonathan suddenly realizes that all is not what they might imagine. Let's get to that point here. In their rituals, were they like, so were the Greeks in their rituals, were they like, were they more closer to what you'd say like, like the Mandalorian or Marvel Cinematic Universe or something like that? What do you mean? Well, you keep saying like, well, it's different with these fictional stories. Yeah. Right. Were the Greeks operating under a fictional story? No, I don't think so. OK, so if I think the gods exist, yes, I think the gods exist. And Zeus included. I think Zeus exists. Of course. The gods. I think I'm on a Neil Gaiman side with that. I think all the gods exist. Sorry. And that look. So The Crying Game is a movie from 1992 where a police officer is investigating something and he he starts attending a bar and he falls in love with a person in the bar and they get more and more intimate. And what the police officer doesn't know is that the person that he's falling for is a trans woman. And there comes a moment of the big reveal. Did 1992. People were shocked because the movie sort of set it up quite well. And Jonathan Pigeot is not a gelding. And if you want to know what the reference of that is, look at the end of the first chapter of C.S. Lewis's The Abolition of Man. Now, this was an awesome conversation all the way through, but I'm going to play the parts that are the most awesome. So let's get started. All the cultural stuff around it aside, the idea of the hero starts out, takes one step back, takes two steps forward. Big, big thing. New status quo. Right. New status quo. Right. Like you move from status quo, like to we see, we see how what the status quo is. There is the call to do something different. There's the refusal of the call. There's the acceptance of the call. Things get worse and worse and worse until they reach a breaking point. Now we're in a new status quo like that. So he just basically walks through and distills, you know, a version of the hero's journey down into this set of things and says, well, that's the hero's journey. He has basically deconstructed the hero's journey and he says, that's all it is. But what's shocking is that Ben Hatke for being a remarkably talented storywriter, which is, I mean, the video begins, Peugeot is kind of fanboying on the guy and, you know, there's all this bromance between them. But Hatke doesn't fully appreciate the power of his craft because somehow he imagines that, and this, this will actually continue through the video. He imagines that, well, the, the real power of story is in novelty. Now in a lot of the Hans Georg Mueller videos, I've been talking about Robert Bella's Habits of the Heart, which is a book. Robert Bella was the one who coined the words of a religion in the 1980s. He wrote a book, Habits of the Heart, which is a book about expressive individualism, about Shielaism. And so in American culture, expressive individualism sort of ascended to the heights of the moral imaginary, let's say. And the, the summa bonum of all people is to sort of express their secret, sacred self and get it out there and be novel and original, and you will be rewarded for the culture by being original. Now, Peugeot flips all of that on his head because Peugeot will much say, now you'll be rewarded by the culture by, by helping people see what is most foundational in contextuality. Now here I'm going to go, I'm going to go, I'm going off the reservation. I'm always a little leery about playing things from certain channels because I don't really want to get these little copyright notices and have to deal with that. So I'm a lot more circumspect about just grabbing things off the internet than someone like, like Grim Grizz or... Complicated. Uh oh, I there, I just did it. I just did it. Well, that, that way I can just snip it out if it offends the, the YouTube copyright gods, but Clay, Clayven, Andrew Clayven made a couple of, so he had a little review of Dune and Clayven now it's helpful to remember that Clayven isn't just a conservative pundit. He's an author and that's what he was before he ever became a Christian or a conservative pundit or any of those things. And he made a, he made a comment about Dune basically that the problem that he has with Dune is that as with much science fiction, he says the character development is wanting because especially in these mythological stories and movies, the character development, every, everyone's just an archetype. Mom is the mom, King is the King, Messiah is the Messiah and authors sort of for the sake of the archetype sacrifice, I would say contextuality in the conversations that I've had with Byrne. If you go way back, texture a long time ago, I had a conversation with Byrne Power where we talked about texture. So in other words, in many of these stories, they sacrifice texture for archetype and that was part of his complaint about science fiction because science fiction loves to trade in really big stories. Now, this, uh, Hatke, I'm trying to remember his name, got in trouble for not remaining, oh, now I can't remember, her name was Helen. Okay. What's up Helen? Um, the woman that interviewed Jordan Peterson for GQ UK, Helen. Oh no, I can't remember her last name. Her name is Helen. Okay. So what's fascinating for me is that in many ways Hatke in a very modern, secular way, his imagination of the power and the reality of story is impoverished, even though he's a terrific storyteller, which is exactly why Peugeot, you know, wanted to talk to him and, you know, Peugeot, I'm probably not saying anything that would offend Jonathan if I said that Hatke is a better storyteller than Jonathan Peugeot, even if Hatke doesn't completely understand how his craft serves as Jonathan Peugeot and I might say the glory of our God. And reality is like that. People serve God and they don't even know it. Well, why should that strike us as a surprise? The sun serves God and unless let's say we go down Sheldrake's path, is the sun conscious? I don't know. We don't, we don't act like it is. Animals serve God. The heavens declare the glory of God. This is Psalm 19. And, and so you don't have to know God to serve God. I've been reviving, I'm just, I should have just jumped into this video without making any PowerPoint at all because I'm just so ADHD and I just feel comfortable enough now on the internet to simply go off the reservation on a regular basis. So for those of you, many of you know, I did a while ago start a clip channel, but I've been conflicted in terms of what I want to do with that click channel. And lately I've been, I started out putting clips of other things that I saw on there. And then somebody sent a message and said, you know, YouTube doesn't really like this anymore. And I knew that because back in the day when Adam friended was doing this to Jordan Peterson content, you know, they demonetized all of his clips of Jordan Peterson, which quite, you know, which was quite frankly, fair. Now this channel isn't monetized at all. And I'm just sort of using it because you YouTube is giving us, you know, free space. And so if they're going to give me free space, why don't I store video content on YouTube and the same philosophy as my blog, leadingchurch.com. Why don't I, except I pay for that. Why don't I, I'd like to, I like to collate things and catalog things here so that I can find them lately. And then for a while I was taking some clips from my own channel of what people said that this was important. I've got for Vickie's agape clip here, which I've used quite a bit. Uh, Ross Douthat's, Marianne Williamson's clip, a little bit of, um, just, just a few things from here and there. And then Grizz started doing some stuff I wanted to remember. And then I actually used a little bit of this Jonathan Peugeot clip. So I've used some different things anyway, all the way back to where I started from. Where did I start from? Oh yeah. We don't, we don't need to know. It's not essential that we understand the role that we're playing to play the role that God has for us. I'll say it that way, even though for some of you that'll, that you're, you're God number two allergy will sort of flare up. So, you know, might get some modernist secularist Benadryl just to, you know, ease the, uh, ease the nerve endings there. But that's, that's not in any way a new idea to Christianity. And it shouldn't come as a surprise to anyone that this author who, who God has gifted and skilled as an author, um, in his, in the Sheila-ism in the, in the waning Sheila-ism of American, of the American empire, imagines that the quality of his story is in its originality. C.S. Lewis, of course, saw that a long time ago and said, no, that's not at all actually what it is, what you're, what you're better off doing is as work on telling the best story you can, you won't displace an archetype. What you will actually do is increase an instantiation and contextuality in texture of because an archaetupos is in that way, as Andrew Clavin said, sort of high and lifted up and lacks contextuality. It's sort of like, and you see this in movies all the time. Sorry, Luke, I didn't finish my sentence twice. I didn't three times. I got to stop. You see that in movies sometime. And in fact, our culture has been doing that in a rather extraordinary way, more and more as increasingly through cyber technology and through CGI and movies. CGI is a great example of it. Things start looking perfect. In fact, I was looking at studio one 88. If you, if you get a whole bunch of studio one 88, if you get a whole bunch of studio one 88 videos prompted to your algorithm, that was my fault. Same thing happened with owl kitty. So studio one 88 does these beautiful instantiations of famous movies on the cheap and they're just hilarious. I love that stuff. Maybe that's why I'm just a sucker for grime lines. And if you saw my hobo communion tweet, it's, you know, I love contextuality. I love reality and all of its gritty complex glory. And that's actually the sign of a good writer, not to write some disembodied archetype, but to have it. And that's when we use this word real and the author's good at it, but he doesn't know what he's doing. And so really Peugeot comes into this conversation to try and say, well, you know, kind of what you're doing is that you do it really well and you know, I'm a Calvinist, so it's easy for me to say, well, God is using you in this way. And back to the conversation. That's the hero's journey at its, at its like most baseline level. Um, so I feel like, like, like that just, that's just there. And I, and I get, that's just there. I mean, that's, that's not, that's no longer novel. That's no longer fresh. That's no longer interesting. I, it is exciting to me to look at that as a, as a basic rhyme scheme for storytelling and realize that you don't have to tell stories that way, but it's a super basic rhyme scheme that you can know. And also now that you know it, what interesting things can you do with it? And again, novelty is in Sheila ism and expressive individualism. I'll probably have to put this sweater back on later. And expressive individualism. That's, that's sort of what's at the top of our hierarchy, but no, I, and I think Peugeot was right here. Yeah. And a lot of the stories, like a lot of the edgy stories, or let's say the experimental stories or the more modern stories, what they're doing is that they're not doing that basic story on purpose to make you notice that they're not doing the basic thing. So even when you kind of go away from this, you know, like, let's say, like you said, like situation, problem resolution, or return to another situation. Sometimes it doesn't mean that there's an actual resolution of the problem, but a transformation and then to another state. It's like, and then if you look at crazy, you know, data type storytelling or people who try to break that, that, that structure, you notice, Oh, you're trying to break that structure. And then the structure still continues to exist because you keep trying to break it. So that's the heart of Peugeot's, I think one of his truly great videos on parasitic storytelling that the more you try to break from the structure, the more you actually reinforce the structure, which is why Peugeot is the apostle of purpose. Why he is demonstrating that reality lays itself out in a certain way and one way or another, it's escapable. And, and at the heart of Sheila ism of expressive individualism is the imagination that my secret sacred self is somehow sui gent, you know, is somehow absolutely unique in the universe. I'm a precious little snowflake deep down inside. And I'm not making a woke statement here, but, but that if I can only get out my secret sacred self, it will be absolutely groundbreaking and unique. And it's Lewis that really gets to the point of saying, you know, if you want to grow in your craft, learn from the masters. And the further you get into that, the more what you will actually do is you will actually become creative and much more original, but the originality now just look at the word original goes back to the origin of all light life and creative things. And that's why original, ironically means the opposite of what Sheila ism and expressive individualism imagines it to mean. Now, again, I'm not saying that hat key or, or even put, I don't even know they'd even Peugeot he's younger than I am read Robert Bell as habits of the heart, but that's the point of Bella's book that our culture somehow, somehow confused novelty with originality. Well, they said, well, they're the same thing. Well, yeah, but you have to understand origin originality. It's right there in the word. Any experimental story ends up in a way, even reinforcing that pattern because you notice it as an exception. You see it as something which is trying to be different. And so it just comes back to it. Just, it just becomes like you said, almost like a, it's almost like the pattern of breathing. It's just like how you even recognize that something is a story is because there's, you know, I keep, I keep telling people that the world is full of facts, right? The world that has a million amounts of facts. So if you string them together and for people to remember it, you, it's not arbitrary the way you do that. It has to have a certain pattern or else people won't even be able to recognize it as a unit, right? Won't you be able to say that's a story. It's a, it's, it's framed with the beginning and an end, right? It has characters that have some kind of continuation inside, or at least some theme or something, which holds it together. Now, a while ago, this video is going way off the reservation. A while ago, I did a couple of videos on like stories of old, which is a, which is a quite a fascinating channel. The guy did a three episode series, the fundamental difference between stories and reality, your life is not a hero's journey. And then story as identities. Who are we without them? And he, he would go through the point of, well, stories aren't real. Stories are just structures that we impose on reality. But, but Peugeot's point is that, you know, however, however theoretical you want to get with these narratives, they will simply, they will simply endure. And let's see, I'll have to find where. Okay. This is the clip that I made for my clips channel, because it was just such a good clip. I, I wanted to keep it. One of the, one of the things I tried to explain is that storytelling, they say the pattern of storytelling just come from attention. You know, you can understand the ancient myths or the myths that have come down to us or the Bible stories or these ancient stories. The reason why we have, we have them is because they grab people's attention. And then as they were transmitted, that attention was maintained. That is that there's a capacity to pay attention. And so you can imagine how stories refine themselves with attention. That is those stories that are able to get, keep our attention will survive the generations and those that aren't, will just kind of fade away. And then the, even the stories themselves will end up being refined because as they kind of progress in time, some things become idiosyncrasies and you have to modify them so that the story can be remembered. So you end up having these really pure stories with time that just kind of happen on their own almost through a process of natural selection, you could call it. But what was sort of fascinating is at this point, I don't know what's, I don't, I've never watched this guy at all. So I can't read him very well, but you know, Jonathan Peugeot is going on with his theory about stories and attention. And I think he's just, you know, kind of sitting here kind of maybe, what's he talking about? The Peugeot guy, I said yes to this conversation, but he's got all these strange ideas and never heard most of these ideas before. And it's just at some point he'll stop talking and then I'll have to talk again. And then that'll be fine. But what Peugeot was laying down here is of course, in many ways, an ontology of story and saying a story is the, the, the great stories that we deal with are the product of consciousness. And so there's something really deep, profound, enduring, and dare we say inevitable about them. That you also have that in yourself, which is that the things that you remember, there's a reason why you remember them. They're not just for sentimental reasons. There's a, there's something about them, which we're able to grab and keep your attention. And so, and in that laboratory in your brain or in your, in your experience. Now, when he says not just for sentimental reasons, again, sentimentality is dismissive, but we're going to get a little bit into nostalgia because again, that Clay Rutledge Jordan Peterson conversation was really outstanding and, and shouldn't go by without attention. You know, to gathers that together and to bring out stories without doing it too deliberately, you know? And so let's say the heroes, like the hero's journey comes out without having to plan it, like where people say, Oh, how does this fit with the, with the hero's journey, let's say. But if you're, if you're an intuitive storyteller, then that pattern will just appear almost out of, it just makes sense because it's this, this the things that made you care about stories in the first place. There's that back to the other one. Um, or else then it looks fragmented and, and we struggle to even remember it, let's say. Sure. Sure. Um, but I do think they're like, I, like, I do think there are multiple, there are many stories, right? And like, so I do think like, Okay. Novelty diversity. There's many stories. And so the goal is to use the muse, the secret, save herself. However, in this mysterious, bullion base of creativity that my stories come out of, you know, we sort of forget the meaning crisis and the imagination that we're all simply formed product of the whole show. CS Lewis miracles. Um, surely our goal is to tell new stories and to be original. I do think that, you know, like these stories that I think of as, as rhyme schemes, um, I still have to admit that there's jazz, right? Like there's still, uh, and, and those kinds of experiments, like, you know, breaking out of, of, you know, I'm not a musical expert, but breaking out whatever came before is what leads us to, to jazz, which brings in its own richness in finding. Okay. Novelty originality. Are those, do those two words mean the same thing? I don't know. And in like new patterns, new, new ways of doing things, like I feel like the same thing happens in, in mathematics and, um, you know, physics and stuff like this. And, and in some ways this is sort of novelty hijacked by the, the spirit of progress. Oh, because it's, it's new things because the, the, the smartphone is a new thing. And it's like, yeah, it is a new thing, but it's also a computer and maybe the smartphone is in fact a creation that is, um, that is drawing us towards something like the ubiquity of knowledge. And the ubiquity of knowledge is of course a very old dream that we have been using all sorts of means to try to get a handle on. And I think it's, again, I think it's a function of the upper register. Um, the other thing though that, that called the mind with what you were saying was, um, another thing I've been thinking about a lot is, um, stories as survival information, coded survival information. Oh, cause you know, evolutionary psychology is really hot right now because I was just listening to, uh, Daniel Smaktenberger on Chris Williamson's channel because Grimm Grizz has a crush on, crush on Chris, uh, totally. And he projected it on me. I just want everybody to know that. Go ahead, Grimm. You can clip this and you can put it on your channel because it's true. You can take it to the bank, but you know, evolutionary psychology because well, now we're getting back to originality too, aren't we? Well, because this is all about survival and Darwinian truth. And again, you know, this is where Peterson is sort of anticipating where a lot of these things are going. Um, this is a something that, um, I don't know if you're familiar with, uh, Brian McDonald and he's written a book called Invisible Ink. Uh, he's got a podcast called the, you are a storyteller podcast. And he's like a master. He's, he's, he's, he's masterful at talking about, about story. He's a great screenwriter and storyteller. Um, but he talks about stories as, as sort of, as, um, at their root, like, you know, at a fundamental, like almost evolutionary level, it's code. Just watch out at their root, a fundamental level, almost an evolutionary level. Evolutionary has become one of these buzzwords today. It's a holy word. In survival information, you've got the Librae Tar Pits. You can find, um, you know, a saber tooth tiger in the Tar Pits or no, you can find like, okay, you find a mammoth in the Tar Pits. You can find a saber tooth tiger on top of the mammoth in the Tar Pits. You don't find a person on top of that saber tooth tiger on top of them because they have a story about the Tar Pits. I saw this thing go in there. It didn't come out. Right. Sit story as simple as that. Um, and then like, and then there are certain stories, like another proof of the, or like example, I guess, of this would be like, um, I can say, um, uh, the tortoise and the hare. And you're like, that was much more a story about rationality, slow and steady wins the race, right. That it like, it like, and if I, if I sit down a child and I say, now, if you go, sometimes the slower route is the better route to win the race. Like they're not going to remember that. But if you tell the tortoise and the hare, it's in there. Right. And it, and that gets back to the clip that I just played, which was earlier in the conversation where Pazell was saying, now attention, consciousness, attention, form story. We're, we're, we're getting at something and we're not, we don't know that we're doing it. We're just doing it. And there's, it's iterative. It's recursive through time and it keeps developing and it keeps purifying. I mean, that's the heart of, of Peterson's sort of divine slash Darwinian authoritative Bible. It's in there and now that you say it and they immediately are thinking so, but anyway, uh, so, so I do like to think about, about that. And I think about living stories as the ones that contain, um, I don't know, not fact, but truth or like, like, like useful. Uh, and, and you see, you could just, you would just watching modernity dissipate in our use of the language, not fact, but truth. Oh, well, you're not all the way over to Jordan Peterson lands yet, but that's the way that the stream is flowing because fact, uh, and, and even in the, it was fascinating because even in the, um, Oh, where's my clip channel? Where's my clip channel? Even in the, the Carl Barth Calvinist faith fact, Orthodox preach creed. I mean, I use all those words so that I can find it. I often title things, especially on my leading church blog. I just put keywords in there because the purpose of the blog is sort of a file cabinet so that I can find things. But it's so funny to watch Will Willimon and, um, Stanley Howe was now most of you won't know who these people are because Will Willimon is a famous preacher and, um, works at Duke divinity and how awesome a famous Christian philosopher. And, you know, all of the words that are problematic, like, like fact and, um, all these, all these words that are now cross pressured. Well, we're, what's happening in over in Jordan Peterson land is you're getting away from the cross pressure because you're going to come, going to come at it from below with, with evolutionary psychology information useful. What do you mean by living stories? Um, I mean, the stories that, that, that shows getting better. What do you mean by this? Define that term for me. And, you know, that's a pastor trick of mine. And, and really the thing is, well, what do you really mean by that? Do you really have any understanding of what you mean by that? Cause, cause that can mean a few things. And I want to know from you what you think it means. That makes it useful. What do you mean by living stories? Um, I mean, the stories that, that, that, that make it the stories that like, like from a, like, I don't know if I, I've never thought about it. See, and he's struggling now. He knows things that he's trying to bring up into his consciousness, Congress to the guy in front of the mic. And so they're, they're kind of shuffling, you know, who's gonna, who's, where's this information? He knows that he can do it. And this is part of fascinating. about this conversation. This guy knows more than he can say. And that's true of all of us, but, but he knows more than he can say. He can do it. He doesn't necessarily know how he's doing it or why he's doing it. He's doing it. And Peugeot was kind of pulling that out of him right now. But what, what you'll tend to get. There was Tony Rob Tony, is it Tony Robbins? The inspirational, the motivational speaker has this show on Netflix and it's. Boy, that was, I didn't watch all of it. I just watched a piece of it and I thought. I had a lot of thoughts about that. And if I, if I, that would be worth a commentary video, just in terms of some of the, some of the tricks, if you work with people like pastors or psychologists, you learn sort of stupid human tricks that you can amaze a crowd with. You know, this wizard, this word wizardry that we use. And so we asked a perfectly lovely common woman to stand up and explain importance and she just gave us a stream of all the hack need cliches that are passing for common philosophy for, for most people, and I don't want to sound like an elitist, but it's sort of the, it's sort of the language that shits, that sits on the answer. You know, I know I got these watchers like, uh, like Chad, the alcoholic and, and, and grim gris who are going to meme the heck out of what I just said. It's all this language that sort of sits on the shelf and we pull it off to show each other and because we're all showing each other the same thing, we're all communicating to each other that this, everything is okay because we're all saying the same word. So say we all, so say we all. And, and this is what passes and you know, part of what you do as a pastor or in a good conversation, therapists do this all the time is you, you, you don't take, you don't take the off the shelf answer. You don't, you don't snack them down and play some elitist move. You just ask them to go a little deeper with it. Teachers do exactly the same thing. Dig a little more because, you know, you know, more than you can say. And if you say it with your own lips, you'll believe it a lot quicker and it'll be a lot truer and you'll remember it a lot better than if I just lay it out there for you, like the Darwinism of storytelling. But I mean, like, I don't know the ones that, the ones that keep the ones that Peugeot just laid out the Darwinism of storytelling. Survive. Yeah. There's like a meta process that you talked about where it's like the story is about survival, but then the fact that stories survive is also like a meta version of that, like this is what I was trying to point to before the idea of attention, which is that like, this is what I said before and seated it and some members of this consciousness Congress that they heard that and they kind of, the others were like, no, we're, we're moving the lips now. Thank you very much. We're in charge because we've, we've, we all know what to say out in the public realm where everyone will nod their help and say, yeah, we'll take all the words off the shelf and send them out here. And then this is the beauty of a conversation because it pushes us and we start to tinker with these things and we learn as we do it. These stories survive because we tell them basically that's what it is. Like we, we transmit them to the next generation and that's why they now, if you watch him, he's a lot more attentive than the first time Pujo went through this stuff. And again, this is no disrespect. If you go through my videos and my conversations, you'll see me doing exactly the same thing. This is what we do. This is how we learn. This is why we have conversation. This is why we're doing what we're doing. They survive, but there are, there are implicit reasons why we do that. That it's not arbitrary. You know, the, you know, the, the horrible sitcom, you know, that in the nineties that we don't even remember, it's not arbitrary. He's the apostle of purpose. You know, remember the, you know, the, you know, the, the horrible sitcom, you know, that in the nineties that we don't even remember the name of that we don't remember it and we won't pass it on because it was just, it just didn't keep our attention. It wasn't good enough. Right. It just didn't have what it takes to kind of survive. Whereas other stories do survive. Um, so Mike, my question is one of the, one of the things that I've been thinking about a lot is the difference between, um, our world, which is full of entertainment stories, which I appreciate, obviously I like them. I live in this world, but there's also a way in which this is much different from ancient cultures that had. Participative story. That is the, um, let's say the ancient Greeks, when they told the stories of the kids, if you watch his eyes, mind is wandering, what he sees, they're thinking about it, or he's thinking about other things, the consciousness Congress, they're, they're working back there. And this is one of, this is one of my favorite parts of the conversation because it actually sets up that moment. The, the crying game moment that Peugeot will get to a little bit later. The heroes and the gods. It was, that was their heroes. It was their gods. It was their story. So they, by telling the story, they were kind of participating in, in the story. And so one of the issues I've had right now is that we've kind of moved. And what Peugeot is doing is the enlightenment. Whoa. This wall, it's like a woven wall around certain areas. And again, this was all done for some very good reasons. I mean, if Jonathan Peugeot and I talk about the enlightenment or the Protestant reformation will, will, will value it in, in different ways, obviously. Oh, the enlightenment was bad. I don't think the enlightenment was bad. I think the enlightenment was inevitable. Um, it certainly sent us down some bad roads and it also sent us down some good roads, but it's, it's our nature to overreach, give Adam and Eve agency. And they'll say, no, the garden's mine. Just watch, watch a three-year-old. This is, this is what we do as human beings. So, so the enlightenment sort of wove a wall and Peugeot is just picking out the threads because the wall is fraying and decaying and coming undone. And that's where we're at. Move away from participative storytelling. Uh, you know, like the way that you would tell the Iliad or the gospel stories or his or the story of George Washington or these types of stories that are part of us and, and on the superhero stories, which are completely fictional and that you can't like, you can cosplay, but you never really enter into the world of Superman. Right. And sort of like earlier when Peugeot sort of lays out the theory and a little bit later in the conversations, like, oh, wait a minute. He's almost saying what Peugeot was saying. And just like, yes, yes. And well, what about this? What about this cosplay? And this is why y'all are going to get a dose of studio 188 coming up soon because what are they, what are they doing? Well, now they sort of pass it off as kind of low budget, um, frozen, low cost version, and it's hilarious because what they're doing is they're taking this and they're kind of making a sort of a mocky fun little low resolution version of, version of what they're up to. And, and I think, I think it's just hilarious, but. It's, I think it's absolutely hilarious. These guys are just having way too much fun, but what are they doing? We, we take this, this world of images into ourselves and then we want to act it out. Now it's not as simplistic as sort of the moral panic that, that went around with the video game ratings. Um, you know, Oh, if we watch people play call of duty, they're all going to go out and act like call of duty and watch them play grand theft auto. They're all going to go out and act like grand theft auto. No, we're not that simplistic at all, but we are in fact in a relationship with, with these kinds of things. Let's make sure that's. Right. But, but you never enter into the world of Zeus either. I mean, if you were Greek, then Zeus is your God. You go to the temple and you can sacrifice like, you know, there's a sense in which you're, you're actually. And so now we're bumping into the enlightenment and we're bumping into a bunch of the stuff that late middle ages, early modern period had to suss out in terms of, well, what do we do with relics? Well, what do we do with miracle stories? What do we do with pilgrimages? What do we do with, and you know, the scientific revolution is coming and we're finding, you know, amazing new power of, of manipulating and controlling the physical world. And, you know, I, the reason I call this the lab leak, the, the scientific lab leak is we take the scientific method and we say, Oh, and these, in these little domains, it works very well. But then we, we do what we always do. We overreach. And now suddenly we're not recognizing, in fact, our, our God given place in the order in the natural law. I almost made a video about natural law today, Carl and mosquito and bionic mosquito, because if you look at infallibility of natural law, infallibility of scripture and infallibility of papal infallibility, and you line those up and you start thinking about the relationship between us and the ideas of infallibility, which are, which are modern in many ways, at least even though natural ideas about natural law are obviously far older. But anyway, that's, that's another video that I wanted to make that I, I didn't wind up making and maybe I'll make at some point because the problem is that we can't wield infallibility because infallibility, let's one video at a time. Where were we? Oh yeah. Um, if you're a, if you're a modern person, you go to, you know, San Diego Comic-Con, right? Like it's. Yeah. And you know what? On one hand, we probably can't mind read ancient Greeks near as much as we would imagine on the other. Comic-Con is sort of like the Las Vegas version of New York as to the real New York and the ancients. That was the real New York. And, and, and Pagel already knows it's going to get intimate and the conversation is going to get closer. And the conversation is going to get closer and he's going to discover I'm not a gelding. Those two things don't seem that far apart to me. Like the idea that like, you are participating in those, in the story of the Greek gods, but Zeus is not going to turn into a bull and impregnate you. I mean, like, the lights are off. Right. Well, not you, but your ancestors. Your ancestors. Me, the ancient Greek, but, and this is where I sort of come in because everyone, every time someone says, and this was big, you know, 10, 15 years ago and the whole church gay wars, um, God made me this way. What exactly do you mean by that? Now we're getting into God number one and God number two. God made me this way. Oh. What are we saying? Well, Zeus didn't, we don't, you don't really believe Zeus impregnated people. Oh, but you believe that God made that little child. See, it's, it's on these frontiers of language that we can begin to sort of get out the Oak Island started again, which I'm very excited about, you know, the biggest tease on television. You know, now they've got that you Canadians, what's with your tyrannical government? I just saw Jordan Peterson on the internet, freaking the heck out about COVID restrictions and, and Peugeot's, Peugeot's skittish here in America, the land of the free and the home of the brave and the first amendment where, you know, those upstart churches in California said, you know, get off our backs. Canada putting restrictions on Oak Island in terms of, you know, you know, Laird is, is the dude that's always around there telling him to slow down. It's like, dig faster people. Come on. We've got a, we've got a treasure to find anyway. I've distracted myself again. That's a real problem. So yeah, it's in these boundaries that we sort of, well, we're in a ground. Kind of looks like a bone. Kind of looks like a femur, but it's huge. Must be a giant femur. I didn't know there were giants in the land. Person is not going to like encounter Zeus as a bull. Right. And then like me as a modern person, I can never, I can never, I can never encounter Zeus as a bull. Right. And then like me as a modern person, I can like Adam Savage has just made a, a tremendous, uh, Mark one Ironman suit and walked around, um, one of the call it. That's the myth busters guy. Ons in it. Right. It's just, it's, it's glorious. And it's just like, and why does he doing that? Because, you know, come on. I don't, I, I'm not going to talk. I'm not going to speak for the ladies, but if you're a dude, you know, when you saw Ironman, didn't you want to be Ironman? Come on. I sure did. You know, super suit. I want my super suit. That's an incredible reference. Yeah. But he's not, he's not bulletproof. Right. It's not a working, he doesn't have an actual arc reactor, but don't we want the gods, don't we want to be the gods? Don't, don't, isn't that a fantasy of ours? And so the Greeks went to the temple and again, Comic-Con is like going to New York in Las Vegas. No, how about the real New York? The real New York Comic-Con is like Vegas, New York, the Greeks, they had real New York and, but he's celebrating that and they were celebrating that. I'm not sure that the distinction is that different. Well, I would say the distinction is, is binding of community. And so let's say you take Zeus says, so Zeus, we celebrate Zeus, right? We, we worship Zeus and then Zeus binds us together. So we, and so when we exist together, right? We know that we're all looking towards Zeus as the thing which holds us. Let's say it's usually not Zeus. Let's say Athena is better because Zeus is a little far off there. Let's say, so you could, you could just say a flag. The flag binds us together. Uncle Sam, John Bull, they bind us together. They'll people will march to their death for uncle Sam. They believe in uncle Sam. They give their money to uncle Sam. They give their sons to uncle Sam. They'll give their life to uncle Sam. They'll shed blood. They'll shed blood of others for uncle Sam. This shouldn't be a hard thing. Stories have this power. But now what he's concerned about is this line between the physical verse and the story verse. And of course, the enlightenment has said there's a line there that's never violated. Really? Is that line never violated? And this of course is where miracles get really, really fun because you just have to say no miracle ever happens. Now you're in a very fragile world because the world is very strange. Because many of you are in YouTube land and not necessarily book people. Craig Keener, who Craig Keener is an interesting story, a New Testament scholar, and he married a woman from Africa. And so he's back and forth to Africa. And yeah, when you look at him, especially without a lot of hair, it's about as ebony and ivory as you can get. No, no, no disrespect there, Dr. Keener. But what about miracles? He's written this massive two volume book on the philosophy about miracles and then just stories. And people go, where's the evidence? Well, you can throw evidence all day long at you. And just as C.S. Lewis said at the beginning of his book, when he tells the story, the only person that I know that that claims to have ever seen a ghost is a woman who then tells me she doesn't believe in ghosts. This is what we are like. Okay. And I know in many ways I'm wasting my breath because either you believe it or you don't, and it is not as simple as seeing is believing. And that's just the way that's just the way the world is. And so when you get to this conversation about, about God's, well, we just don't really understand the world that well. And our attempts to explain it are always our attempts to explain it. Tina binds us together. And so we worship Athena, you know, we profiteer and we do all these things. We sing to her. But then she's also is the guarantor of our community function. So one of the reasons why we exist as a community, because we have the same God. So in the, in the fictional. And this is tremendously hard for modernists to see. Now you can sort of, they'll, they'll talk about it in sociology. Jonathan Haidt can talk about it and he's an atheist, but, and we can say, say, okay, so well, there's this, there's this sociological function about it. Oh, okay. And, and they'll sort of buy that, but we have a real hard time applying this to ourselves. Well, it's more complicated because we don't have these. Like, so, so we, we kind of, we kind of celebrate. So we sell it. Let's say, let's say, here's a good example. So let's say we go to Comic-Con or we go to Harry Potter event and we put on the thing and we do the thing and everything. And then we go back to our normal life. And those are disconnected in terms of causality, whereas in a, in a traditional culture, the, let's say the influence of Athena will be felt all the way into the home when the woman walks in and she lights a candle, whatever they were doing. Like she burned some incense or something, which would connect all these levels of reality together all the way down to, you know, like whatever ritual they were using to include an infant into society, whatever. So it was like, it was a binding of an actual society together where these, these stories are more, they're like, you can kind of participate them in a very particular thing, and then you kind of go back to your mundane reality. Esther O'Reilly, also known as Bethel, sent me this piece from Rod Rear a number of years ago and prompted, of course, me to read the book, which I've only read some of, which is my, you know, it really irks my Dutch soul to spend money on books and not finish them. But a book written by linguist Daniel Everett, a memoir, Don't Sleep There Are Snakes. Now, again, in all fairness, the lines I'm drawing here are not between Christians and non-Christians. He went to a tribe in order to translate the Bible into their language and he lived with them. And at the end of it, he gave up the faith that he had that motivated him to sacrifice. So again, these stories are messy, these lines are messy, but it's really a fascinating book. And the book begins with this scene where he's in his hut because he's living there with his family. And then he notes, even I could tell that there was nothing on that white sandy beach, no more than a hundred yards away. And yet, as certain as I was about this, the Pirahas were equally certain that there was something there. Their God was on the beach. They could all see their God. He and his children could not see their God. Now, it would have been interesting if, let's say, something had happened to him and his children had been completely raised by the group of people. Could then his children have seen his, seen the God? But where would they then have been his children? See, this is where these definitions really get strange because, you know, what he had he just witnessed over the over more than two decades since that summer morning. I've tried to come to grips with the significance of how two cultures, my European case culture and the Piraha culture, could see reality so differently. I could never have proved to the Piraha that the beach was empty, nor could they have convinced me that there was anything much less a spirit. And that's exactly the right word. As a scientist, objectively, that's one of the words that that Willem and Hauerwas kind of shrunk back from. You got to watch that word objective. Yeah, you're right. You do. Because that's that's one of the words that's that's that's the threads are getting pulled away from the the woven wall of the Enlightenment. Surely we could each see the world as the other side. But where does that imagination come from? Well, that's from our physical world where we're just seeing, really? Is that how we see? Is that really how we see? Don't aren't we starting to notice that even though I sit here in my office and before me, it seems like my eyes are simply capturing this entire messy office before me. Another part of me says, well, not really. In fact, my mind is sort of giving me a picture, an image of this office. But I've told this story before. I had a good friend who had very low vision. He explained to me that for him, really, it was kind of just seeing through a paper towel tube. And back then, like when I started making videos, you'd see a lot of black polo shirts. I would often wear black just because I don't like to spend a lot of thought in how I dress. And so Steve Jobs, well, he just wear the same thing every day. And you got to wash it so that nobody complains about the smell. But, you know, you wear clean clothes, but they don't much care what color I wear because I'm just me. But I would I would walk up quietly next to him and then bang, it'd be like I dream of Jeannie when she would blink into the room. Well, of course, that was done through that was done through film back in the 60s and 70s on television. But he would see the room and then suddenly I would be in the room. Seeing isn't believing. The world is much more complex than that. And let's let's get back. This is such an interesting conversation. I think maybe you have a solution to this or another way of seeing it, but that's something that I don't know. I don't I feel like that's not. I don't know. Like one of the things now he's engaged, I think about a lot is that like. How my lived experience is not always the same as everybody. I see that this could be a standpoint epistemology thing, but. But in my experience, I just feel like I see I feel like those parallels are so close that it's not. I guess like not. It's tough because I feel like like. So let's let's take the human story like let's say you have this human experience or you like dressed up as human and you wear it under your clothes as a kind of myself. Yeah. And so you had this like. You know, I remember visiting the Cliftwellers in southwestern Colorado and they're talking about, well, what does the shaman do? The shaman puts on the mask and the shaman doesn't pretend to be the god. You know, there's some profelicity going on there. The shaman becomes the god. Well, what does that mean? Well, well, then we say, well, well, what can and can't the shaman do when the god is is is in when when he becomes the god? Can can the god still the storm or raise the storm? And notice how quickly we get back to the question of the relationship between the matter verse and the physical verse between the mind and the matter. Notice how quickly we we come back right to this point, because that's the point we care about, because. Part of what happened is we say, well, it's it all once you once you make the world physical, primarily you warp the mind verse, the story verse to put in service of the other. But what's really amazing is if you watch people, you know, you think you talk about clout. What is clout? Clout is well, influence in our social media networks. What does clout do? Clout moves the physical world. People will move their bodies to to come over and get your autograph or or fill a concert hall with your sound. The music might be crap, but once all the little chattering. Riders are talking about the same thing. No, no, it's it's not the physical moving the other, it's and just pay attention every time anyone uses the word spiritual. Just pause and ask yourself, what do they mean? And if it's appropriate to do so, pause them and ask them. What do you mean by that word? And you'll watch them. Well, it's a perfectly good word. There's nothing wrong with the word. Do you simply mean feelings? No, that sounds dismissive. It's not just feelings because we're not even sure what feelings are so much. Well, what do you mean by that word spiritual isn't spiritual? That which moves the matter verse. Like he meant house men, which would which would work for you in a sense that it would also probably remind you to have Prince. He's trying to make sure I'm there's an idol. I'm fun loving. So so but the idea would be that that they would act as a talisman for you even where the the he meant vestment would remind you of the values that he may he meant proposed because he did like there was more there were morals at the end of every show like it was like, you know, you should act like this and that. He man, those guys knew what they were doing. I think it's great. Like, I think it has. There's a cut there. And it works with you like it actually had almost like a liturgical effect on like a like people are going to think I'm being heretic, but almost like a sacramental effect on you, like you wore the thing that's not heretical. That's the right word. It formed your values and made you part of the person you are, et cetera, et cetera. All right. I'm going to I'm going to read the snake book just because I had opened my Kindle library. Oh, yeah, I did buy that book. I was because you can often get the audio book and the kind of book cheaper if you buy them both. Look, there he is. And I can't say the word kick Skaggy. She she she Gaggy the spirit. Yes, I can see him. He's threatening us. Everyone come see Skaggy quickly. He's on the beach. I roused from my deep sleep, not sure if I was dreaming or hearing this conversation. It was six thirty on a Saturday morning in August, the dry season of 1980. The sun was shining, but not yet too hot. A breeze was blowing up the Mikey River in front of my modest hut and the clearing on the bank. I opened my eyes and saw the pad, saw the palm throbbing. I saw the palm thatch above me. It was originally yellow, yellow, graying from years of dust and soot. My dwelling was flanked by two smaller Piraha huts of similar construction where we lived in she Koa Bishi. I can't say any of those words. Morning amongst the Piraha so many mornings, I picked up the faint smell of smoke drifting from their cook fires and the warmth of the Brazilian sun on my face. It's raised often by my mosquito net. We're usually laughing, chasing one another noise or noisily crying to nurse the sound reverberated through the village. Dogs were barking. Often I first opened my eyes groggily to come out of a dream. A Piraha child or someone, even an adult, would be staring at me from behind the the palm slats that that served as siding for my large hut. But this morning was different. I was now completely conscious, awakened by the noise and shouts of the Piraha. I sat up and looked around. The crowd gathered around 20 feet from my bed on the high ground of the Maiki and all were energetically gesticulating and yelling. Everyone was focused on the beach just above the river by my house. I got out of bed. Now, remember, this is not a hallucination. This is an entire village watching this and, you know, just go through. Lords, I mean, go through how many well-documented happenings in history. Materialists, you got no evidence. I picked up my gym shorts off the floor and checked to make sure that there were no tarantulas, scorpions, centipedes or other undesirables in them. Putting them on, I slipped on my flip flops and headed out the door to Barajas where we're loosely bunched on the river bank. Just to the right of my house, their excitement was growing. I could see mothers running down the path, their infants trying to hold their breasts in their mouths. The women wore the same sleeveless, colorless, mid-laced dresses they worked and slept in, stained and dark brown with dirt and smoke. The men wore gym shorts or loincloths. None of them were carrying their bows and arrows. That was a relief. Pre-pubescent children were naked, their skin leathery from exposure to the elements. The baby's bottoms were calloused from scooting along the ground, a mode of locomotion that for some reason they preferred to crawling. Everyone was streaked from ashes and dust accumulated by sleeping and sitting on the ground near the fire. It was still around 72 degrees, though humid, far below the 100 degree plus heat of midday. I was rubbing the sleep from my eyes and I took and I turned to Kohoy, my principal language teacher, and asked, what's up? He was standing to my right. His strong brown, lean body tensed from what he was looking at. Don't you see him over there? He asked impatiently. Shegagai, one of the beings that lives above the clouds, is standing on the beach yelling at us, telling us he will kill us if we go to the jungle. Where, I asked. I don't see him. Right there, he snapped, looking intently towards the middle of the apparently empty beach in the jungle behind the beach. In the jungle behind the beach? No, there on the beach. Look, he replied with exasperation. In the jungle with the parajahs, I regularly failed to see wildlife they saw. My inexperienced eyes just weren't able to see as theirs did. But this was different. Even I could tell that there was nothing on the white sand no more than 100 yards away. And yet, as certain as I was about it, the parajah were equally certain that there was something there. Maybe there was some maybe there was something there that I just was that I that I just missed seeing, but they insisted that they were seeing. Shegagai was still there. Everyone looked. Everyone continues to look towards the beach. I heard Kistem, or Christine. Can't even read in English name. Once I encounter one, my six year old daughter at my side, where are they looking, daddy? I don't know. I can't see anything. Chris stood on her toes and peered across the river. Then at me, then at the parajahs. She was as puzzled as I was. Christine and I left the parajahs and walked back to the house. What did I just witnessed? Over more than two decades since that summer morning, I have tried to come to grips with the significance of how two cultures, my European based culture and the parajahs culture, could see reality so differently. I could never have proven to the parajahs that the beach was empty, nor could they have convinced me that there was anything much less a spirit on it. As a scientist, objectivity was one of my deepest held values. If we could just try harder, I once thought surely we could see each other's worlds, we could see the world as others see it and learn to respect one another's views more readily. But as I learned from the parajahs, our expectations, our culture, our experiences can render even perceptions of environment nearly incommensurable cross-culturally. The parajahs say different things when they leave my hut at night on their way to bed. Sometimes they just say I'm going. But frequently they use the expression that, though surprising at first, they come to be one of my favorite ways of saying good night. Don't sleep. There are snakes. The parajahs say this for two reasons. First, they believe that by sleeping less, they can harden themselves. A value they all share. Second, they know that danger is all around them in the jungle and that sleeping soundly can leave one defenseless from attack by any numerous predators around the village. The parajahs laugh and talk a good part of the night. They don't sleep much at one time. Rarely have I heard the village completely quiet at night and noticed someone sleeping for several hours straight. It's probably why they peek at him. That dude's been sleeping in there for six hours. Psh, he's brave. I learned so much from the parajahs over the years, but this is perhaps my favorite lesson. Sure, life is hard and there's plenty of danger. No safetyism in that little place. And it makes us lose some sleep from time to time. But enjoy it. Life goes on. I went to the parajahs when I was 26 years old. I am old enough to receive senior discounts. I gave them my youth. I've contracted malaria many times. I remember several occasions on which the parajahs and others threaten my life. I've carried more heavy boxes, bags and barrels on my back through the jungle than I care to remember. But my grandchildren all know the parajahs. My children are who they are in part because of the parajahs. And I can look at some of those old men, old like me, who once threatened to kill me and recognize some of the dearest friends I've ever had, men who would now risk their lives for me. This book is about lessons I have learned over three decades of studying and living with the parajahs, a time which I have tried my best to comprehend how they understand and talk about the world and transmit their lessons to my scientific colleagues. It's a powerful, powerful prologue to the book. This is Chapter two of Mary Beard's excellent SPQR, A History of Ancient Rome. According to one tradition, the Temple of Jupiter, where Cicero harangued Catiline on 8 November 63 BCE, had been established seven centuries earlier by Romulus, Rome's founding father. Romulus and new citizens of his tiny community were fighting their neighbors, a people known as the Sabines. On the site that later became the Forum, the political center of Cicero's Rome, things were going badly for the Romans and they had been driven to retreat. At the last attempt to snatch victory, Romulus prayed to the god Jupiter, not just to Jupiter, in fact, but to Jupiter Stator, Jupiter who holds men firm. He would build a temple in thanks. Romulus promised the god if only the Romans would resist the temptation to run for it and stand their ground against the enemy. They did. And the Temple of Jupiter Stator was erected on that very spot, the first in a long series of shrines and temples in a city built to commemorate divine help in securing military victory for Rome. So was the god of the Parahar real? Was Jupiter Stator real? Jupiter Stator, who stiffened the Romans at that last moment for Romulus? Well, yeah, this story gets complicated fast, doesn't it? Why did the temple get built? That's just a legend. Well, how do you know? Well, according to all the rules about knowing that you love that, we sort of love to pass around in the in in the objective world, you don't and you can't. The world is very strange. And so but now and so the question is. Does it scale like to me, that's the question, like this is why I struggle with these fictional stories, and so it works to a certain extent. But does it scale? Can it bind your family together? Can He-Man bind your family together? Can He-Man bind a community together? Like hold it in a. Like is there like would you. Now He-Man might be able to drive all the children to set. Oh, gosh, I got to play that. I got to play that. You might not recognize it as set, but I want to read you something. A few months before I was born, my dad met a stranger who was new to our small Tennessee town from the beginning, Dad was fascinated with his enchanting newcomer and soon invited him to live with our family. The stranger was quickly accepted and was around to welcome me into the world a few months later. As I grew up, I never questioned his place in our family. Mom taught me to love the word of God. Dad taught me to obey it. But the stranger was our storyteller. He could weave the most fascinating tales, adventures, mysteries and comedies with daily conversations. He could hold our whole family spellbound for hours each evening. He was like a friend to the whole family. Is Set a God? Wasn't Set was an Egyptian God, wasn't he? A God of a God of chaos and foreigners, as Burn informed us on Twitter. He took Dad, Bill and me to our first major league baseball game. He was always encouraging us to see the movies and he even made arrangements to introduce us to several movie stars. The stranger was an incessant talker. Dad didn't seem to mind, but sometimes Mom would quietly get up while the rest of us were enthralled with one of his stories of faraway places and go to her room, read her Bible and pray. I wonder now if she ever prayed that the stranger would leave. You see, my dad ruled our house, our household, with certain moral convictions, but the stranger never felt an obligation to honor them. Profanity, for example, was not allowed in our house, not from us, from our friends or adults. Our longtime visitor, however, used occasional four little words, four letter words that burned my ears and made Dad squirm. To my knowledge, the stranger was never confronted. My dad was a teetotaler who didn't permit alcohol in his home, not even for cooking. But the stranger felt he needed exposure and enlightened us to other ways of life. He offered us beer and other alcoholic beverages often. He made cigarettes look tasty, cigars manly and pipes distinguished. He talked freely too much, too freely about sex. His comments were sometimes blatant, sometimes suggestive and generally embarrassing. I know now that my early concepts of the man-woman relationship were influenced by the stranger. As I look back, I believe it was the grace of God that the stranger did not influence us more. Time after time, he opposed the values of my parents, yet he was seldom rebuked and never asked to leave. More than 30 years have passed since the stranger moved in with the young family on Morningside Drive. But if I were to walk into my parents' den today, you would still see him over in a corner, waiting for someone to listen to him, talk and watch him draw his pictures. His name, we always called him Set. Television Set. To initiate your children into He-Man. Maybe you would, I don't know. I feel like one of my friends who loves He-Man more than I do, went to Power Con. This is a huge He-Man gathering. He went to Power Con and he met the guy who voiced Man-At-Arms. And Man-At-Arms said, he said something very beautiful to him in the Man-At-Arms voice and the guy, like my friend was like, you know, tears were in my eyes. It's amazing. It's like a revelation, like a little apocalyptic. I see this. Did he get a smartphone out? Did he make an icon of it? I see this with stories. I feel like to say that these stories are, I don't know, lesser or silly or not as not as important. OK, now we're back to the expressive individualism. And wait a minute. These are, are they original or are they novel? It makes me nervous. Yeah, because in my life, I have seen people so affected by story and so able to come together with, I owe my whole life to it, honestly, like finding my group online, these flight artists who we all ended up going on and telling the same kinds of stories, like diving into to this. Yeah, but. Do we? What do we really want? I love the illustration that Tim Keller used to make of of Dorothy Sayers. See, this is the power of keeping your. Pastoral filing cabinet online July 1, 2014, before I ever heard of Jordan Peterson posting this at some point, Sayers had introduced into the novels a character named Harriet Vane. Interestingly, she depicted as a mystery writer, she was depicted as a mystery writer educated at Oxford, just like the author who wrote her into the story. She had on and on again. She had she had an on and off again relationship with Whimsy through several books. She thinks him rather strange and at first declined his repeated invitations to marry. Finally, in one of the later novels, at the very end, she accepts Whimsy's proposal. Subsequently, subsequent novels reveal a blissful honeymoon interrupted by another murder and a long season of domestic bliss. Whimsy's troubled life was rescued by his marriage to Harriet Vane. Keller or whoever it was who discerned an illustration in all of this, sees this whole thing as a beautiful illustration of the gospel. Dorothy Sayers fell in love with her own character and then wrote herself into the story in order to rescue Peter Whimsy. Why do we do that? Where are we living? What do our hearts long for? What are we willing to give up in order to secure it? That shaped and formed my life. And like I treasure the moments that we get to see each other in events and things. And I see other people doing this, whether it's the cosplay community or and like it's in it. I can only see the parallels, honestly, because like you go to New York Comic Con and they are selling you things. Right. Like and that's gross, maybe. But maybe it's not. Maybe. But I mean, they were selling you stuff at temples, too. Like they were selling those doves that you sacrifice. Right. There's always people making a buck off it. So I don't know. And like now I see my my my youngest daughter, Ronia. She really latched onto the Mandalorian series. And that's a whole other. It was really beautiful. It was really good. And it was like, that's a whole other one for me. The. I kind of wish you never took off the helm of the mass. Because it. Wow. I kind of wish she had never taken off the mask. I wish she had remained a god. Lows you. Spider-Man is like this. Was like, like, which white like I cry at the end of Spider-Verse at every time because they've taken all the. All the responsibility lessons and all the self-sacrificial lessons from Spider-Man and finally said, like. You could be under the mask. It could. Yeah, I've talked about that before, which I when I talked about it in the sense that it's like it really is the desire for religion, but it's like a weird version of it. Like, it's like it's basically saying you could be, you know, you can you can kind of live in Christ or you could live, you know, you can manifest this in the world. But it's but it's weird because it's like, no, I mean, not really. Right. I mean, you can't you're not Spider-Man. And then ask yourself, well, let's let's pull the the Tom Holland card. How real is Jesus that he rewrote the moral code? For the entire world. How real is that? Right, but. Or you can't like, can you I don't know, like, I mean, flip the question, I'm struggling to see how how how how that works the other direction. Like how it works. So the other way it works, the other direction is that, for example, you can imitate or you can you can imitate Christ because Christ basically self-sacrifice themselves and that you can take Spider-Man the same way, though, by sacrificing yourself. Yeah. And what I may tell Spider-Man, he's like sometimes like like a hero. What did she say? She's like heroes. I believe there's a hero. Well, you have to ask yourself how original is Spider-Man or maybe is the best Spider-Man the original Spider-Man? Is the original Spider-Man the first Spider-Man? Or. The most popular Spider-Man or the Spider-Man that that most. Instantiates. The essence of Spider-Man, why is it that comic people freak the heck out over canon? And all of us, this like something that makes us noble, keeps us brave. Yeah, I think it's true for sure. Sacrifices and then it says and sometimes it means giving up the thing you want most, even your dreams and that that I'm still a real sucker for the. Defining a hero by what he wants and not giving it to them. Yeah. Yeah, that's I mean, I think that for sure in Spider-Man, that's definitely a powerful thing about it, which is that Spider-Man is always sacrificing that that's his story, he's always not getting what he would like to have and he has to sacrifice that to a higher order. Right. And that's like and that's where that. Yeah, I just I don't see. I'm always a sucker for that. I wonder why. I wonder where that story comes from. I wonder how that got deeply imprinted in me that that is somehow the height of. Morality and truth and beauty. You don't see the difference. I don't see the difference completely. I mean, I see how it's beautifully human and I see that Spider-Man is. Beautifully human. Was it human for the tribe that that the the Bible missionary went to try to convince by translating the Bible into language? A person given great power, but we all are in some sense. I find those I find that I find those stories honestly also a lot about about puberty, really, like, yeah, for sure. Yeah. Sometimes when when you change and you become stronger, men and women happens in different ways and same ways in some ways. But because you just physically get larger, you get to the point where you. Hi, my name is puberty and a terrible plan for your skin. You can explore that in the now you are a danger to your parents. Yeah, you explore that a little bit in the Jack series. You get a sense that that's kind of what's going on with Jack as well, like that in that transition spot there and then they have and he has that like he has that like I feel like Zeta Zeta's. Yeah, like I like to have characters who like have laws, but they're always going to be part they can control them, right? They learn to control their flaws, but they're not like over it. Right. OK, I'm going to skip a bunch of this stuff because not that the sacrifice exclusively to Christianity, not that that's unimportant, but I want to get back to the participation. Anyways, but to come back to the idea of to me, it's all about participation, like I said, that's why I don't see it like you don't have to see it as opposed. I think that there's a way in which these, let's say the Christian story bubbles down, like bubbles up and kind of fills up. Oh, yeah. He's into that. He's into the conversation now up and manifests itself in all these these different stories, and that's great. It's actually wonderful that that happens. But there's also a way in which. Like I said, I mean, I see when you say go to Comic-Con and everything, I get it. Like there's something it's not nothing, but it's not it's not. I'll say it about the Mandalorian. I don't mean to interrupt you, but I go ahead. But I feel like I'm going to forget this. I feel like watching my daughter, my little daughter, she's 10 and she she latched on the Mandalorian and now she's got a helmet. And we're like making her some Beskar armor. And we all as a family enjoyed watching this series together, like, like, like as a as an event. And then now she plays Mandalorian in in the yard with her friend. And and what if she killed? A little evil neighbor, how would you feel about that? No, so you're it's not it's it is participation. It is being pulled into a story. It is being transformed. I don't think I get to the Jordan Peterson Clay Routledge video. There's just. I have to go home at some point. I have Men's Bible study tonight, so. You know, like they've got and they build it out of Legos. They build little worlds, little Mando worlds out of Legos. And then also when we if you play that opening theme, that music that goes along with it, like it's just one of those things where we're all there, right, you can blast that through the house. And it's just like it's maybe I have to play that clay Routledge video talking about, you know, things that are really important to them. Or is there something specific about the actual memories that they're that they're engaging in? But what I think our research does is it complements that by saying, well, if you just isolate the experience of bringing in the mind, the nostalgic memory in a laboratory cubicle where people are by themselves now that Mandalorian for that little girl, now that I'm in my late 50s, I know how fast life goes. That's going to become nostalgia. It's going to become nostalgia for that little girl. It's going to become nostalgia for the whole family. It's going to become nostalgia for the entire neighborhood. And it's going to be a powerful story. So how real is the Mandalorian? And you get these positive effects that suggest that at least part of what's happening in reminiscence therapy is this individual level experience of bringing nostalgia, nostalgia, memories to mind, revisiting, reconnecting with them. And then I'm sure it only helps if you have the opportunity to talk about those memories with other people and share those memories. In fact, that's a new area of research that we we don't have anything published in yet, but I had a PhD student who actually just graduated. And this is what her dissertation was on, is what she called shared nostalgia. And her argument was what we do in the lab is not very typical of how most people actually experience nostalgia, which is people tend to be nostalgic when they're around others. You get together with family members and you talk about you talk about memories, you especially in the context of loss, you go to a funeral or what do you do? You're sad, of course, but then you talk about. I've told the story a number of times of being in a hospital with a family and someone was dying a pretty terrible death and watching the estranged wife of the person dying, the pretty horrible death, hug her brother. And these two people grown up in the church didn't sing a hymn. They didn't sing a song to God. They sang Kenny Rogers, the gambler. Memories you shared with that person, and oftentimes people are laughing and trying to honor that person's life, but also trying to connect over over the meaningful memories you had together. So it reminds you of your affiliation with those other people, too, which would be a great thing to have happen when you're experiencing a significant loss. Yeah, absolutely. So I do think that there's there's some more research to do in that area. And like I said, we're just kind of getting started into how to act. How do people actually share nostalgia and might it serve even beyond the individual and beyond like the more interpersonal relationships? We're also interested in nostalgia at the cultural level because there are there are ways that we might pass down traditions and rituals intergenerationally that connect. So I might have a lot of things that are different in my life and the experiences I've had at the time period in which I grew up than somebody 20, 30, 40 years older than me. But to the extent that there are things that are passed down in the family or in the community that can connect me to that person, that might help with intergenerational community life. Right. And so for social cohesion, period. Right. Absolutely. It's too bad. All these stories that were segmented, that were reeling out are segmented to certain demographic groups in order to popularize them and divide and conquer is usually the easiest way to separate people from their money. Too bad we can't have stories that cohere us all together. We're strangers to one another, and then we can identify elements of our past experiences that we share, maybe like shared love of a particular band or something like that, then we're identifying areas of commonality and perhaps decreasing our distrust of one another. I mean, Robert Putnam has demonstrated that, you know, communities tend to be more generous politically when they view those in the community as importantly similar to them. And so you can imagine that going through the search for a shared past and identifying commonalities might be also a way of generating a shared history across time as part of what unifies people together. Yeah, absolutely. So this is what we call and is that being unified through time arbitrary or maybe all the way back to Peugeot? Let me get the right. Let me get the right. Come on, is it here? Or maybe it's. One of the things I tried to explain is that storytelling, let's say the pattern of storytelling just come from attention. You know, you can understand the ancient myths or the myths that have come down to us or the Bible stories or these ancient stories, the reason why we have them is because they grab people's attention. And then as they were transmitted, that attention was maintained. That is that there's a capacity to pay attention. And so you can imagine how stories refine themselves with attention. That is, those stories that are able to keep our attention will survive the generations and those that aren't will just kind of fade away. And then even the stories themselves will end up being refined because as they kind of progress in time, some things become idiosyncrasies and you have to modify them so that the story can be remembered. So you end up having these really pure stories with time that just kind of happen on their own, almost through a process of natural selection, you could call it. But then you also have that in yourself, which is that the things that you remember, there's a reason why you remember them. They're not just for sentimental reasons. There's something about them which we're able to grab and keep your attention and so and in that laboratory in your brain or in your experience, you know, to gathers that together and to bring out stories without doing it too deliberately, you know. And so let's say the heroes like the heroes. What collective nostalgia, what you just articulated, which is I might, you know, I might have never met somebody who lives across the country, but to the extent that, you know, that we have as Americans, that there is something that we've that that we identify with, like even music, like you said, or or or a movie, if you remember when I don't think they were particularly good movies, but when the new Star Wars movies came out, people were really excited about them because there was, you know, there was this collective nostalgia of we all remember when we were watching the original Star Wars movies. And that was kind of like a quintessential late 70s, early 1980s American thing to do that we could bond over. And it's part of it's part of experiencing a shared myth. It's not trivial. I mean, it's true in one sense, but it's not true at all in another. I mean, we don't exactly know what it is that bonds people together in a community, family, a community, a nation, any of those things. And the idea that it's shared positive memories is, well, that's got to be part of it. Yeah, yeah. I actually talked to a screenwriter a while back about this and he made an interesting point, he was talking about how because we have the way with the internet and with all these different entertainment options we have now, you know, his argument was we might be losing some of the shared media, shared entertainment. Now, people talk about this when they talk about news all the time. They say, oh, people consume different news. But to the extent that he was making even the point that we have all these like dedicated children's programs where he was talking about when he was a kid, he had to watch whatever his dad was watching. And so his dad would introduce him to Western movies or whatever, and the whole family would watch the same thing. And so you had this shared cultural artistic experience that that connected you. But now he's like, you know, you know, you might the kids might be in the back seat of the car, each with their own screens watching totally separate things. And you're listening to your own thing. And the whole family isn't crowded around the TV together in one room sharing the same experiences. And so we might have very, very individualistic, very tailored media experiences that make it harder to have those socially connecting entertainment. Yeah, well, it makes it harder to communicate, too, because, you know, to communicate with anyone, you have to mostly share their experience and then talk about a little bit of variation. I mean, if you're totally opaque to one another in terms of what you've experienced, there's so much to talk about that you can't even gain a toehold. And don't sleep. There's snakes. You do wonder if this incredible explosion of. Of entertainment options, let's say, but it's far more than that. It's cultural options does produce. Well, perhaps does heighten the probability of the kind of fragmentation that we seem to be experiencing right now. Yeah, well, that might be why every so every now and then something's popular enough to where like not everyone, but a decent chunk of people rally around it. And it becomes the thing everyone's talking about. So like Game of Thrones, that might be an example where there's some kind of program that is either so well executed or it just delivers the goods in whatever way, whether it's what goods would those be and how would we know it's delivering the goods, this is all deep, deep coding and programming. Not. It's real, like I am not questioning it's not quite as formally ritualized, but on the other hand, it's young, but it's also not like I think that it's to me, it's like, so let me paint you the other portrait, right, which is a village that has a church in the middle of the village. And the building is like if Kanye built one in Wyoming and put the church in the middle, actually higher than all the other buildings. So when you look out your window, when you're walking around, you can always see that the steeple above has the point of reference for all the people in the village and then, you know, like in the Catholic village, it's a 12 bell rings and then we're all at the same time in the village doing doing praying together. We know we can't see people doing it, but we know that the entire village is praying together at the same time, kind of looking towards the central space. And then on Sundays, we kind of go into the church. Everybody kind of goes into the church together and people celebrate the same thing and then we move out and we go back into our homes and we and we have a fractal version of that, which is that it meals. And like I said, when the bell rings, then we'll have this celebration. We do together. So what it does is. Oh, Quebec used to be like that, wasn't it? It creates. So this is the community is bound together by this common celebration. And so in in these fictional world, which, which, like I said, it works like a Mandalorian, what happens is you have these little things that pop up, but it's ultimately you we could we're watching society kind of fragment. So like our suburbs are just. You know, suburbs have no center. Suburbs have no place of communion, right? Suburbs have no common goal, a common project. And so it's there was a guy who came here to Sacramento. He's coming to some of the meetups and he was making strove waffles. And he decided to make not a strove waffle food truck, but a strove waffle food bike because he was Dutch. And he decided he was going to sell these in Sacramento. And to his horror, he discovered Sacramento really doesn't have a town square like all those old cities in Europe. It's like this breakdown, which it's manifesting itself in all these little, little smaller versions of liturgy, like you said, the Mandalorian or Marvel or Star Wars and all these manga or whatever. But ultimately, it's you can feel this breakdown. Yeah. OK, I mean, I've lived there, so I will. I had that village. Yeah, totally, because we we we've spent, you know, all put together, you know, we go to the Gravagna, Montale in Italy. Somebody has a rooster. This is where my my wife's family is from. And it's a little, little village like, like I think at its height, maybe like three. I can't hear that rooster crow and not think of the Dominican Republic. Bingo. Hundred people live there now. It's more like 60 less than now because it's it's very old. In the middle of it is, you know, the church highest point, more or less. It's on a mountain slope. So it's bell rings. San Bartolomeo is the church. I've marched with San Bartolomeo and his flayed skin. OK, in the procession around the town. And it's beautiful, right? Like I totally agree that it was it's beautiful, but. And it's binding, true, right. And and I can see that that is healthy, particularly for small communities to have. But I don't know. And I and I also will like I don't know how to solve the suburb problem. I get that that's a. And I apologize for this guy out here. No worries, he's having crazy time. Rooster's crow all the time, not just that daybreak. Trust me on that. But I guess my I guess my thing is like. Like it's great that. And so you would say, would you say like the ancient communities with like the Greek communities had something similar? Yeah, they definitely did. Yeah, they definitely did. And I mean, I think that it's a traditional trope. I think for sure the difference is that to say in a Roman or Greek community, you had that pattern. But it was. It didn't have the it didn't necessarily have the love part as this aspect that we talked about, which is that at least ideally there's a sense in which the father is also there to help his children, right, it's like it was a more hierarchical thing where the household would just submit to the father. And it was which is something which exists in the traditional Christian world as well. But at least in the story and in the ideal, there's a sense in which there's there's a top down thing kind of coming down as well. And so I think it's a totally it's a universally traditional system. It just the difference is, in my opinion, in the Christian story, you have a balance between this kind of top down structure and the idea of how the lesser all the smaller people are the hero image that we talked about, the idea of the person above giving themselves for that, for those for those that follow him and all that kind of stuff, but it is a universal pattern. It's not it's not just a Christian one. That's a that's 100 percent sure. Which which parts of universal pattern that the idea of binding ritual, like the idea of a ritual of celebrating, you know, of sacrificing, you know, all of these gestures that we pose to kind of connect ourselves with something higher and then bind ourselves to those that are around us. OK, so were the Greeks in their rituals, were they like were they more closer to what you'd say, like, like the Mandalorian or Marvel? Read Tom Holland, cinematic universe or something like that. What do you mean? Well, you keep saying like, well, it's different with these fictional stories. Yeah. Were the Greeks operating under a fictional story? No, I don't think so. OK, so if I think the gods exist, yes, I think the gods exist. There it is. And Zeus and Zeus included. I think Zeus exists, of course, the gods. I think I'm on a Neil Gaiman side. In the crying game, the trans woman gets smacked. That I think all the gods exist. Sorry, I guess you didn't expect that. No, this is super interesting. Like, like, how do like how in what way? Maybe we're not understanding that it's not getting into the questions here that what what what what what? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Maybe we don't know the maybe we're not using the same exist in the same way. I don't know how do you use the word exist? Ah, now we're getting at some questions. Well, I mean, are you saying they exist in the way that an idea exists? They exist in a way multiplicity becomes again, if you would introduce the word spirit. That helps almost right away, because that word for all of the language and imagery that has been not just imagery, but architecture for everything that has been pushed aside. The word spirit has it. One, like they exist in a way that they're that they are principalities that manage and I I really doubt that Ben Hatkey has any idea what Peugeot was talking about with respect to a principality. Bodies that manage that manage aspects of reality. Hmm. You're a little bit beyond me. I'm not exactly sure what you're saying. So I'm totally interested, though. I'm not I'm not I am interested. The body language says that. I'm just I'm just I'm struggling. This is like this is like the worst thing to start into, like an hour and a half into our discussion, but about the human stuff. That's right. We can drop the mess. Now, suddenly, well, well, well, seems like we all have a taste for what's beyond modernity. So so so think of it like. OK, so let's say a city, right? And so does a city exist? Sure. Right. But it's but it's also I mean, where like it's a it's a very it's a very fluid thing. It's a body, right? It's from CS Lewis's miracles. When I think about London, I usually see a mental picture of Houston station. But when I think, as I do, that London has several million inhabitants, I do not mean that there are seven million million images of people contained in my image of Houston station. Nor do I mean that several million real people live in the real Houston station. In fact, though I have now when he says real there, he means physical. In fact, in fact, though I have an image while I am thinking about London, what I think or say is not about that image and would be manifest nonsense if it were. It makes sense because it is not about my own mental pictures, but about the real London outside of my imagination, of which no one can have an adequate mental picture at all. In fact, the story can I spent three weeks on my adult Sunday school class working through this part of the reason why. I've been posting my adult Sunday school class on my channel every week. Some of you enjoy it, some of you avoid it. But part of the reason I post it is. Before I had these videos to do. My adult Sunday school class was in a sense comparable to these videos because to take all of these ideas and present them to. Five or six. Senior citizens from my congregation in an intelligible in an intelligible dialogical way, well, I'm not a university professor, I don't get bright 20 somethings. I get really lovely 80 somethings. And it's a it's a challenge that's stimulating. So I read this to them because I had to answer the question. Well, Paul was a Roman citizen. Well, what is Rome? Well, now suddenly we're really in the area of mythology. Or again, when we say that the sun is 90 odd million miles away, we understand perfectly clearly that we what we mean by this number we can divide, we can multiply by other numbers and we can work out how long it would take to travel that distance at any given speed. But this clear thinking is accompanied by imagining, which is ludicrously false to what we know the reality must be. To think then is one thing and to imagine is another. What we think or say can be and usually is quite different from what we imagine or picture and stories are much more like pictures. And what we mean may be true when the mental images that accompany it are entirely false. It is indeed doubtful whether anyone except an extreme visualist who is also a trained artist has ever had mental images that are particularly like the things he is thinking about. And you see this all the time when people try to draw the images from the Book of Revelation. It just becomes a mess. But yet it's not incoherent in the story, in the apocalypse of Revelation. But it is incoherent in many ways on paper or in two dimensional images. And this is this is the kind of thing that we're talking about. In these examples, the mental image is not only unlike the reality, but is but is known to be unlike it, at least after a moment's reflection. I know that London is not merely used in station. Let us now go to the slightly different predicament. Once I heard a lady tell her young daughter that that you would die if you ate too many tablets of aspirin. But why, asked the child, it isn't poisonous. How do you know it isn't poisonous, said the mother, because, said the child, when you crush an aspirin tablet, you don't find hard red things in it. Clearly, when this child thought of poison, she had a mental picture of hard red things, just as I had a picture of Euston Station when I think of London. The difference is that wherever I know my that, that whereas I know my image to be very unlike the real London, he has a map of London that he can't fully articulate. And so he uses Euston Station as a low resolution placeholder. To that extent, she was mistaken. But it does not mean that everything she thought or said about poison was necessarily nonsensical. She knew perfectly well that a poison was something which killed you and made you ill if you swallowed it, and she knew to some extent which of the substances in her mother's house were poisonous. If a visitor to that house had been warned by the child, don't drink that, mother says it's poison, he would be ill-advised to neglect the warning on the grounds that this child has a primitive idea of poison as hard red things, which my adult scientific knowledge has long since refuted. This material exists as an event as well. Right. But so you can be at you can, for example. What on earth is an event? An event is Euston Station. I'll be a New Yorker, but still like be in Miami, for example. Like you could you could you could participate in New York, but while physically being in Miami. Paul was a Jew and a Roman citizen. What does that mean? I'm a Jersey boy in California. There's all this complexity of me built into me and all of this complexity has a reality that governs. Yeah, yeah. All right. So it exists. So the way it exists is complicated. It's not a simple thing. It exists under something like a principality. In scripture, there's that it's like the angel. There's. I don't know how much an angel of a city. And it's a and it's a it's a it's it's a being. See, now, if he said a spirit of a city, it'd be a little easier for him to grasp. Just like you have a bunch of stuff in you, like your body and your body extends even into your books and into your the things you say online and the notes that you've written. Right. It's like your body is a lot bigger than what we think when we think of you just as this guy that is there. Let's say us, you know, a bunch of wet stuff held together by skin that I could, you know, that I could touch or that's right in front of me. But you actually your but your being extends beyond that. It's not it's not as contained as sometimes we think. And so the way that you like that, there's a part of you or an aspect of you, which is one, it's like your spirit, your soul. Yeah. Well, so like whatever word you want to use, the pattern which unites all this multiplicity that makes it recognizable, that exists at different levels of reality. It just just doesn't exist for people. It exists for for cities for exists for passions, which is why we say they're demons like the demon of lust or the demon of this. Like it's a coherent body which is managed by a pattern, which is what you mean, which makes you recognize it is a way to understand that. Can it can a demon affect the material world? Of course, but not right there. You had. Esther Bethel gave me a little grief on Twitter about Cartesian dualism. Right there, you can see Cartesian dualism, because if you say spirit, well, the city has a spirit. Your family has a spirit. Mandalorian has a spirit. All of this stuff has a spirit. Oh, yeah, we're completely fine with that language. If we say a diamond. Well, if you know a little bit of Greek culture, you say, well, OK, Socrates diamond, as long as we as long as we say that word a little different. You say a demon. Well, now you're pulling it through Augustine. You're pulling it through Christian history. You're pulling it through the appropriation of the Western Church of now suddenly a demon and we're watching supernatural or where we're doing all these other things. So the words matter. But we say, well, a spirit. Oh, OK. And that to us sounds sort of neutral. And we're comfortable with the word a demon or evil. OK, an angel. Oh, you know, that now all these other images flow. But but right there is this inflection point of Cartesian dualism. And what Peugeot has been been working on, along with Vervecky and and Peterson, what they're all trying to do is is put the world back together. When I first saw Jordan Peterson. Immediately, I thought of C.S. Lewis's book Miracles that I've been read to that I was reading two, three times a year, because the longer I did my job, the more I sensed that the world had come apart and and that there was a line down this world. And when you say the word demon in a conversation, suddenly you're suddenly you're in a whole other land. And where all of this is about is where the story verse and the physical and the physical world tie together. And in Peugeot's conversation with Peterson, that's exactly what they're where they went. They went there a lot quicker because they're both working on the same project. But for this guy, he's just telling stories and he's thinking novelty. And, you know, we can express lots of new stories and all of this newness. You know, the future is just kind of an accumulation of lots of new things. No, that's not what the future is at all. And the word original betrays that reality. Not materially, not materially, not directly. Yeah, just like. But this is tremendously difficult to talk about. And and it's it's about as difficult to convince as the villagers were to convince their host that there's a god on the beach. Well, if there was a god on the beach, what would that do to the village? Well, they would all come down and look at the god and listen to the god. Well, it's exactly what happened. So was there a god on the beach? There was enough of a god on the beach to have the whole village come and look and listen to them. And it wasn't the case that only the shaman said there was a god on the beach and so the rest of the village trusted, trusted in the authority of the shaman. Why would they trust in the authority of the shaman? Because maybe they had seen that the shaman had power. Maybe he was hoodwinking. But yeah, no, the whole village gathered on the beach to look at the god. It's tremendously difficult to get across this barrier. And this is exactly the barrier that we're at right now. Your thoughts can affect the material world, too. Not clearly. And this is why we're amphibious. Human beings are. Right at this point, where the stuff of Earth and the breath of God mind moves matter in us every day. We think nothing of it. But. How? Like your will can affect can affect the world, you just just not materially. Your will doesn't affect it directly. It's intermediated by all sorts of other things, isn't it? By other creatures who are amphibious because we're all talking at this level and we're all acting at that level. So science is. A process of trying to come to understand the objective world in a way that. Goes beyond my own subjective sense of what it is, which means beyond my conditioning and my bias, right, and so I might think that sound travels faster than light at room temperature and air, so I set up an experiment and measure it to find out that it just doesn't. And then I can do that a hundred times or a million times and other people can do it. We can use different apparatus. And there is a we can all say there's a God on the beach or we can say that there isn't the measurability and the repeatability gives us a certain sense of the objectivity of it, right? Well, so science has done a very good job of giving us a framework for is what is that is not based on what I think is. It doesn't it hasn't given us the same basis for what ought to be. And there is this classic division between science, the manifest image and the scientific image. Wilfred Sellers and ethics or science and existentialism called the is odd distinction, science can say what is it can't say what ought because the process of science is a process of. Observing and measuring observable things, which are inherently third person objects and then being able. But what happens if you have two groups of third persons who are looking at the same beach and seeing two totally different things, will define patterns of regularities expressed that I can express in. Something like math and so it pertains to the domain of if you ask the villagers how many gods are on the beach, one, if you ask the. American missionaries, how many gods are on the beach? Well, now suddenly, what do you mean by God? Of the things that are measurable and repeatable. Our experience isn't measurable, it's feelable, it's first person, not third person. They're fundamentally different categories. Right. You say, well, no, your your experience is measurable because we can measure brain waves, it's not measuring the experience that's measuring a brain state that happens to correlate with your felt experience. But someone who studies the neuroscience of the EG's, who's looking at the brain pattern of a Zen meditator, can look at that and has no idea what the experience is like. And so the fact that there might be some neural correlates to experience doesn't mean you're measuring the experience. It means there's some neural correlate, right? But that's still the domain of third person, which is fundamentally never first person. So first person is outside of the domain of science formally. This is important because it says science is not a method of knowing all of reality. It's a method of knowing parts of reality. And there's parts of reality that are rigorously outside of the methods of science. So you can so you can you can have spiritual action at a distance, right? You can ask your wife to bring you a cup of coffee. And if she does, the spirit of Karl Marx continues to move through woke ism, says some no, say others. And you're affecting physical worlds through meaning, through spirit, right? Hmm. That's a lot. That's a lot to chew on. All right. Sorry. Can I ask another question? What about like so OK, so Zeus in some sense exists. Could there be a new one? Could there be new gods that will exist? Well, they wouldn't be new. They would they would they would they could they could their bodies could appear in time. That's for sure. Do we tell new stories? Well, that's then we're back to where we started, aren't we? So like so like, oh, so we discover new gods that always did exist. Well, that not always the word always is complicated because it implies. How can I say this? It's like you could say that all things exist eternally in the mind of God is the best way to understand that. And then they manifest themselves in time and space. But you just threw them into a whole world that he was a god. He is he 500 years old? He looks like he's somewhere in his 20s or maybe 30s. But in many ways, his biases about this are coming up 500 years old. Well, how old are we if our programming is well, we all say we're our genetic program is very ancient. We can find all of this code in our our our genetic, you know, four little letter combinations that go back way, way time. But what else are we? Well, you know, about Weinstein, we're also this culture track. Well, how old is that coding? What exactly am I? That they they obviously all of them have an eternal, like a non space, non time existence. So so of course they could be bumping up against that Cartesian dualism. They but I would say it may be yes and no, like it's complicated. Like, of course, all. So there's a theory, like a Thomistic theory, and it's a it's a theory that a lot of ancient Christians accepted, which is that every time there's a communion between between beings, there's an angel. So there's myriads and myriads of angels. Again, you can if you say an angel. OK, but. The context that that Thomas Aquinas was in was very different from ours. So let's just say a spirit. There's a spirit of the there's a spirit of this conversation and we can sense that we can we can sense the spirit of this conversation. We can sense violations of the spirit of the conversation. I mean, the spirits just multiply like mad. Like, you know, every time like there's an angel for our conversation. Because because our conversation, when he says an angel, and I'm not saying Jonathan is doing the wrong thing, Jonathan is trying to push him in this and saying there's a degree to which that spirit has a life, which all of us we if we don't submit to it, there are prices to pay and in fact, the spirit of a conversation. So when I, you know, I had my conversation with John Vervecky a couple of weeks ago, which which just went well. That conversation had a beautiful spirit. If one of us were to break that spirit and neither of us did, we were we were both creating that spirit and we were submitting to that spirit. And we're dancing to that spirit. And and these two are two. And, you know, I was looking for this video that I saw a long time ago about Canon. And that's exactly what you watch when you look at all of this drama around Canon of Star Trek or Canon of Star Wars or or, you know, the Canon of Dune, because Frank Herbert wrote quite a bit of Dune. And is the movie faithful to the Canon? Well, it's faithful to the spirit. And now to take Peugeot's language, it's it's faithful to the angel. But now when we say angel, suddenly we get a sense of the power of that spirit. When when before when we say spirit, we've sort of we've sort of taken the strength out of spirit in many respects. But when we say the power of that angel, that angel is going to enforce the conversation. Well, do angels enforce? Oh, yes, they do. But see, then I just I just tripped right over that Cartesian line again. And you all had pictures of Euston Station, of of of painting of Renaissance paintings of all you didn't have. You probably didn't have pictures of the cherubim that were in the Holy of Holies. That you find in the Bible, because their angels looked a lot different from our our sort of European angels and far different from touched by an angel. It is more than the sum of its parts. Are there angels for our tangents? What do you mean by our tangents? Is there is there an angel for the human part of our conversation and an angel for the well, it's you better off again, if we flip to spirits, well, there's there's a spirit of he man that's sort of governing the conversation that is Jordan Peterson said actually allows us to communicate. Now, OK, let's flip the language. There's an angel. Of the human part of the conversation, that's actually the angel of human. And then there's the angel of our relationship with one another. And all of those are coming together and they are governing that conversation. Again, if I say spirit, spirit and governing, but I say angel and governing. OK. The like, is there an angel of human? No, no, it's like you say there is an angel for our conversation, for the communion, for the fact that we're that we're coming together like the union of multiplicity into one, so soon as multiplicity kind of joins and you can recognize something, but there's angels there. What are they distinct? Yeah, they're distinct angels. They don't necessarily have another podcast. Is that a different angel or is that? Again, if you just switch spirit into there, he'll have absolutely no problem. Well, the spirit of our conversation that we had and I don't know when they recorded this early November, the spirit of the conversation was this. Now, if we talk again, you know, I've had number of conversations with Jonathan Peugeot, with with John Verveke. The spirit of those conversations has been distinct in some ways, but has grown. And and now so my my third Loeb quartet, when I had part of the reason that I wanted Chad and I wanted Mark and I wanted Grizz in was I knew that the combination of those would create a certain spirit. And then Grizz left early. And when Grizz left the conversation now, suddenly. We had to shift. C.S. Lewis made the point that when Charles Williams died, the Inklings would never be the same. And, you know, take Peugeot's from there's an angel of the conversation. But again, the difficulty that I know many people are having is some people are feeling some people who are deeply Christian are feeling threatened because what sounds like you've deontologized angels, not at all. And this was one of the confusions I initially had. If you go back to my second conversation with Jonathan Peugeot, when we got into this angel demon stuff, I was, you know, it takes a while to figure Peugeot out and and there has to be a degree of translating that we do to sort of figure out, OK, we're as Peterson said, we have to kind of find each other in this story. But, you know, the the angels of these conversations, they will punish and you can tell because they they will punish us in many ways through how others treat us through the YouTube algorithm. They actually have tremendous power. The same angel coming back for the next podcast, the next revolution, where we doubled down. And this is this is where you get into. See, OK, when I talk about cartoons and dualism, what am I talking about? Descartes at the beginning of the modern age wanted to sort of OK, how can we account for? How can we account for what the new things that we have seen? OK, so if you read Owen Barfield, he makes the point that spirit. At one point, original participation, there's that word. If you read Ruach or Pnuma in the Bible, it means spirit. It also means wind. I got separated. Now, what happens with Descartes is he's trying to. Well, there's a separation, then there's two substances, then there's a physical substance upon which all the attributes happen. And then there's the spiritual substance upon which attributes attach. The problem is we can't use any of this language without pulling on models. That have been in our language that we have been swimming in for a very long time. And so you want me to answer a yes, no question about the. The agency of these angels, and I'll say the angel of the conversation is powerful enough to punish you if you cross it. And suddenly we've got Frank Peretti images from this present darkness of and again, back to see us loose as miracles. We need to have picture images, but we have to watch these picture images. Just like if you go into the house and the little girl says, don't eat that. That's poison. And you look at it and say, that's not poison. Well, it's full of hard red things. I know it's not full of hard, hard red things. I'm going to eat it. But the little girl may read very well. No, even if her pictures. Are her pictures, just like Houston Station is for London, for C.S. Lewis, and again, when you say he man, pull up the little the little action figure. Is that all he man is? No, he man was a story that that gave little kids a degree of agency. They they they possessed part of the spirit of he man, just like the Romans with Romulus had this moment when Jupiter Stator had to come and strengthen the men so that they could stand and defeat their enemies. Well, where is that Jupiter? Is he gone? I don't know this stuff. It'd be interesting. It'd be interesting to think about. That's an idea that doesn't really have an end. No, it doesn't. I mean, that's why it's like there's that's why the I'm not saying that this is necessarily the best way to kind of understand reality, but it's definitely a one which ancient Christians have have accepted, not just ancient Christians. Like even, you know, like it's still with us today. We just have different pictures for it. And because we have different pictures for it, we have different language for it. But it's still here. Even in Hinduism, we have this kind of idea, right, that there are myriads and myriads of principalities. OK. But it's the problem. It's a problem of complexity. Like it's not it's not a religious problem. It's a it's a problem of how we're able to perceive unity in multiple. And the reason he says it's not a religious problem is because you've got a certain substance issue about religion. All enlightenment definition of religion, that has to do with supernatural things. And we're back into that dualism. Felicity, because it's like you think it's obvious that that you have a bunch of stuff in front of you. And all of a sudden you see it as one thing. Like, why are you seeing it as one thing? It's my office. One thing, it's a bunch of things. And that bunch of things also has another bunch of things at a lower level. Right. It's a stacking up of bunches of things. But then somehow you're able to perceive one. So how is it that you're this one? Where is it? Right. So that's that's that's the ontological problem that these questions are trying to pose. It's not because Houston Station, of course. Well, there was the images that C.S. Lewis had because C.S. Lewis didn't drive. He took the train a lot, I would imagine, in the, you know, early 20th century and in England, Oxford to London. But the janitors at Houston Station knew a very different Houston Station than C.S. Lewis. The engineers at Houston Station, who are very different, Houston Station than C.S. Lewis, the the people who bought and sold tickets at Houston Station knew a very different Houston Station than C.S. Lewis. It's not a it's not a new it's not a new philosophical or physics problem. Right. Where does one thing end? The other thing begin like but I mean, like, I don't know, I've been reading a ton of physics and and it is. It gets slipperier and slipperier the more you look at stuff. And that I can that I can get on board with. And and I do like like the idea that the edges of things, the reality is granular and the edges of things are kind of fuzzy. Yeah, they have margins and they're they're like the corners of the field, right? That you need to leave until they're the are the the fringe on the vestment, the fringe on the garment. There's a there's a messiness on the border. Sure, sure, sure. But I'm I don't know. I just I can't I struggle with with with talking about principalities and angels as in that sense as being useful for understanding it. Like at least it's not the most useful thing in my toolbox currently. Mental toolbox, I guess I'll say that. It's like I'm not going there. It's it's like you're coming up with some interesting stuff, but I'm strong. And if they landed the plane now, it would have been a very good conversation, but they don't. I'm going to get it, I guess. Yeah, that's OK. I mean, it's not I didn't expect us to go in this direction anyway. This conversation, I'm like, I kind of kind of pulled you into into into a world of a world that's difficult. It's not the way that modern people think, let's say. But it's definitely it's something that is it's coming up in the problem of complex. It's not the way modern people think, and he doesn't mean contemporary city in the problem of problem of emergence, like how is it that these how do these phenomena coagulate into one and how is it that quantum fields? Look at look at the attention. You know, Jordan Peterson always talks about the crowd gets quiet. Well, his little consciousness, Congress. Peugeot has all of the attention of his consciousness, of of Ben's consciousness, Congress. Stack up so that you can say, you know, it's like you can say that's Ben. It's like that's a pretty intense, the pretty intense thing that I can notice that you have unity because you're you're a bunch of stuff, not just a bunch of stuff in space, but a bunch of stuff in time, and the fact that these join together. Into one being is something which is difficult to account for. You might even imagine you have a soul, because what other word would we use for the collective of everything that Ben is? Unless you have something like. A platonic structure like it doesn't exist outside of everything, the one true apple. Right. Oh, he said Plato. And did you see, did you watch that other angel come into the room? Once he said Plato, the angel of Plato or the diamond swooped into the room. You're skeptical that any of this is practical. But what better way do we have to think about the spirit of Plato coming into the room once Jonathan has summoned him? Do you think we are without spiritual power? Do you think we can't call upon spirits to come to our aid or sometimes to our distress? Because when Jonathan Bejo says Plato, suddenly an entire spirit comes into the conversation and we must contend with that spirit. Now, the spirit of Plato is also fragmented between between the little bits of ways that we know this spirit. But we all act as if the spirit, in fact, has a truth about it, has a reality to it. Oh, you don't have Plato. Right. No, you don't have Plato. Right. But Plato was summoned into this conversation with just a word and we all saw it and they both responded and, you know, see it right here. But it's not a platonic structure, like it doesn't. It's the skills that exist outside of everything. The one true apple. Whoosh, there he came. Right. But it's not in. That's why in the Christian vision, or at least in the Orthodox vision, it's not that simple. It's like it's not just that the apple, that form of the apple exists outside the apples, it's that it exists within all the apples. The apples exist within it. It's not a it's not a it's not disincarnated. It's an incarnate. Let's let's swoop the spirit of Aristotle in here while we're at it. Metaphysics, you could say. But it's not like there's a world of the forms of apples. And then there are the particular apples. It's that this is actually it's an incarnate reality. The form of the apples are, you could say, hiding in the apples and the apples are in the form. So now remember, we were talking about the instantiation of the Mandalorian and his daughter or the instantiation of He-Man and his childhood self that you're able to perceive the apples as a discreet thing. It's like, I feel like I feel like this is going like way off to the 10. But but let me. Oh, no, this this this conversation has a delightful spirit, has a delightful angel. Let me let me kind of let me rope it back into the. All right. Talk about a little bit of discipline. Storytelling. Well, I'm talking about I'm thinking like the one. I guess I get nervous when when all of it leads to there being. One true story. So we're back to this again, aren't we? We're back to Sheila ism. We're back to the question of originality. Which is also definitively historical and therefore has primacy over every other story. Like the story of Jesus, relegates that, though. One true story, which is also definitively historical and therefore has primacy over every other. Why does a story that has correlation as at a physical level have primacy over stories that don't have correlates? That's exactly what we were talking about with Zeus. Zeus raping Zeus, taking on the form of a swan. Having sex and impregnating a virgin to create a demigod, something like that. Why, oh, why. Do we have supremacy with stories that have physical correlation and physical manifestation and that can be tracked on? Well, you've got the tracking of the story verse. But when the story verse and the physical verse track with each other, now suddenly we have power in every courtroom. That is the question. Does the story verse and the physical verse, do they track on each other? You have meaning, you have question, you have all of those things. But that is the question. And we all know that that's the question, don't we? Let's hop over to this conversation. You have evil located as a snake, right? So it's a predator. It's the predator in the garden. And predatory snakes were hell on primates. So now for a long time, I'd talk about Jordan Peterson and his biblical material as a sort of concordism, as sort of an evolutionary psychology, concordism, and that's exactly what he's doing here. There's plenty of evolutionary reason for that. But then you can imagine. So there's an insistence in Judeo-Christian thinking that the snake in the garden is Satan, which is a very odd idea. I tried to think that through. I thought, OK, snake as predator. Other person has predator group as predator. Soul inside your soul as predator, it's increasing psychologization of the idea of predator, because, you know, when we were, but it's also got correlation to the physical love, the physical layer or animals like other animals, we were preyed upon by straightforward predators and then by other people. And don't forget the we because we were preyed upon. When was Jordan Peterson attacked by a snake and a cat? Was Jordan Peterson? I don't mean he tells us to pet the cat, but I don't think that's the cat that he's worried about, even though our little house cats, if they had two or three hundred pounds more, we would be very worried indeed. But what is this we that we're afraid of cats and snakes? Are there many snakes in Toronto that are threatening Jordan Peterson's life? The poor man, he's had all these kind of health problems. Now he's got snakes, too. No, no, no. We. Oh, oh, the spirit of us, the the principality of humanity, the angel of all of us together that we all participate in, just like those little apples that that Jonathan Pichot was talking about. And then by other individuals. But then we figured out that that battle was within. We figured that out. Then why do you have to tell us if we figured that out? Wouldn't we already know it? No, no, no, no, no. You're simply not understanding me. No, we actually all do understand them quite perfectly. But what we're not understanding is how on earth we're using all this language and knowing what we're saying. But here we are. And if it isn't occurring within, then is it necessary that it is transferred to something that's occurring without? I really like your point about how believing in original sin or that the battle is within makes you less susceptible to a simplistic, where good, there evil narrative. Now, did he mean you meaning Jordan Peterson or did he mean you meaning us? I like that a lot. I'm a big fan of Amanda Ripley, who wrote this amazing essay called Complicating the Narrative, and it's about how journalists, reporters, you know, don't report like, well, this side says this and this side says that. Don't just report the two sides. That simplifies the narrative in a sense, rather show splits within each side and show that the story is really complicated. And that kind of stops people in their in their in their rush to judgment and mob action and makes them think, which, of course, is what great literature does, too. And that also helps explain what I think is is particularly attractive to me in Christianity, at least in some of the Christians that I know, is that they really make a virtue of humility in a way that well, Jews don't at least American Jews don't don't seem to. But I don't know. I know some humble Jews. How humble are you, Jacob? The idea that we are all flawed, don't be so sure of yourself. Judge not lest ye be judged. So I sometimes join a group of evangelical preachers actually brought together by Jonathan Rausch, another Jewish atheist. But, you know, with a bunch of interesting people like Pete Weiner, David Brooks and some actual some actual ministers as well, not just those high status writers. People who actually work with people with us, but it I just love the the virtues there of humility, grace, forgiveness. And these are virtues that have just been completely drained away from a modern society. And when we talk about grace, beauty, grace, forgiveness, humility, are those spirits? Are those angels? Do we participate in them? I think you see the the struggle for morality within in the Jewish tradition, in the prophetic tradition, with the insistence that people have deviated away from the path of God and have to be called back to it, so at least the precursors to that idea there in broad form and importantly, which that makes sense. Yes. Yeah, the idea that there's a struggle between our better angels and our inner demons, good and evil within us is an important idea. It doesn't have to come from the parable of the snake in the Garden of Eden. The problem doesn't have to come from there. I don't know. Where does it come from? What ontology does it have that it is, in fact, coming towards us? Well, we might say angel or something like that if we talk in language like that. But then we're stuck with the language we have, aren't we? Good and evil within us, good and evil within us. Well, you mean like eating too much salt. But how is that in us? What on earth are we that things like good and evil can be in us? Like, you know, if I take a pill, that pill is in me. No, no, no, that's not what we're talking about. Well, what exactly are we talking about? It is an important idea. It doesn't have to come from the parable of the snake in the Garden of Eden. The problem there is that if it is, it's just a parable. And people who are raised in the Christian tradition or who just don't believe it or can't slide onto it can reject it. Oh, it's just a parable. What does that mean? That means it didn't really happen. Well, what does that mean? It means if there's no physical correlation. Well, why is that important? Well, because things that are true, you know, Jimmy Carter, you know, had lust in his heart. He committed adultery in his heart for other women. But I think Rosalynn Carter was completely understood and was, you know, rather satisfied with the distinction that at least he didn't do it in his bed. What's the difference between his bed and his heart? Well, you know, I'm not contradicting Jesus' comments in the Sermon on the Mount because there is a significant difference and that difference is recognized by all of us, including the court of law, and it's recognized especially by the people upon whom your lust may fall. I mean, you might not even know what's going on in Jimmy Carter's heart. The story, like the story of Jesus relegates that relegates all the other stories to being glimmers of the one true story. Ah, so here we are. But instantiations of stories are definitive. And court, you swear about the instantiation and the physicality. Usually they might get into motivation and some of those things. But all of the motive gets to the question of instantiality. Instantiality is fundamentally important. I can tell a lovely story about all sorts of things. And in fact, the question of that story will be its power as it goes out and then once again gets instantiated in others. The power of the Mandalorian is born witnessed to by the instantiation of it in his daughter's life. That's a testimony to its power. But again, the power of it likely has everything to do with its originality as Jordan Peterson was trying to make to Sam Harris and their conversation. And that is an idea that I have grown uncomfortable with. Yeah, yeah. But there's another way to present it, which is not which is not necessarily the idea that they're just glimmers, but that there's a because what's that what else is interesting is, say, if you look at Jordan Peterson Concordism, where I say Concordism, because that was sort of when during the early modern period, when there was increasing skepticism about, well, we've got these fossils that say or the late modern period, actually, we've got these fossils that say this, we've got the Bible that says this. There's all these attempts to try to put them together. And a little bit later, when I play the my conversation with the individual with his creative ideas about fall on Earth, creationism, that's all Concordism. It's trying to put the physical and the story verse together because that has a power that the other doesn't have and it has a power. Not only it is a power because it governs in a way. That's why Jesus is Lord, because he governs via that power. And that's why the miracles, that's why stilling the storm, that's why raising the dead, that's why multiplication of loaves and fishes, that's why all of those things, because he's showing himself to be governing both not just governor of stories, the governor of spirits, but the lord of all. That's the whole point of it. And the power of us as sub creators, as Tolkien called us, is that we can now create stories that actually occupy and instantiate and will will facilitate their instantiation into the world, hopefully to bless it. How can I say this is like a fractal reality, which is that reality is full of, let's say, the story of logos, right? Right. But that's the logos, the logos, the whole thing. You're giving a fractal reality a center. Yeah, that you mean the fact that it shows like, yeah, it has one, it has one. And when you when when you tell a story that is as original as possible, as tied to the origin, its glory grows. And if, in fact, you can instantiate a story in time, it is powerful indeed. That's why the civil rights movement had power. They were instantiating the story of Jesus. In a powerful way that a Christian nation paused and said, maybe we ought to do something about that Jim Crow stuff and all those lynchings. Maybe it's maybe it's time we didn't just look the other way at the inconvenience of the South. And then when Dr. King brought his marchers up north, the inconvenience of racism in the north to instantiating story is both bears witness to power and is enormously powerful because that story has energized and fueled the American moral morality ever since it's become the center of all of the other moral stories. And in fact, it's not that these that a truly powerful, well instantiated story robs the future of stories. No, it actually fuels it. That the story of Jesus, like encapsulates, let's say, all these stories together. And then by definition has to be factual. The story of Jesus fuels all these stories. That's the entire point of the spirit of Jesus going out into the world. And it fueled the stories and the stories fueled instantiations. And that, in fact, transforms the creation. And we're seeing it done. In a way that the story of Zeus is not the story of Jesus did not take all the narrative air out of the world, it puts more in it feeds it. And that's why. Tale of two cities, the story of Jesus, the reality, the historicity of Jesus story does not impoverish Dickens, it energizes him. It gives life to Dickens. Because Dickens had to tell the story in his context, all the way back to Andrew Clavin. It had to be it had to have characters and grit and grime and reality. That's what made Dickens so pointed, so powerful. I mean, it was you mean you mean that it's that well, Zeus was is not embodied in the swamp, did that happen? All right. Let it is it let it lead a lead in the swan. I don't know. Take it. Why am I on a Zeus kick today? That's so weird. Any one of the people who was who Zeus like turned into Zeus and got pregnant. Yeah, that today. Why are we talking about all of Zeus's rapes? Is that what you're wondering? Yeah, it's an interesting psychological question going on here. But what did the spirit of Freud enter the room? Did that happen? Like is like. You could say that it didn't happen in the same way that we say that the story of Washington crosses the deliric, what's the signing of the Declaration of Independence? And so so there's a hierarchy of events in the world and they don't necessarily happen at the same level. But I have to turn off the mic because of the car on the street says a lot. I got no roosters here, although we do have some more and more in the neighborhood, but yeah, that's what I got in the neighborhood. Oh, you know, and some of them have more intensity and more brightness and some of them are less incarnate also as well. You could say. And so for sure, the way that the way that Zeus impregnated his different ladies is not the same way that we talk about the resurrection, let's say, or that we talk about the story of Christ. But to say that it didn't happen, I think is. Do we talk about the resurrection of Christ in a similar way to the signing of the? No, I hope not. I hope nobody does that, like because it's. I'd love to know what Jonathan means by that, because I think in the mind of the other guy, he's asking this this very modernist term of historicity. And again, it isn't that the ancients didn't know. You go back to Mary Beard, you know, in my Sunday school class, I talked about here. Here's two. Here's two stories of Rome. You have Romulus and Remus and you have a Neas. And so, you know, the scholars of Rome, Livy tries to put Romulus and Remus and Aeneid into one storyline. It was not that they were. It's not that they were unconscious of these issues. But they had an understanding that with the strength of modernity. Let's think about it like Woden and his eye. We had to sacrifice an eye. To see. And to have the power of knowledge. It's kind of a good way to say it. It's obviously not at the same level. It's a different level. It's hinted at in the scripture, right? Closer to the Zeus level than to the. I mean, the idea would be that it's a it's a kind of. It's a place where it all comes. What happens? I mean, lately I heard someone say everyone who signed the Declaration of Independence committed treason. Well, that's true. These are all the stories and words and and why when someone said that, I thought, well, of course, that's that's exactly what that meant. But I had never I had never thought about it in that framing before. And that's exactly what Peugeot was talking about in terms of the spirit in that room and the spirit of that event. Now, the Declaration of Independence happened in a very physical way. And you can go to Washington and you can see the remains of that physical of that physical reality. Comes together and so in a way it is something that happened, but something which is beyond description at the same time. But it's not a it's not a it's not a fable. At least no Christians believe that it was a fable, like that it was something that happened in a in a more subtle way, let's say. So a lot of a lot of the old stories are more subtle, like they have they don't have they seem to be happening at the psychic level or seem to be happening at like a psychic level of the version of a community, like something like that. Like, you know how you have ideas and imaginations. And so the day a community can have that. Adam and Sitch had me on and they wanted me to talk about this and I completely bombed and so this stuff is so difficult to talk about, especially if you're in the con if you're in the context of a conversation. Because, again, it's it's not much different than all the villagers see their God on the beach. The gringo does not. As well, a lot of these stories seem to happen at that level. And so they're not exactly the same as as I say, the stories about Jesus. OK, so but stories like OK. So, yeah, those stories, I have a more of a psychic. But the physicality of the story of Jesus is a point I make again and again and again The physicality of the story of Jesus is vitally important for us to wager and risk responsibly our physicality on the authority of Jesus. And that's exactly why the church had the shape it did. And you can read that. So I'm looking in second Thessalonians this week. Paul continues to go back to that point and tell the the the men and women of the church of Thessalonica. Go ahead and suffer. It will be worth it. And now we're now we're back to Peterson and his life and death and resurrection of Jesus video that he made in April of twenty eighteen. Go ahead and suffer because. Your flesh will be redeemed. The story verse and what the resurrection is, is the reunification of our spirit with resurrected flesh creation to point out. That's what we see with Jesus. He Paul says in Romans eight and first Corinthians 15. Level, which is different from the story of Jesus. Was it happening at a more psychic level than, say, Ford making the first team model T. The witness to. The power of Jesus resurrection was in the church and it was real enough to overthrow the Roman Empire and it's been real enough to rewire humanity and all of our observations ever since. Now this model T. Well, right now he's just brought the spirit of model T into the country. He's just brought the spirit of model T into the conversation. I don't know. Yeah, you're trying to find something that is. Well, we're on it. We're on it. We're on it. We seem to be on a on a on a. There seems to be one of my favorite. Peterson classroom clips is when he asked, what is a car? Is a car a conveyance to get me from here to the grocery store? Is the car a. And an urban terraformer that will reshape cities all over the world? Is the car a. Is the car a sneaky plot by plants to feed them more thoroughly with carbon dioxide reclaimed from past dead matter trapped in the underground? What is a car? That's. I remember when I was why I remember them. I remember I remember the moment. I don't I can't tell you the date, but I remember standing in my kitchen, hearing that and stopping and thinking. He's an expert. I didn't think then, but now he's an exorcist. Why is he an exorcist? I know that makes some of you uncomfortable. Because he is he is casting out spirits that have been occupying us, and he does so with stories like that. And. Can. Exorcism come through video to some degree, that's certainly what everyone was paranoid about about a year or two when everybody thought that YouTube was radicalizing young people. There's there's a lot of spiritual warfare going on all around us all the time. Be like, what do you call it? A continuum of some kind of types of events. Yes, they're like, like, like you have like the more psychic events, which are like like Zeus, we have more historical events like, like the first light bulb and things that you can. And again, Peugeot, you know, it doesn't want to be a jerk. But tell me about the first light bulb or gas lights, light bulbs. No, no. And then suddenly all that the spirit of a light bulb, the spirit of a light bulb instantiated. I mean, you can't use language without understanding language is by nature always spiritual because any language that attempts to refer to anything physical in a substantive way and continue to move spirits, you know, pass me the salt, it's spiritual language because you're you're talking to another spiritual amphibious about changing something in the physical world, like point to you have, you know, and then we have like where where on this continuum is, say, the resurrection? I don't the resurrection is is very singular because it's presented as both an event which obviously happened in a way that people could recognize it as happening, like it's happening in the world, but it also points it's it's it's difficult to contain because the disciples don't recognize Jesus. They don't recognize him. And then they do when he reveals they don't recognize him physically until he opens his mouth and manifests himself spiritually with language and then they know exactly who he is. And oh, by the way, just like me coming into my office. Oh, yeah, there's those scars. And in some ways, that divide between the missionaries and those who saw their God on the beach was at play. Reveals himself. And so it's a very it's very mysterious. I think it's made to be mysterious. It's made to be mysterious on purpose so that you don't think that it's it's as mundane as, you know, you cutting your fingernails, but that it's also not something which is imaginary or a fable, but that it somehow is a place where all of this kind of comes together. And that's why it's got primacy and we can toss out Zeus, but not that it is primacy because it doesn't suck the air out of the room. It feeds every other story since then. You can find it in all the stories, can't you? You can find it all the worlds we create, can't you? In fact, it's it's powerful enough that it gets dragged into almost every other movie, as does the crucifixion, we just these stories just multiply. They they take over over everything. They don't they don't they don't take life. They give it. We don't have to toss out Zeus. Like, I mean, we don't worship Zeus, but people remember the story of Zeus, right? Things that bring communities together, it does not have to be. It does not have. If we worshiped Zeus, our girls would be afraid to go feed the geese. Attention. To be Athena. Yeah, well, the stories of the Greek gods ended up participating in the margins of the Christian civilization. Like they were remembered and they were they were remembered and copied and celebrated as lower on the hierarchy of things, let's say. In other words, the Christian stories and nobody's better at pointing this out than Peugeot and, you know, Roland, the Christian stories gave life. To the ancient stories, they, as you would expect from Christian theology, they fulfilled them. In, you know, the kind of Christian story that we see Jonathan working on in a sense, Alexander the Great is redeemed by Christ, at least his story is. To remember, but they weren't forgotten. There were statues of the Greek heroes in Constantinople, of the Roman heroes and Greek heroes in Constantinople, like they were, you know, they were just part of society. But then the Norse myths are alive and well now with Thor being in the Marvel universe. Yeah, it's a literal lore. So it's like, so I get like, but that's more of the evolution of story. Like that's that's an organic. I don't know. What do you mean by organic? Like stories in time growing, changing, being adopted by different people for different reasons in different ways. Yeah, but there are ways like, I mean, be interesting. Listen to the rest of history just did two podcasts on paganism. Fascinating. And it in fact, the appropriation of paganism, imagining that somehow there's continuity, according to this one historian of it, complete fabrication, just made it all up over again to look at it, because there are ways in which the story of the story of Jesus, let's say just the actual story of Jesus, that it takes storytelling to its limit. And so it's very difficult. And I think when Americans hear that, they hear. They hear a contraction instead of fulfillment and and the fulfillment, meaning the the fertilization and the feeding of stories and instantiated stories. And so what Jesus does is he replicates himself through the story in William Wilberforce, in the Saints, in in people, even even people who don't even know the story that well or don't even want to be identified. He's reigning over them as well. Again, part of that Bardian video came into there. Maybe I'll just I don't I don't have that in there. Difficult. It's very difficult sometimes to go to think. Imagine how you could go beyond some of the stories that are told, but they in his story that the the the one. Sorry, Garth. Go ahead. Well, go ahead. You go ahead. I'm sorry. I get excited and I interrupted it. So like the story of the of the descendants of the underworld, a good example that I like to use, which is that the descendants of the underworld is like a universal story. You see it in every in every culture. It's always there, like their versions of it, different aspects of it. You go down to visit to get some wisdom. You go down to save someone. You succeed or you don't succeed. You know, and so you see it in all the in the epics and you see it in the different myths. And so now Jesus has a version which is to go down to the underworld. And then he goes down into death. And then he takes everybody out and then he destroys death. And so that's like that's the end of that story. So it's not like you can participate. You can have other versions of it still like it's still kind of fractally will continue to manifest itself, but it's reached the limit of storytelling, which is that that story of the descent into the underworld has. And I think if we reframe that as more of a definitive originality that in fact. Both creates it affords new it affords it gives life. It doesn't close the book, but but every other story must in some way. And again, this is so you've got the story, then you've got the the multiplication of history, and so the reason that the story isn't limited, isn't a limiting factor is even though it is, it's so hard to talk about, is because it can be instantiated in other worlds and it's limiting because originals are always limiting in a way because they have to have boundaries. There's nobody better than Peugeot talks about. But but they also have richness and, you know, fullness, fulfillment, they have fullness. They occupy and colonize new settings and therefore and therefore they are they are made manifest. And, you know, the New Testament says in Christ is all in all. That's the language that it uses. That's kind of reached its. Yeah, like their death is abolished, so. So, I mean, it's like you could say, why why is it that they're the ones who thought of telling that version? Like, I mean, you could kind of find that one. If that's the one true best ultimate. Version of that story, the fullness of the underworld story. As me sitting here, I have two questions. That's the first question, number one, with that being the fullness of the underworld story, I sit here today with I think it should be the fertility. It's the it's the. We don't have we don't have proper language for it. The book on my desk is writing an underworld story. Yeah. That I feel that that marginalizes my underworld story a little bit, but why would I why would I the best has already been done? All I could do is be a glimmer or a fractal. It's exactly it's exactly the same question that Jordan Peterson talks about. One of his students said, why can't we tell the definitive archetypal story? And the reason is that. In context, stories, the original story multiplies itself in new instantiations. There has to be limit, otherwise, the story is lost. In other words, there has to be a spirit of the story. There has to be a governing angel that that. That controls and governs and limits, but at the same time with the new creation, it. It is it is it is fresh. I come to make all things new to Christ. So Christ says in the Book of Revelation, I come to make all things new. Every blade of grass is renewed. C.S. Lewis gets at this with the new Narnia in the last battle and the great divorce. Everything is is more real in. It's the it's the real Narnia. I'll not I'll not. I'll not. I brought C.S. Lewis in. Let's let's be careful with. I hate to say Plato, because then he whooshes in the reflection of that story. Right. But that's not like that. You're being a fractal reflection of the ultimate story is something that it's that's always what we've been doing. The child is not a diminishment of the parents. Let's say it that way. In fact, it's the glory of the parents that the child is in some ways original. But that originality is the union of both parents. And it is the glory of the parents that the child would have glory. So is the same with every story that is original enough to bear the witness of the. Original story, yet manifest it in a new creation. Think about it that way. It's not like it's not. It's not like this is this was always what's been going on. Like it's always been a fractal reflection of some story, which we recognize. And then we're kind of participating in and we're showing different sides of. And so and then everybody can kind of. And participation is a better word because the old is instantiated again in the new. I mean, that's what happens in church. That's what happens with ritual. It's what happens with the Lord's Supper. Do this and remembrance of me. I see that this is this is connecting us to something which we can't totally describe or that stirs us in a way that we can't completely exhaust and feeds us and nourishes us and creates us. But that continues to be true because because because it's because the point, let's say, where that story comes together, has been has happened. It doesn't mean that there isn't this like joy of participating in it. I don't know. I mean, it doesn't it doesn't affect me. Like I I would still tell an underworld story because Dante still told an underworld story and it was one of the best underworld stories to ever to ever happen, but it didn't reach the limit, let's say, of the of the of the story of Christ, like it didn't it actually participates in it because even in Dante's story, you you get this sense of how all of this is going has been transformed by that event and how it's also even more interesting hints about how. Yeah, anyways, I won't go into that, but yeah, sorry. OK, so what about. This sounds like I'm having a hard time figuring out where the line is between. And the way the way the way we're talking about now is takes a lot of thought. But I have this idea like, do you think if you. Could see the historical Christ, Jesus of Nazareth, we'll say. And find that this is a historical person and could could view that history or travel back to that history and see what do you think you would be disappointed? Because the reason I'm asking, can I just just go ahead? To flesh out that question, my other totem that I have here with me. So I had Prince Adam. I also have Robin Hood. Yeah, who I love. And my daughter Angelica gave me this. I love that. I love that movie. My kids watch that movie to death and I never got tired of. Plastic Disney Robin Hood, because I love Disney's Robin Hood. But, you know, like Robin Hood's hard to figure out where it all came from. But, you know, it's possible that there are like a couple like early, early medieval contenders for maybe the origin of the Robin Hood story. I feel like if I went back and met one of those guys with Disney's beautiful Fox Robin Hood, with Errol Flynn, with the many other versions in my mind, it would be nothing short of a disappointment. Yeah, I think you're right. But I think that's part of the story. It's actually in the Jesus story, what you're saying. In the Jesus story is people being disappointed in Jesus and not him not seeming they looked on the beach and they didn't see a God, not the God they were looking for to be what they expected him to be. And so you're you're the way you think about it is completely right. But it's contained in the story. So there's a sense in which the logos is hidden in his manifestation and the fruits of that of his hiddenness appear. As the story continues to unfurl, then so when when Christ resurrects that, you know, or when they when there's at when they received the Holy Spirit, you get a sense that all of a sudden they now they see all these little aspects of the story and they're able to connect them in a way that at the time they were too blind to kind of see. But I think you're right. I think that probably if I if I was there, especially without the knowledge that I have now, I see the spirit is already in Peugeot through that knowledge. And that's exactly that. I love the way Peugeot answered that question. It was absolutely terrific. Because the spirit comes in. What do we mean by that? Well, it comes into them collective and communally like a wind, like a dove, like a fire. It comes it comes into them and and they are now filled with boldness. And they couldn't see him before, but now they see him and and they are they are transformed. And in fact, the story of Jesus does not diminish with the disciples. It just grows and it grows and grows and will and will take over the it will take over the Roman Empire. I would probably be one of those people that didn't recognize the Messiah because because he because, yeah, that's exactly how the story is actually told. This was a great conversation. I think I'm just I just kind of end this, but I'm going to close it with the sub stack that I wrote the other day. It very much gets to this this question of disappointing. Eugene Peterson, not Jordan Peterson, Eugene Peterson was was a writer who my mentors put his books in my hands. He's a wonderful writer and I have an immense amount of love and respect for Eugene Peterson. He passed away not very long ago. There was a lovely review of his of a new biography out on him that was in Plow. Those Bruderhof, is that the Anabaptist community? And I thought of this, I thought of this here. And this, again, is is how how Jesus, how Jesus does not limit our stories, but he fulfills them and he fuels them. When you meet a saint, resist the urge to kill them. Thoughts on a review of Eugene Peterson's biography. And this this review really touched a part of me, a part that is more that was more of me a decade ago. For many thinky white middle class or middle class white preachers, Eugene Peterson is the person to be the right blend of classical piety, smarts and status worn with appropriate humility. I've read and profited from much of Eugene Peterson. His books, his books were put in my hands by my mentors. But when I think saint, I do think miracles. There is something about how physical law violating miracle should be physical law colonizing, commanding miracles, connect heaven and earth like few other things. Miracles have huge dangers and downsides that go far beyond contemporary materialist skepticism. If there were more of them, they'd be abused as often as sex. Read Jesus, read Jesus reaction to the Galilean crowds. I really like what Frederick Beekner did in Lion country with his character, Beb, was he a pedo? Did he raise someone from the dead? What about the church? And then that diploma mill scam he was he was doing. The story is of a reporter coming from New York and he's going to expose Beb and make a name for himself, discovers Beb's hot daughter and, well, kind of turns his life upside down and in a kind of way that if you grew up and kind of those those small out of the way churches, the kind that Jesus and John Wayne likes to throw stones at and point fingers down upon, you sort of know that it's you're in this place. Is this is this holy or slimy or corrupt or or what exactly is that? Well, that's that's Beb. In some ways, thinking white, it should be thinking, not thinking, thinking in some ways, thinky white middle class preachers can't help because that's what I am. I can I can call myself out, can't I? Can't help but be who they are unless they decide to fall into an underworld. Eugene Peterson was a gift. Saints are people where heaven touches earth in surprising ways that not only delight us, but undo us. It's exactly the kind of person that fuels stories. We usually celebrate saints after they are safely dead. When they are alive, we want them dead. So that'll close it. I hope I remember to be able to put all the links in. This turned out being very long. I knew it would be because commentaries always are long. But what a what an amazing conversation. And I hope they I hope they do it again. What amazing job Peugeot has done, but how tremendously daunting and difficult a task it really is to undo the fabric and and knit a new one that gives life and breath and hope and shalom. Leave a comment. Let me know what you think.