https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=klpg7f5kqC4

 So I recorded most of Ben's presentation. And it's up to Ben if you want, I'll share it with you on YouTube and you can pass it around via Facebook or any other way you want to. One of the fun things about YouTube is you can go on YouTube and search just about anything and find something. And so here is a church service in Atlanta where, as isn't uncommon during church service, someone had a medical emergency perhaps a heart attack or something, and they passed out there and passed away. And were revived by the paramedics who came and so I just searched on YouTube, man raised from the dead, and there's the whole church service and they're praying for the person. And it's really cool and it's kind of fun to watch. But when I think about the story of Lazarus, not raising from the dead was a whole other thing. And in John 11 you can find the story where Lazarus falls ill and Lazarus along with his sisters Martha and Mary are good friends of Jesus and Bethany just outside of Jerusalem. And they send word to Jesus that Lazarus is sick and Jesus intentionally belays. And then Lazarus dies. And Lazarus is entombed for four days by the time Jesus gets there. Again you can read all about this in John chapter 11. But what's shocking about the Lazarus story is how stark it is. Because this isn't just something you find on YouTube. Everybody in their community knew Lazarus. They knew him by name. It would have been, I want to be careful not to hurt a lot of people. So I always, where's Reggie? Is Reggie here? I like to pick on Reggie. There he is. It's as if Reggie got sick and died. Now I don't want to disturb you any more Reggie. You're eyeing behind Maury. It's not football season so I don't know what you're doing. But you know if something can happen to Reggie and Reggie would pass away, all of us would know about it. And there wouldn't be any ambiguity, oh did he faint, oh did this happen. Because if Reggie passed away and we had a funeral, and four days later after the funeral and the repass and everything, and then this man Jesus would come and go to the grave, now hopefully you kept the mortician away from Reggie and they didn't involve him, but they would go to the grave and Jesus would say, Reggie, maybe he would use Reggie, I don't know, what would you rather have Jesus say, Reggie? Reggie's fine, okay. And he'd say, Reggie, come out. And Reggie came out of the grave after being buried in there for four days. Now they had a rule in the ancient world, the Jews had a rule, because death is, especially in the ancient world, it's kind of hard to know if someone is really dead or just mostly dead, if you've seen the Princess Bride. So often they have this time period, they say, you know, three days, after three days they're really dead. And this is four days. And so if Reggie had died and everybody at the Capitol knew because they worked with him, and all of us would be in terrible grief and shock, and this would be a tragedy, and we did a funeral, and we put him in the grave, and we wrapped him up and everything, and then this man called Jesus comes, and he was a friend of Reggie's, and he called Reggie out of the tomb, and Reggie walked out of the tomb. Now you can imagine what would happen around there, because, you know, today if Jesus showed up and was going to bring someone out of the tomb and Reggie starts walking out of the tomb, everybody's iPhones and cell phones would come out, and everybody would take a picture of that, and it would be on YouTube, and all over the world. Because it would completely change everything. Now let's imagine that you're Reggie's friend. I know that's hard to imagine, but let's just, you know, let's get even more personal. Let's say Nancy. So Jesus comes and raises Reggie from the dead. What's Nancy thinking about? Well, there's things in my life that I would really like Jesus to address. There's people that I want Jesus to heal. There might even be loved ones who have passed that I'd like to talk to Jesus and say, Jesus, Reggie was down for four. Can you do longer? Because this kind of power, is that something you just walk away from? And this was such a public thing, like again, if Reggie died, we all would know about it. We'd all go to the funeral, we'd all mourn, and we'd come around, sing the anastasia of our grief, and then if Reggie came out from the funeral again and showed up back for work at the stake, everyone would know about it. What would that do? What would the state of California say? Because here's something that you couldn't deny. This would be, in fact, a huge problem, because they're the first things that would happen, is that anybody who knew Reggie or heard about it would start looking for this Jesus, and we'd all have our angle on how we feel about this. And most of us would probably think, boy, if he can raise Reggie from the dead after four days, what can't he do? And I want to find this Jesus, and I want to meet this Jesus, and I want to see if this Jesus can't fix some problem in my life. And probably Jerry Brown would think, I know Reggie. I knew Reggie was dead. I sent a card to his wife, but he's back at work now. And you know, the TV crews would be there. And Jerry Brown would probably think, I want to stand next to Jesus and get a picture with him. Or I want Jesus to endorse the tunnel project under the Delta. Because if Jesus would endorse the tunnel project, you know, isn't this the way it would go? Well, that's in fact the way it went. But then the more you got to know about this Jesus, probably the more questions you would have, because we would really like Jesus to be kind of a projection of what we like. But this Jesus walks around and he says some really shocking things. He keeps talking about himself in the third person, like the Son of Man. And those of you who would hear that, who is the Son of Man? And you might find the Bible and open it up to Daniel 7 and see the story about the ancients of days, delivering, you know, putting down the empire beasts and delivering an eternal kingdom to the Son of Man. And this Jesus walks around and keeps talking about himself as, I'm the Son of Man. And you start to think, are you okay? Are you crazy? Is this true? Now before he raised Reggie from the dead, you might think, that's just kind of crazy talk, isn't it? But they say he's done some other miracles, so I don't know. But then if you knew Reggie and you knew he had died and you knew he had been raised from the dead, you would probably stop and listen and say, I'm going to think about this Son of Man thing. And one of the things you probably would really be concerned about and maybe even persuaded about is Jesus also kept talking, again you can read this in the Gospel of John, that Jesus believed he was sent from heaven. And you might say, well weren't you born from Mary in Bethlehem? Yes. But I came from heaven for this mission. And again when you hear people talk like this, and people still do talk like this, and people come up to me and say things like this, and when I hear this I begin to say, I don't think you're quite sane. But if you raised Reggie from the dead, and I knew Reggie, and I knew he was dead, and I knew he was raised now, I would listen. So now a large crowd of Judeans, that's the people now. There we go. Of Judeans learned that Jesus was there. And so they came not only because of him, but also to see Lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead. So again this is the idea. So okay, Reggie is raised from the dead, and Reggie goes back to work. Pretty soon the governor would have to call the state police to organize the crowd outside of Reggie's office. And they wouldn't be there. Now Reggie would probably from his desk be able to say, now I'm going to start a website with fantasy football picks, and it would get a million hits from that. But they'd listen to Reggie's fantasy football picks a little bit better. But the point would be they'd want to see Reggie, and they'd want to touch him, and they'd ask him like, what happened? Like what did that feel like? Like did you experience heaven, and what did that look like? And then Reggie can run your book and make a million dollars until that Christian bookstore is pulled off the shelf again. But this is the drama that would go on. And so on one hand everybody wants to see Lazarus, but the chief priests also know this is a legitimate threat to the status quo and to their power in Jerusalem. So they not only want to kill Jesus, they want to kill Reggie, or rather Lazarus. So watch your back, Reggie. But now the crowd is thinking about this too. And the crowd knows the political wins and something big like this happens. Everybody stops and ponders, okay, what's going to happen next? And even though, let's say, Nancy wants to get at Jesus and can't have Jesus do his stuff for her, one of the things that Nancy is going to be very concerned about is how to make sure they don't kill this Jesus. Because that's what the Romans and the people of Jerusalem are going to try to do. And so how do you protect Jesus? Well, you do by a show of force. So you organize a demonstration, and so you go down the street and you carry signs and you say, you know, we love Jesus and Jesus is great. And maybe we can get Jesus to run, well, we've got a governor election coming. What about Jesus for governor? Oh, we've got a presidential. What about Jesus for president? And then what will the two political parties try to do? Well, I want to get Jesus as my candidate. And suddenly Hillary would be nervous because someone's going to run against her. And the Democrats are going to be saying, we want Jesus to be our candidate. The Republicans are going to say, we want Jesus to be our candidate. But what happens in the town is they decide, we need to show our support for Jesus. And the way they do this is by going back to something in the past that was important, informative, and worked. And we see this today often when, whether it's Ferguson or another place in the country that wants to have a demonstration, they harken back to the Civil Rights Movement. And they'll sing songs for the Civil Rights Movement and they'll do things that connect it with the Civil Rights Movement. Now, obviously the Jews didn't have the Civil Rights Movement to think about. What the Jews looked back to was the Maccabean revolt against the Greeks. Now, if you used to be Roman Catholic or you still are Roman Catholic and you have your Roman Catholic Bible, some of the things that you'll notice is that often Bibles in the Roman Catholic Church will have a whole group of books in the middle called the Apocrypha. And the Reformers, actually the Reformation told the churches, we don't believe that these are part of the Bible, but they're good books to read. And one of the books in that Apocrypha is the Maccabees. And this is what 1 Maccabees 13, 49-53 has to say. Those who were in the citadel of Jerusalem were prevented from going in and out to buy and sell in the country. So they were very hungry. So there's this revolt that Simon Maccabees, Simon and his brothers, Judas and Jonathan, were kind of the leaders of this revolt movement. And they had by this point had taken most of Jerusalem, but there were holdouts in the citadel, and Simon was basically surrounding them and starving them out. So at this point they're finally ready to give because they're starving. So then they cried to Simon and made peace with them, and he did. But he expelled them from there and cleansed the citadel of its pollution. Now this is really important because if you read Matthew, Mark and Luke, one side up front. Oh, I didn't see it. Yeah, you can stick to this slide for a few minutes. They cleansed the citadel of its pollution, and in Matthew, Mark and Luke, Jesus goes and cleanses the temple. And so when the people are watching this, they're like, yes, we're going to support Jesus, and we're going to make Jesus king, and Jesus is going to be king of Jerusalem, and then Jesus is going to be around to not only raise our dead, but Jesus is going to be around to kick out the Romans and kick out those corrupt religious leaders that are sympathizing with the Romans and collaborating with them, and we're going to get our hands on this. So then on the 23rd day of the second month in the 171st year, the Jews entered it with praise and palm branches, and with hearts and symbols and strength instruments, and with hymns and songs. Does this sound familiar? Because a great manatee had been crushed and removed from Israel. Simon decreed that every year they should celebrate this day with rejoicing, and he strengthened the fortifications of the Temple Hill alongside the citadel, and he and his men lived there. And Simon saw that his son John had reached Nantuck, so they made him commander of all of his forces, and he lived at Gezara. So what happened? Well, Simon celebrated the final full occupation of Jerusalem, and he strengthened the walls to be able to maintain their political and their military position, and all the people went out with palm branches and singing. And so on Palm Sunday, this is what they do. Next slide. But then Jesus found a donkey and then sat on it, just as it is written, Do not be afraid, people of Zion, look, your king is coming, seated on a donkey's colt. His disciples did not understand these things when they first happened, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about and that these things had happened to them. Now there's something important here, because the palm branches go out and everybody's welcoming Jesus come in, but then John quotes something out of the prophet Zephaniah, and it's really interesting because then John also mentions the disciples didn't quite understand, and you might ask, what did the disciples understand? Didn't the disciples understand the Maccabean revolt and the palm branches and everything going on? Yes, the disciples at the moment understood Jesus coming into Jerusalem exactly like the rest of the crowd did, that this was their opportunity to save Jesus and support him politically and basically by threat of the crowd. And if you read in the Gospels that last week of Jesus' life there, again and again you'll read that the religious leaders wanted to act against Jesus, but they were afraid of the crowd, and that's the function that this triumphal entry has in this process. So then what here in John is he referring to that the disciples didn't understand? Let's jump ahead two slides, Roger, to go to Zephaniah 3. This is the passage that John quotes from, The Lord has removed the judgment against you. He has turned back your enemy. Israel's king, the Lord, is in your midst. You no longer need to fear distress, disaster. On that day they will save Jerusalem. Do not be afraid, Zion. Your hand must not be paralyzed with panic. The Lord your God is in your midst. He is your warrior who can deliver. He takes delight in you, and he renews you by his love. He shouts for joy over you. As for those who grieve because they cannot attend the festivals, I took them away from you. They became a tribute, and they were a source of shame to you. Look, at that time I will deal with those who mistreated you. I will rescue the land sheep and gather together the scattered sheep. I will take away their humiliation and make the whole earth admire and respect them. At that time I will lead you. At that time I gather you together. Be sure of this. I will make all the nations of the earth respect and admire you when you see me restore you, says the Lord. This is a really interesting passage to quote. Because what we expect right now is a very nationalistic verse that says, yes, God is on Israel's side. And he's against the Romans, and he's against the Heronians and all the Jews who are sympathizing with Rome. Jesus is a nationalist figure like Simon Maccabees. But this passage says no. Jesus is going to love and care for Zion, and Jesus is going to care in fact for the weak and the poor and the ones who have no political clout. Because here's the thing, Jesus takes no side. So again, let's imagine, Jesus raises Reggie, and the governor now notices because Reggie works for the state. And everybody around the offices notices because they went to Reggie's funeral, and now they see him alive. So the Democrats and Republicans are lining up to say, Jesus, don't you want to be a Democrat? Because we're all in it for the poor. And the Republicans are saying, Jesus, you're a Republican, right? Because you're against abortion and you're against sexual stuff. So Jesus, you're with us. And Jesus says, I'm not going to be a Republican or a Democrat. The question isn't if I'm on your side. The question is if you're on my side. One more round, John 17. So the crowd who had been with him, when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead, were continuing to testify about it. They kept talking about it. Lazarus is there. Because they had heard that Jesus performed this miraculous sign, the crowd went out to meet him. Thus the Pharisees said to one another, see that you can do nothing. Look, the world has run after us. So what do the Democrats feel when Jesus rebuffs them? And what do the Republicans feel when Jesus rebuffs them? Democrats and Republicans, they can't agree on a lot. Romans and Herobians and Pharisees and teachers of law, they can't agree on much. But you know what they can agree on? Jesus is a threat. In contemporary, in our times, would they kill Jesus? I don't know. But in the ancient world, if someone is a threat, you just kill them. That's what you do. And so the path is clear. Jump ahead to the common ideology slide, Raj. Common ideology. You see, and here's really the kicker. Because you might be in the middle and say, ah, Democrats and Republicans, I don't get into that office thing. But what do you want from Jesus? Jesus, can you help me in this? Jesus, can you get me out of this fix? Jesus, can you heal or fix this person? Jesus, can you raise my dead? Blank. And restore him to health and life with me. See, this fact betrays not just our political and religious parties, but also the warm, hazy spiritual imagining that Jesus' real mission is simply to help us feel good about ourselves. So that, you know, Jesus healed, raised, ready, so we all have signs. I'm with Jesus. I love Jesus. Jesus is popular and everything. And Jesus is owned by us. Well, Jesus, in fact, regularly brought comfort to a number of individuals. The kind of affirmation he brought usually wasn't in the shape of validating our decisions or our agendas. Can Jesus be a raider's man? Will Jesus be a diner's man? Will Jesus be a giant? All of these questions just don't connect. Next slide, Raj. Of Jesus' entire ministry, there is no other place where Jesus seems to come closer to the line of signing on to the culture war or nationalistic agenda than Palm Sunday. He walks right into the silent Maccabees script and embraces the son of David, King of the Jews label, working the 30 AD pundits into a frenzy. The Gospel of John puts it right there and throws Zephaniah into the mix. Jesus will advocate for the broken, the herding, the Gentile, the outcasts where there is no political coining. He will offend those who wish to lure them in as his ally and declare to them that if there is a side, it is him alone. And in a week, he will prove it when he dies alone. Jesus will make everyone with power and position believe that killing him is the only way to move this world forward to their cherished vision of how it should be. Now, I look at Ben's slides and you look at all of this open land and you look at this water supply with leeches in it and you just have to say, you know, if they discovered oil there, everything would be different. You know, why here, when so much of the world is developed, is this little area completely untouched? Because there's no money in it. No one has anything to gain. Well, let's send them electricity. Are they going to be able to pay? They don't have cash. Well, let's fix their water. Can they pay for it? They don't have money. It's the way this world works. Go ahead to Midori Raj. So you cannot make Jesus the servant of your agenda, religious, political or personal. We have no power to secure our agendas in the age of decay. And this is what's frustrating about Jesus. This is what so often I'll have, you know, oh, I tried Jesus and he didn't work for me. And so often what they need is quite simply this. I said, Jesus, there's this thing in my life that I need you to fix. And if you don't fix it, what? So you made him an ultimatum and you couldn't coerce him and now you're going to leave him? That's exactly how everyone around Jesus approached it. Jesus can't be coerced, manipulated or strong-armed. And this puts us in a bind because we say, but I, this is serious. And he says, yes, it is. Excellent. See, the cross looks like victory to Jesus' enemies and despair to his friends. But in the cross, he does the unthinkable because he embraces us outside of our agendas. And apart from our agendas and even forgives us for them. In the resurrection, he shows himself the author of life and invites us to follow. And again, I was teaching Paul in the Sunday School class. And I mentioned, if you look at Paul's life before his conversion and after his conversion, most of us will look at Paul and say, boy, following Jesus was a really bad move. Because beforehand, you at least were popular and had support with your pharisaic audience. And afterwards, there was nothing but conflict and persecution and stoning and shipwreck and famine and all of this stuff. And in the end, you wind up being killed by Nero. If you want your best life now, don't be a Christian. And Jesus flips the script and says, if you follow me, you will know both joy and suffering. You will know both the riches I give you and the pain of this world not giving you what you want or need. And you say, well, how can I believe this? And Jesus says, because that's what I lived and did for you. One more slide. One more slide. Gratitude. So the question is, will you continue to manipulate him or coerce him or try to recruit him? Or will you rest in your new status, promise, freedom, and life? Because the truth is, if Jesus raised Reggie from the dead, what's Reggie to say or do about that? Besides say, thank you. And the really amazing thing is now I'm talking today about Reggie and this is this cool imaginative story. But what we say in the Christian church is that this is not so imaginative. Because what we believe is he will not only raise Reggie, not only if Reggie is one, two, three, or four days dead, but even if Reggie is years dead. And not just Reggie, but us. So if you believe that, what does that do to your heart? And that's the question I want to lead you with. Let's pray. Lord, we come to church and we talk about crucifixion and resurrection. And it's difficult for us to appreciate the traction that this would give. And it's difficult for us, Lord, to appreciate what raising of Lazarus and all of that meant. But Lord, we believe that we're not just playing with words and dealing out stories here. We believe that we're talking about our death and our pain and our suffering and our resurrection. And we believe, Lord, that our resurrection is in fact coming. Lord, give us your Holy Spirit and help us to believe. Our hearts are so quick to try to grab Jesus, to appropriate him, to make him our tool, our political tool, or our personal tool. And Jesus is never anybody's tool. He's alive and he reigns. And he asks us to come join him, to try and make him understand our little agendas. So give us your Holy Spirit and teach us to believe and teach us to respond not out of fear, not out of greed, but out of gratitude. So here are our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen. Will you say it? Amen.