https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NHpdndXjkYk

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my sermon that I'll be working on for Sunday. And it's Palm Sunday this week. Now, Palm Sunday, liturgically you have palms, you have Jesus coming into Jerusalem. It's always a challenging sermon. It doesn't have the same kinds of focus that Christmas and Good Friday and Easter have. And Palm Sunday is full of subtle ironies because Jesus is welcomed as king, but he's not really welcomed. And he's not exactly the kind of king that the crowd is welcoming. And by Friday, they'll be shouting to have him crucified. And so all of these issues come together in Palm Sunday. And it's not exactly a thing that's so easily packaged every year into a nice sermon with nice applications. And one of the things that when you deal with the text on Palm Sunday is you always have the long intro to the main point of it, with the hosannas and welcoming Jesus with the cult. After Jesus had said this, we're looking at Luke this year, he went on ahead going up to Jerusalem. As he approached Bethphage and Bethany at the hill called Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples saying to them, Go to the village ahead of you, and as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden. Untie it and bring it here. If anyone asks you, why are you untying it? Say, the Lord needs it. Those who were sent ahead went and found it just as he had told them. As they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, why are you untying the colt? They replied, the Lord needs it. And they brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the colt and put Jesus on it. And that's actually the bulk of the text pretty much every year. And well, what do you do with this text? Now, I think for a lot of us, the cult story is sort of an inverted Jedi mind trick. That here, it's just amazing that the disciples with this, the Lord has need of it, get use of this animal, which would of course be a valuable animal for its owners. And it's kind of an inverted Jedi mind trick because when Obi-Wan says these are not the droids you're looking for, they in fact are the droids they're looking for. And so the Jedi mind trick passes as a lie. But what the disciples say to the owner is obviously and of course the truth. But what the story is, is sort of hard for a lot of city people to understand because the emphasis is made that this animal has never been ridden. And what that means is that the animal has never been broken. And these animals are not weak and they very much know how to launch a rider off of their backs. And you don't see any bucking bronco action on this day. Now the story continues of course. As he went along, people spread their cloaks on the ground. When they came near the place where the road goes down to the Mount of Olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise God in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen. Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord. Peace in heaven and glory in the highest. Now Luke is addressing a Gentile audience here. So he drops some of the specifically Jewish content like the content like the Hosannas. But what's fascinating is that what we do get is in a sense the conclusion, the inclusio of the angels singing at Jesus' birth to the shepherds. The angels sang glory to God in the highest heaven and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests. There heaven was wishing peace on earth. And now earth is finally responding with peace in heaven and glory in the highest. And this presents sort of bookends. This frames the entire life and ministry of Jesus so far. And what this actually shows us is heaven and earth beginning to respond to one another in an antiphonal way, which is in fact moving us towards and encouraging us towards what the culmination of the Bible actually is, which is the reconciliation of heaven and earth. And this is coming together on Palm Sunday, which is in a sense, again, this very ironic coronation day for Jesus as he is welcomed into the city of the great king as the king. But yet soon he will be rejected as king. And then Luke says this. Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to the teacher, teacher, rebuke your disciples. I tell you, he replied, if I keep silent, the stones will cry out. Now, now this is interesting because this is continuing on with the antiphonal theme that we began with the crowds finishing or replying back to the heavens and to the angels for what the for how the angels welcomed the birth of Jesus. And whereas there are a lot of and in previous years I've gone through some of the Old Testament texts that relate to the Jesus writing into Jerusalem and on the donkey and on the Psalms of Ascent and the Hosanna and all of those passages. This year I wanted to take a look at the all of the ways in which the Old Testament actually articulates the creation itself, praising back to God. Now, now in my Jordan Peterson videos have been talking a lot about God number one and God number two. This is obviously for a Sunday sermon, so I'm going to adjust some of the language. But but God in in it, you have God immanent attribute set number one. That's in a sense what what the modern world has reduced. And this is this is God built into the world, the immanent God all around us, where in Isaiah the whole earth is full of his glory, the God of creation, of creation whose fingerprints are everywhere. And what has tended to happen in the modern period is we we reduce this aspect of God into things like the laws of nature and providential deism. And really one of the defining moments of that transition was, of course, Charles Darwin, when when many basically began to believe, well, you don't need God for creation. But what remained was the relational living God, the God transcendent attributes set number two. Maybe I should hyphenate those. And I think for many Christians, this this aspect or set of attributes tends to take the forefront, partly because it's so naturally relational. This is the transcendent God, the God who calls Abraham and wrestles with Jacob, the God who comes in the flesh, the great king who returns to his city. Now, now what sort of happened in the modern period were were two sort of bad things. We doubted the immanence of God. And so we tried to suppress him in nature and tried to see nature on her own. And we compensated with the transcendent God, forgetting that nature also serves her king while resisting us. And you find this again and again in the Old Testament, Psalm 96. Let the heavens rejoice. Let the earth be glad. See, here you have heaven and earth. Let the seas resound and all that is in them. Let the fields be jubilant and everything in them. Let all the trees of the forest sing for joy. Let all creation rejoice before the Lord, for he comes. He comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world in righteousness and the peoples in his faithfulness. Notice how often these these nature crying out verses revolve around judgment. Let the sea resound, Psalm 98, and everything in it, the world and all who live in it. Let the rivers clap their hands. Let the mountains sing together for joy. Let them sing before the Lord, because he comes to judge the earth. This is nature in a sense saying, come and release us from this brother of ours, this humanity who has done this to us. He will judge the earth in righteousness and its peoples with equity. Isaiah 55. You will go out in joy and be led forth in peace. The mountains and hills will burst into song before you, and all the trees of the field will clap their hands. Instead of the thorn bush will grow the juniper. Instead of the briars the myrtle will grow. This will be for the Lord's renown, for an everlasting sign that will endure forever. Abakuk 2, 9-11. This is where in fact a house responds to its its unjust maker. Woe to you who builds his house by unjust gain. Even the building materials will protest. Setting his nest on high to escape the clutches of ruins, you have plotted the ruin of many peoples, shaming your own house, forfeiting your life. The stones of the wall will cry out and the beams of the woodwork will echo it. So here the house of the unjust will cry out against its maker. And so here we have on Palm Sunday the idea that if the people don't welcome Jesus into Jerusalem, the stones that built Jerusalem will cry out. The very stones of the temple that not too long before the disciples were looking at and wonder at how large and how magnificent they were. They themselves will sing God's glory if the people themselves don't. What if the world is as the Bible says it is? What if God is the author and we are the agents and we are agents in his story? What if nature is our sister and in our rebellion she no longer wishes to listen to us? You can find that in Genesis 3 along with the curses. So we enslave her and we force her to do our bidding sometimes through technology. Against which she always finds a passive aggressive way to get even. How often aren't there unintended consequences by the technological roots that we try to subvert and make nature do our bidding? C.S. Lewis made this point in his book Miracles that one of the things that we often see with Jesus is that his miracles often are miracles of nature. Jesus speeds up the processes of nature like water to wine and multiplication of bread and fishes. Jesus stills a storm and Jesus walks on water. Jesus is the master of nature. And Jesus comes as our brother and in fact shows us what we will become. Joy to the world the Lord has come let earth receive her king. It's a song we sing at Christmas time and it's very apt for Palm Sunday. Let Jerusalem receive her king. But we are rebels. We don't wish to hear Jesus praised. Nature herself praises him but we make nature our enemy. And she does get even with us on a regular basis. Nature is red in tooth and claw. But our king comes to us not like an angry sister but like our older brother who knows we need rescuing not just from our angry sister but from ourselves. We receive him one day and cry out to crucify him not a week later. Now that part we play that we should pay we should play the part of returning the praise delivered by the Christmas angels part of Palm Sunday is in fact to recreate the celebration of receiving Jesus into Jerusalem. And we should play our part so that in fact the stones don't have to cry out because we've been given minds and mouths and lungs and vocal cords and lips and tongues and we should give to the king the praise he deserves. Another point of Palm Sunday is that we reconcile with sister nature by reconciling with the maker of us both. That in fact is the story that we find in the early chapters of Genesis. When we rebel against God nature says to us why should I listen to you. And so the path in fact to reconciling with nature is reconciling with nature's owner and nature's maker. We anticipate that one day we will both praise with equal sincerity us and our sister nature and our relationship with nature will once again be set right. We see this in Jesus with his miracles and we anticipate it in the new heavens and the new earth.