https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ETiQjpSCCJY

 Hey, guy. Oh, your hair is long and curly. COVID cut. How have you been. I think good. I've been pretty good. Yeah, how have you been my friend. I've been good. I've been quite good. Both of us. Both of us do things that COVID has has dramatically impacted. Yeah. Oh, can you give me permission to record. Yeah, go ahead. Oh, I'll see if when we go ahead. I gotta give it to you. Hang on. There you go. That should do it. All right. Yeah, you're right. We do both do things that have changed. It's funny. It's it's you know we had been thinking for a long time in my company, right, of like okay we got to start, you know, doing stuff online and but as always so resistant resistant to it right almost for you know, I almost didn't even want it to work online, right, because I'm just what's now I guess you could call it old school, right, because I wanted to do everything in person. Right. And so, doing this it forced us to put everything online, and I'm really quite surprised at like how well it works. You know, you'd think you'd think something about which the whole thing is about, you know, a practice of relating and relationship that it would make a huge, you know, a dramatic difference it would no longer be what it was. Yeah, if you remove the in person body but I think when you get into conversation. Right. There's something about a conversation that as long as there's conversing, there's a, there's a world that it forms right and you can you can find yourself in that world. Right. And that's the relationship right that happens. So I guess if you remove, although it'd be interesting to look at like what is the difference though right when you remove embodiment right That's, that's what I've noticed to on. There have been moments that I've been really surprised how much you can do. And then also, all all almost always forced to realize the limitations, even if you can't necessarily articulate what those limitations are. They, they, they show up. But you realize yeah there's a deficiency I was just talking to someone yesterday about something that he wanted to do in his church, and he wanted me involved. And I said, I would not try to relate to people at that level in a room with masks on. I, you know, we've got enough experience with masks now that any kind of significant relational conversation, you just, you need to see people's faces in order to recalibrate. We communicate so much and we communicate more than we know. So, it's, it's, it's, it's a strange year we're living in. Are you doing a lot of stuff you see you, are you doing a lot of the church stuff online or like how is this affecting could affecting your what you're doing. Well, we have. So because because I have so many older people in the church, they can't, you know, we are Bible studies are small groups moved online. But many people didn't have computers didn't have broadband. They have old computers they might have a 10 year old computer without a camera and I'll say you should really get a new computer. They can afford it some of them can, and they won't spend the money. It's like, yeah, but because they don't see the value and. So we've had we've maintained. We've maintained local services almost throughout. There's a brief period in March and April when we paused. And then, because hospitals are filling up here. We're contemplating another brief pause maybe a few weeks, but it's, it's, but but even so the numbers are very small, we have a big enough room that we can easily have lots of distance. We ask that people wear masks, especially if they sing. Yeah. And we saw in that first pause that the toll the isolation was taking especially on seniors that live alone was bad. And even if they didn't come every week. If they had a safe fish place to come that was better than, you know, sort of forcing them into isolation, or some of them, most people have family members that are just sort of not wearing masks not paying any attention to anything like that and that's tends to be the places where you'll hear the, oh, they had a family reunion and you had, you know, 10 people get infected because so so it's all, you know, working out the details, trying to balance all the things but it's, you know, we do do things online. And, you know, I just finished talking to someone who, who has been he's, he's been because he had cancer treatment. He's basically been in isolation for three and a half years. So, but and then he and I was just before this I was thinking about doing a video thinking about church and coven and thinking about just how crappy zoom and and streaming is and I just had this relationship, this conversation with this guy and he said, you know, I was. I had had a bad doctor and I was hating this doctor and I was watching your church live stream, and you're talking about forgiving. We'll keep the last I mean it's all this kind of thing you can't get away from it. And even if it's even if you're watching online for a host of reasons is is impoverished compared to being present. It's sometimes better than nothing. So we'll keep doing it. Yeah, totally. Yeah, totally. I mean it's it's it's it's also just interesting to think about this because, I mean, I've been struck by just how much of how much actually does come through this form, right. It's about, in some sense, your body, for example, when it works. You don't, it doesn't show up for you, like, there's a way in which you know the the context of embodiment when it works, it's actually no one's embodying anything it's just working, because it disappears. And there's something about really interesting to kind of get how, you know, questions of what is a self, who is another, and how much it's how much it's in cooperation with language. And that is this thing what I have heard about right a lot is, you know, when you meet somebody like if somebody comes over to your house, right. There's the beginning and then there's the end. And that's, that's a very distinct thing, right, just think about all the rituals that that take place when somebody comes over, right, there's the awareness of somebody coming over there's the knock at the door there's them coming up to the door there's there's this awareness of like privacy and you're going from a public space to a private space and it's their private space and you're entering somebody your house and there's this whole like set of implicit and explicit formalities, right, that happen in that coming into relation and having somebody come in. And then, and then the series of rituals of when they leave. Right, there's all there's all these things like do you got your coat you have your things and, oh no let me get the door and it's a whole kind of thing that happens the beginning and the end. And what's interesting about this medium is he just press the button, it's over. Right. Yeah. And that I think is really really quite striking for people, and it has me wonder to what degree that that those two horizons being right, being changed on the front and the back end like to what degree that affects actually somehow affects the, the interaction or not. Yeah, that's, that's really true. That's really true. Yeah, that's good point I hadn't even, I haven't, I mean I've done, how many hundreds of these things but I'd never really thought about that, those, those rituals and those traditions. Yeah, and your, your point about embodiment true to when you're healthy. It's, it's very. Your body disappears. Yeah, when you're pounding a nail, the hammer disappears. We are strange creatures with strange abilities. We really are. Absolutely. We really are. So what did you, you wanted to talk about God, so I got down, you really had my interest when you said I want to talk about God so it'll be interesting. So, what are you thinking about tell me what you want to talk about. Well, I mean, on some level that's all I ever been thinking about, right, is God, right, and, and I've noticed because in fact I was just listening to your last conversation the three way that you had with the, the own barfield guy. Oh, yeah, yeah, just really liked it. I was listening about halfway through and I really liked it. And actually you mentioned something about you reference something called the middle voice. There's the first voice in the middle voice in the way I did it. Middle middle Greek has a middle voice. So, passive active is, I run passive is, you know, the dog was run or the car was run, or something like that it's it's you're the recipient of the action and I really thought about this, you know when they, when Michael, who was the barfield scholar brought this up with respect to I really thought that about this with respect to for vacay stuff, because a lot of verveky stuff is very middle voice ish. It's a, it's, it's, it's, it's in the middle between the active and the passive. We don't have that in English. And, and it's, it's much more again participatory. And a lot of a lot of a lot of theological blood has been shed and Inc has been expended on the difference between the active and the passive with respect to us and God. And, and there are, there are areas in which, you know, does prayer change God or does prayer change us. Does you know with Calvinism does God save us or do we save ourselves. And, and so, And almost, you know, and you see these strange inconsistencies so Calvinists are supposed to, in terms of the theological tribes are supposed to be the ones in which humanity is enormously passive, and there's no agency, but you find Calvinists being incredibly active and activist stick and exhort, you know, exhorting people to go to church or stop doing this or this. It's like, if you really believed in human passivity, you wouldn't, you wouldn't be saying or doing any of these things so so something's out of whack there. And so, yeah, the middle voice, and, you know, it's been a while since I've studied Greek and paid attention to Greek grammar. Except in the process of natural a grammatic kind of linguistic structure in Greek. So for example, it'd be something like there's female words and male words and female and neuter in Greek too so there's there's those three in Greek as well. Yeah, there's the middle voice and I remember learning that in, you know, when I was learning Greek and it's like, as always when you learn a new language when you find a construction that you don't have in your own language. And the only way to really get a sense of it is to get into that language. And, you know, one thing I learned in, you know, having to learn Spanish, and then live and work in Spanish when I was a foreign missionary. Once you, especially as an adult once you learn another language and you get beyond mere translating. You become a different person. And there are, there's a you, there's a you in that context that is different from you in another context. You start dreaming in the other language, you know, our relationship with language is very, is very tight and very nuanced so yeah, so these affordances and other languages are significant, and the fact of a middle voice, especially when you get into something like bar field, where everything is participatory and of course the same for Heidegger of course, where I mean what where we started talking about with respect to, we stop we stop seeing zoom and we start seeing each other. And we stop recognizing we're seeing through eyes, and we focus on the other eyes I mean it's the this this thing that we are this almost, you know, it's, it's almost a trance translucent avatar that we sort of sort of moving around, and then agency. The agency of this avatar very much becomes participatory. So, yeah, yeah, totally. Well I was gonna ask you because since we last talked. I think I don't think this was in, in place when we last, but you have now have a one of those those servers, what server discord server, right, which is a community of people that are gathered roughly in being interested in the conversations that you've started here on your channel. So, so you have like I would imagine and you go and do you participate in it. Right, like you go and do question and answer and there's a community in which is formed a gathering around the conversations. What is that like. So, the server started. You know we started our local meetup. Yeah. And the people, a number of the people in the meetup liked it. Well, you know so well, we would have visitors coming in from other parts of the country for our local meetup which was, which was really flattering, but our members said you know there's a lot of people who want to talk about stuff like this like we talk about here and they can't. What can we do for them, and this bunch of these are young men mostly and so they're gamers so they play computer. Well let's start a discord server. It's free we can start it and so we. The first time we started it nothing happened. The second time we did it really took off. And that's been, that's been also an avenue of exploration, because when you start something like this with human beings you don't know what's going to happen. And discord is a strange platform. You've got voice chat capacities you've got video chat capacities. It's mostly text chat. And it's free, you don't have to pay anything to sign up you don't have to pay anything for a server. And so then what happened. Well, I had a number of conversations with was talking with a bunch of the guys in the meetup job sort of became the pastor of the discord server. And this happened because we started it, and then we started going to voice chat. And he started doing on the server. What he and I had done and what he had seen me do on my YouTube channel. In other words, inviting people into conversation, sharing their lives about an hour or so of pulling of helping them tell their story. And then we did another very on discord thing, which is that we created a culture where you gain status by using your real name on the server not a little avatar and a little internet name. And so the server has continued to grow and continue to evolve. I started doing, you know, a lot of people do question and answer type things on YouTube. I, I don't. I wanted a form which was more interactive. So I started doing that on the discord server. And that way. They asked me a question, I can answer it but I can also have them say no that wasn't really what I was asking, or this is what I was thinking so we could actually have a conversation. So, and then we've done watch parties where there'll be a video and you'll start a watch party and other people come, and then you can text chat while we're listening to it. So, lately, I have, I am a. I have no love of. Let me say it this way. So many of the administrative chores that are simply common to running a church. I find very meaningless. And so I avoid that and procrastinate with them and most jobs have this kind of thing. And so lately part of what I've been doing on the server is, I will go into a chat room, and I will turn on my camera. And it's another thing that we've been learning that text chatting is one thing voice chatting is another, but if we can turn on our cameras and see each other. That adds another dimensionality. So, yeah. And for me. So obviously what what happens when you start a YouTube channel and you go from 15 subscribers to a couple thousand subscribers to 15,000 subscribers. You blow away your Dunbar number, and you have to, but if you're a pastor. You really have to treat people like individuals. And you really don't want to blow people off. And you really want to embody the fact that their individual stories matter. Right. 15,000 people and that posture do not get along very well. So what the what the what the discord server has sort of become is at least for the kinds of people who can handle the discord technology has become an estuary of sorts because enough of the culture that I have established on my channel has gotten into the culture of the group that there is a level of expectation about treatment of individuals that has been perpetuated in that server that server is not everyone's cup of tea there's a Dunbar number effect to that server to their limitations to the technology, but I now have a high degree of confidence that if someone watches my channel and they want to engage in conversation. If they go to the discord, there's at least a chance they might find a level of community that they will find helpful for addressing common loneliness, having a space where they can have a conversation with another person one on one, or in a small group setting. So in some ways the discord server sort of become a church, which is really strange, because that's how churches function. Right. Oh, interesting. And it's a it's very much a work in process. So there's, there's something about so, so, essentially, you starting to get discord server. I didn't even start it, the guys started it and that's an important distinction. Right. Okay, got it. Yes, if I had to run it, it would be a mess. Yeah, yeah, that that pretty much goes for almost everything that sustained in my life. The crumpled up piece of paper in the back seat of my car or something. Yeah. So I definitely appreciate that. So, so there's a way in which there's a way in which for you. Well, a couple things. One of the things I heard is I heard like, to what degree you actually are a pasture. Right. Because what I explicitly heard you say that relationship between 15,000 people in you, and the obligation of the pastor is to see each person as an individual, like the math on that right is intense. So in some ways, this is helped distribute that right. The, in a way that's church like, which is probably something I don't know if you, if you expected anything of it I don't know if you expected that or. I hoped for it because that similar dynamic happens in church, because even in a small church like this. There's one pastor, and there's way more need, even in a small congregation than one pastor can immediately address. And so churches by their divine design are always distributed agencies. So you have small groups, you have family units, you have elder districts, and so churches are always about having community scale down. Yeah. Oh, interesting. Interesting. And what's it been like has that affected. Well I actually have a couple of questions that came up for me is like, one, being a pasture. You're, you're that that role of being a pasture is so intriguing to me. I, I taught, I actually did a for six months I taught a group of pastors. Right. Circling essentially. And I really was kind of struck by that role of being this is in between right between the community and God in this, in some sense of mediator and translator and it just, the profundity of it really struck me. I really heard it when you said like oh yeah as a pastor, even looking at the people that are subscribed to my channels, I'm still obligated as a pastor. How is there any, is there any point in your life when you're not a pastor. Like is there any place in your life where you're not a pastor. If I talk to my wife in a certain way she'll look at me and, you know, don't pastor me. Yeah. No, that's, you know, that it is a, it is an office that you fulfill and it's a role that you play. And it's a. It's not uncommon, especially in a small church someone comes, someone comes into the church. They become a Christian, they, they're, they're in the middle of a big life transformation, and, and you've sort of been the midwife of that transformation. And they will now you and I are going to be best friends and it's like, I really hate to disappoint you. Because you've sort of, you know, it's like when people fall in love with their therapists, the therapist was, you know, was serving something and so you have to kind of ease people through those things and, and it's, and this is actually quite difficult for pastors because pastoring can be very lonely. And so, you know, you can live in some of these things, it's difficult. You live in, you can live in very intense relationships with people in your church. And sometimes they are your friends and sometimes they're not but the pastoring and the friendship can kind of get in the middle and so sometimes you need friendships outside the church. So, because it's a traditional institution and not a modern one, like a therapist is a very modern institution. Here's the walls of the room. This is what we do in these walls outside of these walls. Totally different relationship, not a pastor. Right. So there's, there's lots and lots and lots to this. And if you get into differentiation of let's say a pastor and a priest, because pastors do do that priestly role. But they also do other roles that priests may or may not do. So there's, there's a lot, there's a lot going on there. But again in a pastor who has a YouTube channel. That's new territory. I missed that one when they wrote the Bible, or went to seminary. Right. Yeah. I imagine there's just so much of that for you in these brand new questions that on some level, really have not been asked or experience that you're probably asking yourself I would imagine, right, as a pastor, like, being a public face, but being a public face in this, in this medium, right. And, you know, what are my obligations to that, am I still a pastor in this being a public face and my somebody, am I just me, what's the difference between those two. I mean, these are really really really interesting questions. It's different from being a, let's say a mega church pastor. Yeah. So if you're, if you're pastoring a congregation of 1000 or 5000 or 10,000 and there are congregations out there like that. That's different to. And, like, it's like, you know, it's. I have the, I have the, I have the, the Calendly thing to get, you know, to the randos conversations and such and people are always complaining they can't get a slot. The truth is, they can walk in the door on a Sunday morning and have pretty good access to me, just by being here. And I'm not on the internet that I'm hard to get ahold of. Right. And so there's all these weird dimensionalities. That's really interesting. It is a bizarre thing and I remember when you know that first one of those early videos took off and I went from 15 YouTube subscribers for random local church people and family who, you know, we're going to kind of support Freddie by watching the Freddie and Paul show to 2000, 2000, it was like okay, stop, you know, let's let's no more new subscribers let's just stop here. That didn't happen. And so then it's okay. And so now for me too with, I mean, is my church going to survive coven I don't know. Am I going to be a YouTube pastor. I don't know. I don't know where this thing goes. And so, it's, you know, the discord server. That was a whole new thing. It's all exploration, and but again it's all mediated by the office and role of pastor, and the traditions within that. Right. Right. So, and it's weird, it's weird. But, I mean, you're doing lots of new things too. I mean, you know, you've invented this circling and I mean, right. Right. So, well it's just, it's just, it's so interesting it just is, it's always impresses me Paul in that sense of just, you know, I've always thought this in relationship with you, but like when I talk with you I'm like, you know, there's something about live, you know, live conversations where I'm like really, I find myself putting myself in your shoes and so interesting because of this. And then there's a tradition that goes very deep. Right, like, and then a facing and an openness to the new, which I know with that tradition its relationship to the new has been, you know, it's that has not been uncomplex, you know, throughout. And so there's a, it's just, it strikes me as attention that you hold really well. But when you said it when you said it like this when you said, and I don't know where it goes. Right. I think that you've been it seems to me, at least from watching you tell me if this is true but from watching you, it seems to me that you're aware in a very conscious way that there's an it that's going somewhere. That you don't know where it goes, but there's a way where you pipe to yourself right up to the face of, of that change, right, and you've really opened to it right and you've been talking to all kinds of people. Right. While being a pastor. Right, which is just so. It's so impressive. Yeah, so impressive to me. Well I'm, you know, I'm also a third generation pastor. So, my grandfather. Oh boy. You're right, these things go deep. Yeah, my. I was doing some, some genealogy things with a guy on the discord server who used to be a Hasidic Jew. And, you know, a number of years ago we discovered that on my father's side of the family. And so we're trying to figure out at what point they sort of left the Jewish community. And, you know, and how this how this intersected with immigration to the United States in the 1890s. And so then it was my great grandfather who came in over as a 19 year old to establish himself to bring my great great grandfather and some of the other family in. And I think at that point they had probably been exiled from their Jewish community in the Netherlands. And then my grandfather, and so then they go to Western Michigan, and they become part of Spring Lake Christian reform church. And then my grandfather becomes a pastor. And so, so there was a, there was a leaving of the Jewish community and the Jewish religion. And then at some point, and embrace of this Dutch Calvinism in Western Michigan to the degree that my grandfather decided to become a minister and my grandfather He was to be a rather dull preacher. In fact, he was such a dull preacher that at one point, back in those days churches would call would basically extend calls it's how to recruit someone pastor site on scene and my my grandfather came and preached in their church and the church decided they didn't want him because his sermon was so dull. And he was that he basically stonewalled them and they didn't. Because of the strangeness of Christian reformed rules and regulations they couldn't really fire him after he had accepted the call, but they grew to love him because he cared for people so well and loved people well. And so then, you know, he wasn't as much of a preacher, as he was a pastor. And, and then my father. My father's story was different in that he goes to Patterson, New Jersey. Very different context my grandfather had been in depression era churches throughout the Midwest and then into Canada. And then my father goes to Patterson, New Jersey and works with black folks, and I don't think my father had had any personal experience with the African American community until he goes to Patterson, but my father was quite a bit of a better preacher because my grandmother would have been a great preacher, but women were creatures back in the day. Yes, but my, my grant my father was it was a very good preacher, but also had that pastoral heart of his father. And, you know, ministered to people at every level in Patterson. And so I all of these things were built into me before I could have any conception of them. And then I didn't want to be a local church pastor. I got kind of backed into it after. I would have rather done teaching or, or those kinds of things but as it turned out, you know, I wound up here in this church and found I loved it, and all of what had been built in by my ancestry by watching my father and my grandfather came into me but now. So my grandfather, so my great grandfather was an immigrant from the Netherlands who somehow joined the Dutch Reformed Church, my grandfather becomes a minister and that and pastors to mostly dairy farmers in the Midwest and Canada, and then some on the East Coast, my father then pastors to African Americans, and I become a foreign missionary and then pastor to a very multicultural community in Sacramento and then on to YouTube and discord and, you know, it's when you look at it generationally it's like, it's rather breathtaking. But the traditions and the values continue through the, the, the technologies and the different communities. Right. Interesting. A couple of generations back that you're. So you're really built like it's tradition it's your personal tradition as well. Right, that goes directly in your bloodline through this. When you tell me about when you, when you became a pastor. You said you weren't expecting to do that. I didn't want to do that. You didn't want to do it. No, what was it before. What was it before you. What was pasturing. When you weren't wanting it. What weren't what weren't you wanting. When it was all the it was all the differentiation stuff I think from from the genetic and and parenting legacy I had I wanted to differentiate myself from from Stan my father. And I was a pastor in Patterson in the black community. The pastor is a big deal. Even if the church is a small deal. And I was little rev. And I look like him and I sound like him and I walk like him and I was the only son in the family and. And so there is all of and my father never put any of this on me my parents never put any of this on me. And so I, I had a terrible time in college deciding what I wanted to do I was in engineering I was in math I was in history. And, but I just really liked theology and so. And I like philosophy and so I, I decided then to go to seminary. And my I didn't want to. I didn't want to become a local church pastor so I thought well maybe I can teach theology maybe I'll get into the academia and then my, I met my wife, and she very much wanted to do foreign missions. And so we, well there that was easy because foreign missionaries most they mostly don't do my any pastoring, they just teach. And then they get to have different cultures and I like the cultures. So, foreign missionary work was sort of a way out. And that, that, you know, we, we had to come back to the United States, you know, for a variety of reasons. And, and then suddenly, what was I going to do for a living. And I was fixing computers for a while. And then I was teaching teaching therapists how to work PCs because they had to start putting things in PCs and therapists didn't know anything about computers. And, and then, you know, I just, I needed to, I needed to earn more money for my family in the Christian reform church, being a local church pastor, you can live on that. And so I had the degree, I had the credential. And so I had the skill set. And then I had a church in Chicago wanted me in this church in Sacramento, and the church in Sacramento, just looked like they needed me more than the church in Chicago, and it was much closer to what I had grown up in in terms of a multicultural community, a significant African American population. And so it fit. And so I came here and I started this. And very quickly, I discovered. That's 23 years ago. Very quickly discovered I enjoyed it. I really liked it. And the first day I walked to work. There was a woman sitting in the parking lot with a suitcase. Oh, okay. I, when they when I took this call they didn't tell me about all the homeless folks in the group homes and any of that but all of that I had grown up with in Patterson with my father and so that wasn't. I'd always lived with that population that wasn't any problem at all. I deal with homeless people and mental illness and poverty and everything that goes along with it. I, that's what I'd grown up in, in terms of watching my father. Much watching my father minister to those people and that the key thing though is seeing my father, I mean we could. And you get you get this with doctors and therapists and, you know, mental health workers you get a certain gallows humor of the, of the despair of so many situations. Right. And right. But my never my father was never in any way demeaning. Or, he, he, he, he, I would, I never saw him lose patience with the most unbelievably frustrating people doing this, the most foolish repetitive self destructive things. He always treated them with respect. He always treated them with kindness. He always treated them with love to the degree that I would sometimes pull my hair out and say, how can you, how can you walk into this idiocy one more time and yet he would. And I learned from that I learned both sides of that because my mother had considerably less patience with that, and some wisdom about that she would draw a line with people and say, here's the line. And sometimes people need that line. But the. And so that's. And you know I saw a lot of that with Jordan Peterson to. I mean, I can tell he had paid his dues as a clinical psychologist and a therapist. Right. Right, because I could see him one on one. Total strangers with kindness and patience. And when I saw that that impressed me and I thought, I'm, you know, I'm willing to give this guy a listen, because that's significant. That, in what is specifically that that ability to be have an unconditional regard for the humanity of another person. That's right. Independent of their, of their circumstance or their, or the form that they took that that regard to someone's. Is it is it an implicit dignity. Yeah. What would dad like what what is that like, how did he is like, how the hell did he do that right. I'm going to post, I'm going to post the, I'm going to post the eulogy I gave at my father had a couple of memorial services I'm going to post the eulogy that I gave at the memorial service in Patterson sometime on my channel and I talked quite a bit more about him, but he part of it was just him, how he was wired. And part of it was. So, so in my grandparents house my grandfather took a call to a church in Owen Sound, Ontario. And this was in the 50s after the Second World War, and Dutch and freesian immigrants were coming to Canada after the war. And I would say, you know, they're all suffering from post traumatic, you know, they had lived through the, the really brutal occupation of the Nazis in the Netherlands. They would, they would come to Canada, they would have to have sponsors but the, the dairy farmers that would sponsor them. That was sort of a way of farmers getting cheap labor that they could even potentially abuse. So it wasn't even easy for some of these people who came over from the Netherlands to work on dairies in Canada. And if any Dutchman would show up at the train station and Owen Sound, the, the person working at the train station would call my grandfather. And in the middle of the night the phone would ring. And, okay, and my aunt told these sources my father was already heading to college but it talks about the, the character of my grandfather okay Glenda that's my aunt you're going to have to go, you know, you're going to have to go, you know, spend the rest of the night with your brother, we're going to give these people the room, or, you know, whatever you need to do because we're going to take these people into our house and we're going to feed them. And throughout the depression. Also, stories of the hobos would mark the would mark the phone poles with chalk. Until you get in front of the preacher's house, they put a special mark there, because they know you knock at that door and these people will give you food. And during the depression. My grandmother she was a writer to. She wrote an article for the banner, like, you know, two cents and 13 pounds of butter because the farmers didn't have any cash so they're all dairyman so they pay the preacher in butter, but how much money do you eat but yet my grandparents despite their poverty, they never had much money. You know someone comes and knocks at their door. They will feed them. And, and so that was. That's what my father grew up. This is what a Christian is. So then he goes to Patterson and totally different context but this is what a Christian is these people who show up at your door they are image birds of God, and you'd better treat them that way. It doesn't matter if they're mentally ill if they're homeless, if they're. I tell this story in the eulogy there was once a guy who Parents, I get the story wrong and my mother often corrects it but I'll tell it the way I remember it. You know, the guy comes that we, the guy comes you need something and so dad brings them home and he eats dinner with us and my father liked photography and had this old camera probably wasn't worth that much. This guy ate with us. The guy eventually turns around our house was always getting broken into because a bad neighborhood in Patterson and so the guy breaks into our house steals the camera that he had spied when the preacher who had taken him to give him a meal, gave him a meal that's that's pretty despicable. So, guy gets arrested. My father visits him in jail, and it'd be like, I'd be, I'd want to give the guy the finger I'm not gonna, you know, guy visits my father visit some in jail and the guy says feeling a little guilty Oh, by the way, you know, I pond your camera. And so what did my father do, he goes to the pawn shop and buys it back, you know, and it's like, and my father, you know, he would forgive this guy who, who, who betrayed his trust. You know this is this is the stuff that you know this is Jean Valjean type stuff, and my father lived that way. And I, you know, as a kid. You don't, you don't know what you're watching. This is just imprinting on you. Yeah. And so, when I, so I find myself in this church. How do you treat people. This is how you treat people. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then now. People write me letters and emails and it's like, I don't always get to see them and I don't answer them back and you know I try but I get weary but you know, this is try, try to pay attention try to teach treat them as an individual. Try to love them. Right. Right. And, and it's also it just seems like what you're talking about like loving them treating them as an individual. I mean these things are inexhaustible. Right, there's a, I don't know if there's, I don't know if there's any end to which to the degree that I could see you. Right. I don't know if there's any end to the degree. These things are inexhaustible, like, and mysterious all the way down right. I think that's the thing that I, as you're talking about it I'm like what it's noticing the one who's listening as you're talking, right is keeps getting the sense of that I think on one on one level, there's what it takes. Right, to be able to. The guy who stole from you. You're going to go to jail, and then go buy back your property. Your property. What it, what it, where, where is it that that one is like what is he looking at, what is he listening to, who is that like that capacity to see someone into into even when they're completely devastated of any of their own sense of dignity, that the the fact of their existence is that which is deserved of my respect. That sense of being able to be respectful at that deep of a level. What is that, that showing like what's glowing forth to him such that that's a saying, that's the only it's the, it's the most matter of fact response. What is it that's showing glowing forth to him and now to you that when you experience that, what is it that you're seeing I don't know that you see it so much, but it's, that's, that's in some ways how you're programmed. And there's lots of other programming that's saying, you know, don't do this. I mean, and I just had. So, you know, I made a video, little while ago when I put, you know, one of the homeless guys in jail, and he just got out of jail. And in a sense the system is working because he hasn't shown up at church he came and got his shopping cart and I haven't seen I know I will see him he will come back I know it will happen and he's probably really pissed at me because, you know, he thought the cops are inside was probably only going to go to jail for a few hours and he was there for a week but you know he's. I don't, I think it's, I don't, I don't know what it is. I don't know what it is obviously it's, you know, theologically the answer is easy. But to, but to live it out. And it's also not, I mean Jordan Peterson and 12 rules for life has a chapter, which I thought it was, it was the chapter that hit me most, where he basically deconstructed. He, he deconstructed a, a, a benevolence that we have and this it was very neat, it was very Nietzschean. And that there's a there's a there's a false performative potential to all of this too. Yeah, I was just gonna say, So it's just like you say you know there's no bottom to this thing. Right, right, right, especially if it's in you, you know, there's no bottom to this thing because am I, am I trying to, you know, am I trying to impress this other person by my generosity, am I trying to impress God by my generosity, am I, I mean, and I what I loved about that chapter in that book which I, which I don't, I've never heard anybody else talk about that particular chapter, but it's, it's something that someone in a helping, it's something, someone in a helping profession would know, because you might be, you might be looking like you might be a saint, you might be thinking that you are a saint, you might be impressing the hell out of yourself and other people about your saintliness, but there's a certain degree of self serving that is going on in your little game. And that, that needs to be, that needs to be seen in yourself too. Yeah. Yeah. So there's a, so there's a, there's a, because I was just going to say when he said well on some level it's been programmed into me, and I was like well, at least the picture I'm having of, especially as you talk about with your dad, doesn't seem like he's following a rule. It's like, he's in a relationship with something that has, that seems inexhaustible and seems to evoke a concurrent inexhaustibility in response. Right. I think a part of it, one of the reasons why this is, is kind of hitting me so deeply as you're talking about it is, I read that. Oh, it's, it's a book. Jonathan who I'm talking with for the first time later this week is talking with Jonathan Peugeot. Oh really. Jonathan's on a tour. This is, I love the conversations he's having. Yeah, yeah, totally. But the, the, he reckoned, he had somebody on it, I think a month or two ago, who wrote a book on the Christian, like basically the rise of Christendom, right, and specifically, it's a book, is it called Reform? It's just, it has a picture of Jesus on the cross, but you're looking down, it's got a picture. Oh Dominion. Yeah, Dominion, right. Oh yeah, yeah. So I'm in the middle of that. Yeah. It's, it's, it's, I don't know, there's something, there's something about the way he wrote that really highlights to what degree, And then there's this sense of looking at being and valuing it, right, as thou, right, this sense of thou and just in its own factness, that like that inexhaustibility. At one point wasn't there. Right. And, And I'm just trying, it's just, it's so striking to me that like, I don't even know if Jesus could understand what Jesus was saying. Right, it was so like by what horizon of intelligibility could it, could he understand or anybody understand it, right, in some degrees, that's how it was able to get off the ground is because the Romans couldn't even be, probably couldn't even perceive it, let alone be threatened by it, right. So kind of, kind of, I think there's something about getting the brutality of the world. Right. Prior to Christendom. Right. That is, I mean I knew this before but I, perhaps this is one of those things where there's no, there's no, there's no, there's no end of depth upon which you can know how deeply the impact of in the revolution. Right. And before that it's in that and it's so part of us that when we look back at our history and we we we look at the Greeks and the Romans, you know, prior to Christ. We think that we think that we're looking at them, but we're, we're, we cannot not look at them without the frame, which is pretty much our frame called Christianity. And so I'm pretty much as I've been reading that I'm just really present to that experience of, oh yeah, like, this is people are so Christian, they don't even know it. Right, just the, the, you know what I'm talking about is that is the basic pre reflective sense of when you point at something just that self evident something that's that it is that you don't even have to think about is, it's at that level of that's where Christianity is, which I think is also giving me a deeper sense of what it means, or what it possibly means when the explicit sense of Christianity. Right. It's changing so dramatically. Right, and church attendance is down and all these kinds of like, you start thinking about that stuff and it just, it's, I think we're in a time that's just really striking, in other words, right. Where we can actually see it in our lifetime, we can see these things that used to take thousands of years, right. To change we're seeing a bunch of them happening in our lifetime that we can see it and we can have a conversation about it, right. This is, I think we're in a time that's really really stunning in that, in that respect, but I think a lot of it has to do with this. You know, everything that we've just been talking about. Yeah. No, I really, I really I think you're dead on right. I think you're dead on right and the fact that we're watching this play out so quickly and so dramatically. You know, another, another thing I think of Christians would like to take Hollens book and say, Oh, see it's Jesus. And part of what's interesting to me about Hollens book and in fact, the story of Christianity is that even following Jesus. Even in Jesus name the church didn't avoid being tyrannical. And that is in a sense what the Protestant reformation was about. And Jonathan Peugeot, he had a conversation that was just posted with Adam friended. And, and part of what Jonathan would point that Jonathan was making there is that in modernity. The state, sort of, has become tyrannical in some ways. Well, in the church had also churches also had its tyrannical moments. You know, part of what I took from that book too is I've been reading some more enlightenment stuff lately. You know, the enlightenment for all of the dirt Christians sometimes kick up at it. It was the enlightenment that was really important in helping the church divorce itself from some of its tyrannical ways. And helping the church develop to at least to the degree that it can this universal regard for the outcast and even people whose suffering is well earned. A lot of people I deal with their suffering as well earned. And I was just this morning there was a woman sitting on the brickwork over here by church. And she was having a fight with her husband, right out here in the street, which growing up in Patterson was not an unusual circumstance. And whenever there was a fight, everybody came out to watch the fight. Nobody came out to watch this fight because this fight was just, you know, she was accusing him of infidelity and he was accusing her of, you know, they were just screaming at each other at the top of their lungs just 20 feet from my door and so it was like, okay, and should I, should I go out there and sit down with you two and maybe see, no, I'd conversations I'll leave you two to your misery but no, the, the, the idea which Tom Holland, I think, demonstrates is that Jesus reprogrammed human culture at such a deep level. And it took hundreds and hundreds of years. And in fact, many centuries for that deep programming to play out and it's still, and as you said right now it's still playing out very quickly and very rapidly in our midst, and it, it's not it, unlike a computer rollout that let's say I just saw zoom updated their software and we you know 5.4 point three or something like that, the reprogramming of us happens in conflict. And, and there are different. Both the you know in terms of our current culture war, which really annoys people on both sides often when I say it. Both sides are in some ways manifesting Jesus. Both sides are in the fight. Both the woke who, you know what this ultimate regard and ultimate war against racism and sexism and all of that, and the hide bound traditionalist culture warriors who want to maintain traditional marriage etc etc. Both sides are manifesting Jesus. And neither side can. Neither side is willing to see Jesus in the other. And that isn't to say that neither side has something incredibly valuable and important that they're fighting for. But that what we're continuing to work through is this deep reprogramming that Jesus did. And the only way we, you know, unlike a computer where you just click a button and, you know, new code replaces the old code. Our distributed cognition system is far deeper and broader and more complex. So, and that then means that the church. And all the churches are part of that reprogramming because it's the church that actually preserves a lot of the. A lot of the inherited code. And keeps that inherited code alive, because that's what we keep bouncing against in some ways, the way that my mother's code and my father's code got built into me, because my grandparents were two different individuals that got built into my father. So, my father inherited the, you know, the, the absolute regard for the other from his father, but got some of the preaching and stuff from his mother. And, you know, I got some of the compassion from my father but got some of the the trollish boundary markings from my mother who, if my mother hadn't, you know, manage the checkbook and drew lines for my father. And so, the house we lived in would have been not fit for children to grow up in my mother kept those boundaries. This is our home. He, you can, you can basically the rule was with my father that he never had any money with him because my mother wouldn't give him any. But if he went out and had preaching or sell a little bit of extra money that he could keep for himself. And what do you do with that. She the reason she didn't give him money because he'd always give his money away, because people would ask him for money. Right, right, right. So my mother's like, I'm not giving you too much money because you know what the children need to eat. Right. Yes. Yes. Right. And so as a unit they could, they could figure that out but as a culture now, we've got this code from Jesus. And, well, what is the Jesus code mean with respect to the same sex attracted person or the person who feels like they're there. Their biological gen, their biological sex and their emotional sex are are a mismatch or, you know, how do we, how does, what does Jesus have to do with that and that's what we're working out right now. Yeah, yeah. Right. Right. In some sense, you know, I think it's just in some in some sense. You said something earlier in the conversation we said this thing about prayer, right, which like, is it. Is it that I'm changed through prayer, or is it that God's changed through prayer. Right, these questions of, of like, in the sense of prayer is one of the things that's there for me is one of the things I noticed is I don't have much of, I don't have a lot of anxiety around the God question for me. And I think some of that is just has to do with just an actual lack of. I don't come from any place. I don't have any kind of over religious practices in my background. Right, so in some senses I'm just, I don't have a lot of those anxieties that I'm pressing against or, or averting or something like that, there's just like, I'm just kind of temperamentally really open. Right, so, but I do, I definitely noticed the extreme like the anxiety that people have around this explicit conversation called the existence of God, and I noticed I don't have it, I don't have much of it. I'm like, well, let's see if it's a. I think there's places where it's really interesting. Right. Is this, this kind of conversation about like the theism or not theism. Right. Like the, the sense of there being a personal address. And I, I. One of the things for me where God has always. I guess it's like, I think where I find myself most, mostly dwelling is in the way in which the sense of the divine or the sacred has this quality of withheldness or concealment. Right. And I, and it's in that, that I notice it's my relationship to this sense of the, of the sacred has this quality of, of where it withdraws, it reveals itself in its withdrawal in a certain sense. And in the trick, the tricky part of this, or the, I think the personally, the personal challenging part of that. Right, is not is not to. Well, as if you could is not to is not to make it unconcealed. But it's behold, or will be in a relationship with it in such a way that it, it can, it can be, it can reveal without having without it having to be unconcealed. Right. Right. So for example, it's like, there's a way in which the unknown, another way of putting that is the unknown can become present without making it known. And in some senses, right. The unknown, we can become present with that in making it known is not revealing at all. Right. So there's that quality of concealment, which is for me. And actually, this comes together. I just thought I found this poem I wrote, if I can share it with you. Yes, please do. I wrote this a number of years ago. Most asking question. You planned it this way. Didn't you, God. You knew to put yourself just out of our grasp. It's the space between us, where we must widen. And we will completely unfold to feel the untouchable spot. Ask the unanswerable question. And deny ourselves. The never satisfied desire that constantly wiggles in our belly. Is this the place, God? The gap between you and I, that is the window where you stand and peer out upon your making. Is that you? Feeling yourself in my strain? Is that you, God? Sitting just behind my eyes, as I look for you walking in circles. When the leaf dances delicately in the wind, and for a moment we trade places and beauty breathes me. Is that you who is satisfied? Is that me wanting more? That's really beautiful. That's really good. You should send that to me. That's really good. So we're in Genesis and Genesis 3. So the man and the woman are in the garden. And the setting is that in some ways the garden is the royal garden. The temple has been built in Genesis 1 and Genesis 2. It's been populated in Genesis 3. And of course the man and the woman have had the episode by the tree. And the man and the woman hide. And I mean, who told you you were naked? And then there's the fig leaves and then the garments of skin. And then the exile from the garden. The foundation of my theological tradition is that God cannot be wielded. What does that mean? That means that he cannot be grasped. Because when we grasp something, we know its boundaries. And so your poem is really, I found that deeply moving. Because in the conceit, you know, what God, to a certain degree, a big part of the exile from the garden is don't call me, I'll call you. And it really isn't even don't call me because they do call. And this is one of the strange things about the story of the altars don't appear in the Bible until Genesis 4 with Cain and Abel. And they're making sacrifices. There are no sacrifices in the garden. The only implicit ones were the animals that had to offer their skin to cover the man and the woman. And so the strange, what you wrote about is a very big deal theologically and in the Bible. Because the promise of Scripture, the fulfillment is imagined that we will see each other face to face, us and God. We will see the face of God. And in Scripture, we're told you can't see the face of God or you will die. And so something in us has to change so that we're able to see it. C.S. Lewis, I think his best novel, it wasn't the Narnia novels, those were children's stories, but a book he wrote, Till We Have Faces. And it's a retelling of a myth, which is Lewis loved mythology. So it's a retelling of the myth. And just right there, even in the title, Till We Have Faces, basically underneath the novel, Lewis is making the point, it's not that God doesn't have a face that we can see. It's that we don't have faces through which to see his. Right. That's the point of the novel. And how on earth do you get an idea like that across? Well, you write a novel. But I really loved your poem. That was really profound and meaningful. So just before you, and I'll post it on the channel, I was talking to a guy who has been fighting cancer for years now. And he's grown spiritually since my first talk with him. And he's grown spiritually since my first talk with him. And he's grown spiritually since my first talk with him. My first talk with him was he was much more in that Peter Sonian space where he's sort of interested in religion, but the whole God thing. And he was more in that space. And I talked to him today. We were talking about the corruption of institutions and the disappointment of experts in our lives. And I asked him, I said, because he's having to deal with medical establishment all the time because of his fight against cancer. And I said, well, how are you living then in that space where on one hand you both with reason distrust doctors and medical institutions, but you have to engage them in order to continue to live. And he just said, God. And, and he talked about how sort of in the moment of, of pain and distress, you know, God is present, but then often afterwards after the battle in the exhaustion. That's when God, in a sense hides his face or he can't see God. And, of course, what's that mean when he's exhausted. Yes, yes. And, and, of course, at the center of Christianity is Jesus recitation of Psalm 22 on the cross my God my God why have you forsaken me at the. And I think that in some ways the one of the one of the pinnacle moments of the drama of Christianity. Christ yells that from the cross. And, you know, the. So I'm a Christian minister, and you know we've talked about that quite a bit so we talked quite a bit about the pastoral relationship but the preaching aspect of my vocation. Part of my job is to point to God to be a sign. But throughout Christianity. The, the sign of God is certainly there in the sacraments. But the sign of God is in the lives of the cruciform lives of the Christians. It's in, it's in the faithfulness when God himself isn't looking very faithful. Yeah, which is exactly what the cross is. Yeah, yeah. So when you're on the. So Jesus is Jesus says that when he's on the cross. Right. Right. My God my God why have you forsaken me. Right. What happens after that. Well, he, he keeps hanging. He keeps suffering. And there's, you know, then of course in Luke there's this this famous conversation with the one of the, and these are these are these are revolutionaries who are being crucified for resisting the Roman occupation. And one of them is giving Jesus is mocking Jesus along with everyone else. You know you're supposed to be a miracle worker you would think you would think you could use your, your ostensible privilege with God to avoid this, which is a big reason why many Muslims doubt that the crucifixion happened. And the other, the other person says, Why are you mocking this guy, you and I were Roman we were revolutionaries we, you know, they're probably being crucified because they killed. They killed Roman soldiers. He said this other guy he didn't do anything he didn't. Everybody knows, everybody knows who Jesus is. He overturned some money changers 10 you know but he didn't. He didn't kill anyone in fact, then they probably didn't know this story but in fact in the And so Jesus hangs and suffers. And then after having said, My God, my God, why have you forsaken me, his last words are into your hands I commit my spirit. So, right there you have that the dynamic that you have in your poem. Yeah, that. On one hand, Jesus. And yet, even in that time of abandonment relinquishes himself fully. into that abandoning God's arms. And this is the thing about these. The dynamics of the, of the elements of the Christian drama. It's all of these contrasts. He who is God is abandoned by God. In the moment of abandonment by God, he relinquishes his soul into thy hands I commit my spirit. And it's. And again your poem reflects that you can't put these things together. They don't. And that somehow, in the strange way, is there togetherness. Right. Right. Yes. Right. And it's, it's in God's concealment that he is revealed. Yes, that just doesn't sound to like make any sense. But there it is. Yeah. And God abandons Jesus on the cross. And so he commits his spirit to him. You know, and if a kid, you know if some kid grew up and their parent was negligent. And you're going to commit your spirit to the arms of that negligent parent. And this is part of the reason why all of these attempts of, you know, in the in a in a portal conversation between Eric Weinstein and Ross Douthat. Eric Weinstein basically says, well, if Jesus was today was around today wouldn't we just mean him to death. And it's like well you haven't read the Gospels, because that's exactly what they tried and they didn't just try to destroy his reputation. They hung him naked on a cross, which was, which was destroying Jesus at every level you could destroy a human being by being hung naked on a cross you take away all of their dignity. You destroy their reputation, even in an Old Testament way because the verse in Deuteronomy where, you know, anyone who is hang hung from a tree is despised, certainly in a karmic way he must deserve it. And so, the attempt is, go ahead and just try to destroy him in every way you can. And he keeps coming back, go ahead and hate him. And he will show his love to you. Go ahead and abandon him, and he will give himself fully to you. Yes, he can. And this is, and this I think Tom Holland picks up on. This is the deep reprogramming of history that Jesus accomplishes. And, and of course that's an audacious statement that if you had made and let's say the first century when the, or end of the first century when the book of Revelation the apocalypse was written seems totally out of keeping with what anyone would assert. By 400 years later, few people could deny. And now 2000 years later, there's a lot of the only way to really deal with Jesus is to avoid him. Which is really the only way, but that then is also the definition of hell. Hell is hell is complete denial and refusal of God, finally to say to God, I want to, I want to avoid you utterly and completely. And God says, okay. That's hell. Right. Right. So, that's it's that spot right in the middle of that total. It seems like on one level. Hell strikes me as something like that spot. It's a double bind, like heaven is something like that very same spot is a paradox. Right. There's a deep, there's something about that that's so deep to what I don't know yeah, it's just, there's because I get every morning in the morning I get up, I've been having this practice for the last about about a month or so pretty much every morning I get up and I meditate the sun up. And usually it cooperates. And, and then I, I like deep in my meditation I started praying. I really prayed in a, in a, in a while. And it was, it's been a striking experience, like to pray. Because it's, it's a strange kind of intimacy. It's very intimate, but in a way that's very odd in a, in a sense, because there's a, there's And what you know what's interesting is, is of course, you know, I'm meditating so I'm like kind of, you know, I have this, you know, hour into it or something the sun's coming up and I'm like just present with what is and so there's this kind of open sense of awareness right that just can notice things. So there's that part of it so there's a part that's like wide open. So it's like there's the, the experience of like saying the words. And then there's also just a noticing of the experience of all of that right at the same time, that's really open. And what's striking about it is, well, it puts me right in that place of, well, I think it more realizes that place of what I spoke of in the poem is, I don't quite exactly know who's talking to who. Like, But there is a quality of, well, one is that I'm not expecting an answer. I'm not like I'm, I'm speaking but I'm not expecting an answer. Yet there's a listening, a deep listening in myself. That somehow part of the speaking. I'm not expecting an answer yet I'm. I don't know if I'm hearing something, but I'm definitely there's a deep listening. And I'm just, I'm wondering what am I listening. Like what is what's calling forth that listening. And so, in some ways, And I noticed that this has been the case, I think more, which I'll also I think is just a function of age, right, is, I'd say like the first I don't know 4040 years or so was for me was the question, or the pressure was what life was a kind of pressure to where what seemed to be really important is to make sure that I was someone. Right. That, that there was a kind of an existential almost. It felt existential like a implicit pressure in being is to be someone. Right. And that there's something about that I've been given existence. I don't remember asking for it right. I don't remember even wanting it. Yeah, I kind of came to with the first name and the last name and I'm with a boatload of concerns. And so there's this kind of there's this quality of that, you know, what is it, what is it that can justify the fact of my existence, right, like what is it. What is it that can justify the most profound gift. When I was younger, it felt implicitly like the way one did that is by becoming someone right. Helping enough people or, or whatever the call was. And now it feels a lot more like a sense of, well, you know, first of all, it seems like I can't actually repay my existence, because everything, anything that I do presupposes the existence that I've been given. So there's a there's a sense in which it's it's it's unpayable back to right, there's one of those pair paradoxes. And what's more there now is the sense in which is as Corianton would say, you already are more than you've ever accomplished, or ever could accomplish. Right, there's a sense and just the very facticity of yourself and what we are is already more. Than I could ever accomplish. And. That there's a way in which and it's funny I don't know if I can quite put words to it, but there's a there's a there's a quality of where the ethos, the. The sense of an ethics almost is one in which it seems to be more about. Can I be. How good of that part of me which is a host to all of it. Can I be a good host, right. Can I be can can can is few moments. There's a way. Not anonymous in my case, right, there's that sentence that quality and where it feels a little bit more like that. Or the refuge or the point is to is to be a site for God's face if you will, right, be in some sense I would imagine is to is to And I think this is probably what's attracted me to Heidi girl these years is this way that he's continually talking about the clearing right or the way in which we are an opening for world. And there's a way in which we can witness that, and we get to say what we think about it, right, which is just stunning. That seems to be that feels more like as I've gotten older I've been noticing it's, I feel a lot less of that pressure to be someone. And there's more there's more of a sense and I wouldn't say it's a pressure it's more like an understanding. It's like way in the background of, of, you know, actually it's like can I be a really how, how, how profound of a witness. And then, can I be with that it is. So much what it is but that this is like just the sense of like, can I, can I, can I actually like allow myself to even come close to how strange it is that that there's anything at all. And if I'm lucky enough to be able to be shaken by it enough to be able to say a couple things about it. Yeah, yeah, that's good. And to, and to have And to participate in that, you know, obviously in a in a Christian in a Christian frame. The The reprogramming that Jesus does to get back to the middle voice here happens as the, you know, you talked about witness, witnesses always as is this dual sided word. It's the, it's, it's us being a witness to and being a witness of and and it's, it's this carrying forward into every generation. This, this programming that's in a sense how the world gets programmed. That's that's really that's really, that's really fascinating and profound what you just laid out there. It takes a it definitely takes a certain stillness. Yeah, especially in our culture. Yeah, which is so frenetic. Right, so distracted. Oh yeah. And, and, and, and I think because it is so deeply anxious And, you know, the, the word and at the time of the exile from the garden is you know, in a sense, you can't you can't you can't get to me, but I will come to you. And what that move in terms of the relationship means is that the man and the woman and their children are now going to be profoundly aware of the giftedness of being like just like you said, this, this has been given to you. Right, right. Period, there's no, you know, you didn't ask to come into being. You cannot secure your being. Yeah, it's, it's, it's gift. And that down. What's that all the way down, all the way down. And, and, and that the facing that leads us often to anxiety, because we can't trust the giver. And, and the kind of peace that we have. I'm not saying we can't trust the giver we have trust issues I'll say it that way. We have trust issues. And so to be to be at peace with the gift is in some ways to make peace with the giver. And he hasn't been our enemy. He's terror. In some ways, he's absolute terror. Because we are dependent, but he's not our enemy. And that, that is the. I think that is my camera overheated, so I'm still here. I'll let it cool down I'll turn it back on again in a second. In many ways, the, what I see as the heart of the Christian message, which is that What God finally reveals through his son is that he is not our enemy and he can be trusted, which is in the midst of this brutally painful world. Something we desperately need to hear. The last conversation I had again talking to someone who's been fighting cancer for the last, how many years he's a young man. He's been reading Russian, Russian horror stories basically for the 20th century, and there's plenty of them. And it's, it's so interesting that it's in those. I mean, you and I live dramatically privileged lives, you know, we live in this outstandingly beautiful state. And it's, it's astoundingly affluent, even in this time of coven you and I are are fortunate in our career choices. But, and so in one way, it's relatively easy to express trust in the giver of what we've received. And I think it's important for those who Who can very much identify with the cry of the crucified Jesus on the cross. That ability to trust the giver enough to commit his spirit into his hands. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. And I think that's the key to being a good giver. Right. Right. It's like there's... I think that says something about the place of what really forgiveness seems to be, which is what you're tending to is ontological. It's not conditional. Right. So it's like forgiving isn't like, okay, I've been able to understand enough such that I can weigh it out myself such that I forgive you. It's more like... This is why I think that like a good measure, it seems, is like... Well, I've noticed it seems to be there's a huge correlation between where people are suffering, and their level of judgment. It seems to go hand in hand. Right. And it's also where people seem to be most genuinely open and in flow and is... Now, I'm not talking about a discernment. I'm talking about judgment, which seems to be this thing that I think must come involved in when we trust. Because there is a quality of where... There is something in which at the end of the day, I think that's something that no one can do for me. Like they can't give me the experience of me trusting them. Right. Or the experience of me seeing them as trustable. There is this quality where it just that seems to be a very, very deep relationship with myself. Right. That... That is an act of... It's a generous act. Like you think about it, it's a very generous act. I always feel that it is when people trust me. There's always a sense where it's like I feel a sense of where I feel the generativity of them. Yes. Yes. Yes. It's not like I look at myself and feel super proud of myself. Because there is a recognition of where, you know, it's actually... That's where it is. If you wanted me to lose. And it's even in our language. We extend trust. In the direction. We extend trust. And here's the thing about... The other thing about trust though too is... I don't know if it's... I don't know if I stop trusting somebody. I think it's like I start trusting something else. Yes. Yes. Right. Because I've noticed that around in conversations in my... You know, wherever there's people, you know, you'll have these kind of conversations. But where... When somebody says like I don't trust you or I don't trust them. It's really interesting how there's this strange stop where all the action stops and it's almost impenetrable. It's like, all right, you don't trust me or you don't trust them or you don't trust it or... Everything, all of your participation and the quality of that participation is banking on that. And that's something that if it's not there, it seems like it's so difficult to penetrate that. And so what I started to do with people is I was like, okay, so like... Let's just say that you couldn't not trust. Let's say all you could do is you could say I used to trust you and now I trust what? Some thought about you or some sense of investing, right? Hmm. That's really good. That's really good. And I think it's... That scales. That scales not just in terms of interpersonal, but also people's identity within... Called the agent arena relationship, their identity within whatever worldview they're inhabiting. That it is a... It is a... You start trusting something else. I think that's really true and quite right. Because otherwise the responsibility is still on the thing, right? But maybe it's also probably a really good thing. Jesus, there is a lot worth not trusting. Yeah. I think that's a good point. That sense in which that is a real sovereign, where I trust and where I don't trust is really sovereign. When it comes down to it, I think. Or can be. And I... I think that's really good. I think that's really good. I think that's really good. I think that's really good. I appreciate it and benefited a lot from John's work. His awakening from the meaning crisis, he took 50 hours to lay all that stuff out. And his four Ps of knowing is something that I've used a lot. Because it... That participatory... That perspectival. That's what I've seen in people. It's... I'm not going to say that none of the propositional is important. No, that's got its place and it's got its... But I think the participatory and the procedural, which both trust is at that level. And there's certainly other elements of the propositional. And the procedural... I almost always forget one of those darn Ps. Propositional, procedural, perspectival, participatory. There they all are. Trust hits more of them. Trust almost hits them all. At a deep way more than many of the other things that we're dealing with. And so... It is such a key to life. Again, you can go back to the Genesis 3 story. And the fall happens... Where the serpent attacks is their ability to trust their maker. That's exactly where the serpent puts his finger and says, this is where I'm going to push. And if I dislocate that, everything else slides. And I see in... So again, another aspect of pastor is being with people in their relational miseries. And so often it comes down to... You have to trust this other person. If you're going to... I think you said it very well. That you can't... Huge correlation with their level of suffering and their level of judgment. I can't trust that other person or there's their misery. Well, you have to trust that other person, but they're not trustworthy. That's true. And so there are limits, there are boundaries. But if you're actually going to make progress in this relationship, you're going to have to extend trust one more time. And you might get burned again. There's no guarantees here. But that's the path. And so... And the forgiveness... Your father's saying about forgiveness, that's exactly right. It's not a reason. Forgiveness is not a reason. Right. Yeah. There's no reason for it. I mean, maybe. So your name just doesn't point to a contraction, right? But ultimately, yeah, you're right. Because I do... There is a... You know, this is one of the things that's interesting about intimacy. That's striking to me is... The family systems... People talk about intimacy being a function of your ability to tolerate anxiety. And specifically... A particular kind of anxiety that comes up in a relationship. If you say that like, you know, like a... Maybe a... You and I become intimate. There's bulls eyes to that. Like, you know, layers and layers and layers, right? And that usually when you get close to a layer is where you... You get these moments where... Like, these two fundamental drives to be human is one. And then the other one is to... Is to stand out in my cosmic uniqueness. Right. And that's what it is to be human. And then just press go. Right. And wonder why. But in intimacy, it's usually that sense, isn't it? Where all of a sudden something... If I'm... There's a moment where I want something that may... That looks like it may threaten our relationship. Right. Or there's a truth that if I say it, right, you could go away. Right. And intimacy is really about... Seems to be about those moments where... You go right to the eye of the needle with that with somebody. And what's interesting to me is like watching this happen over and over again and working with couples. It's another thing I do is like work a lot with, you know, couples and coach them and stuff. Is... When... When they do... In some sense, say it. Right. Oftentimes, what's interesting about this is like... They didn't say it because they were almost certain that if they said it, X, Y, and Z would happen. Therefore, I'm not going to say it. Right. And they had reason. Yes. And then not saying it, right, gets to this point where it hurts too much to not say it. And even though X, Y, and Z, and then they say it. And usually, the very reason why they didn't say it... Happens. Some version of it happens. Right. And so on one level, you can go, well, that's... That justifies me not, you know, not saying it because I knew that that was going to happen. But because he didn't say it. Right. And so now you're now in territory that you couldn't be otherwise. Right. And so now, because you're in that territory, now you can start to observe it and be with it and in the presence of it. And I think in that sense is where... Coming back to trust, what do I trust? When I say what's true for me, even though I'm afraid that you will go away or something will dissolve or something will go away that I can't... Like I can survive. Right. And what am I trusting actually when I say that? Right. Because the first level is like oftentimes the very thing I'm afraid of happens. But what's interesting about that is because I do it, I volunteer. And it's not just, you know, especially it's not... It's even more than just volunteer. It's extra duty volunteer because I'm precisely really scared to say it. So volunteering is really, really... It's a real frontal, forward, stepping into it. Trusting. And there's something about that that no matter how I think I've noticed is that no matter what happens after that... The thing that seems to be trustworthy is that it ultimately ends up leading to something that can be very, very transforming. Right. Like I think there's just that one element that because I think a lot of the reasons why we avoid vulnerability, right, is because of our experiences of being exposed before. And so we have that mapped over with vulnerability, right. Exposure is that thing where it's like, you know, like someone pulls your pants down or like something suddenly happens and you're faced with your like humiliation and you're surprised by it in some way. That's exposure. Right. Well, vulnerability though is actually kind of maybe perhaps doing the exact same thing except for you. You step into it. And so in that sense, it's like the no matter how it turned the outcome of that particular situation turns out, the self that one gets to transcend and become through it, I think is the thing is what is trustworthy. Yeah. Yeah. Well, Peterson gets at that in 12 rules. It's the, it's the voluntary. I mean, the thing about telling the truth. It's the voluntary aspect. It's, it's, you know, it's that direction that changes it. And, and you can turn the tables on. You can turn the tables on the well a lot of it has to do with the agency. That that your agency is broadened, not narrowed. No, it's very true. Well, well, guy, we're coming up on two hours here. Yeah, I mean, I could, I could keep going. But I know so good. I have a, I have another meeting with the band is getting back together, Chris and Jordan Hall were meeting at 230. So good. Good. Well, thank you for your time. And thank you for, as always, you're a, you're a masterful listener. And a, and a very well, a very, a very satisfying conversation partner. Absolutely. Love, love being with you, my friend. And one of these days, what hopefully this COVID scourge will pass. We can be each other in the flesh, which would be much better. Yes. Okay, guy. Take care. Bye bye.