https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NOOAoHF9wuI

 And that's the thing that for myself, you know, I've become more and more cognizant of in my own kind of like practices and behaviors where it's just like, oh, I didn't really think about that too much. When I said that I use the language I talk about unhealthy a lot. It's kind of like an analogy or metaphor or whatever, but it's like, what am I actually saying? It starts feeling a lot like Philip Reef, his critique of the therapeutic culture was that we dance around in this theater of the medical. Like that's what religionists start to do and I find myself increasingly gravitating towards that and it's like, well, why do I use, why do I feel like in order to validate my comments, I need to medicalize them, right? And I, because I noticed that a lot in John Mark Kovmer, I noticed a lot of qualification, a lot of what I call, you know, the up speak where there he doesn't make statements. He asks, they're all questions. And I find that a lot with, you know, my, my co, my, my co pastors who are really into spiritual formation. It's all about asking questions, right? But the question is a rhetorical device. That's, you're not, it's not sincere. The question is not asked out of sincerity. It's, it's a posture that you're putting on to get somebody to, you know, to give you, it's like something a confidence man would do. Right. And I'm not trying to be like judgmental because I don't think anybody's intending that. We've just implicitly internalized these kinds of like these behaviors where it's like, I'm trying to get you to do something. I'm trying to get you to concede something or come somewhere. And so I'm going to frame what I'm saying as a question when I don't really believe it's a question, but I'm framing it as such. Does that make sense? That makes perfect sense. And that's, boy, if you take what you just said and apply it to something like Socratic dialogue. Oh, let's be fair about Socrates. It's kind of the move he was making. And the question is, a confidence man sort of has a grift in view that he's working you towards with the questions. The question of let's say sincere Socratic dialogue is how, how much is Socrates himself a partner with you on that journey? Yeah.