https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_Ht0CXJkb1k

 So now we're going to get into the, the, the new drama of the peas we have. Is it, is it parabolic or is it perspectival? Um, but, but it's also procedural. And, and so when we read, believe partly because of our modernist frame, we think propositional mental ascent and, you know, even before verveky or Peterson or anything, this was something that church and Christians have been talking about for a long time in terms of. Ascent versus behavior because, and in fact, it's, it's right there in the Bible. And the book of James talks about this in the Bible when it says the demons believe in God and shutter. Well, what, what does he mean? He he's making the point that this discrepancy between propositional ascent and behavior has been well known way back into antiquity. In fact, you can't watch people and not recognize hypocrisy. That this is, this is how we are. And hypocrisy is, is a tell of our complexity. So yeah, this is, this is a, this is a common thing. And so one of the, one of the, one of the little tricks you could play with your, if you're not a Greek reader and you're reading the English Bible, you can find Bibles and especially online, you can find software that will, will reveal. What the Greek is underneath the English. And now that gets difficult in different translations because of the various schools of translation, but pistis in Greek means trust. So if you even take whoever trusts in him in John three 16, and if I say it that way, suddenly I've switched the frame and you've probably gone from some sort of verbal ascent, propositional ascent into much more of a procedural, perspectival relationship. And that, hence that gives my little definition of a Christian who is a Christian, a Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. And notice how I'm moving it away from the propositional. I'm not saying propositional is bad or doesn't have a place or anything like that. Just moving it away from the propositional so that these other aspects, which you can find in the Bible, quite clearly are salient and present and forefronted. So, just trying to see if Nate, the great is in the voice chat and I don't see him. Any, any other responses or comebacks on that one? Um, Hey Paul, how, how do we know when we believe a proposition or not though? Because there is still that thing where Jordan Peterson won't go that extra last half step or whatever of saying, I believe in God, but lots of Christians do, and they know what they mean when they're saying that. So what, what is that little extra half step that that's different there? I think part of the, part of the reason propositional knowledge has become so important for the church, there, there are good reasons, there, there are better reasons and less better reasons. But one of the really good reasons and utilities of propositional knowledge is it sort of creates sort of hammers a stake in the ground. And even, even though it isn't foolproof, it does help us identify each other in some ways that are less variable than, let's say, perspectival knowledge. If we think about trust as procedural and perspectival. Okay. So, and I think it's for this reason that churches have, but it isn't that 1800 years, what we care most about is propositional knowledge. So we're going to tie Christianity to it. We can think about the, the, the evolution of the primacy of prophecies, propositional profession in the church. And that's what we're going to see in the future. And I think that's a really good reason to think about this, because I think that's a really good reason to think about this, because I think that's a of propositional profession in Darwinian terms as well. And say that even if the community hasn't recognized the utility of it, and even if it's not a perfect thing, it's, it's become an extremely useful thing for communities to organize themselves and for individuals to try to maintain the cohesion and coherency of their narrative thread through time. So, so if I, let's take this out of a specifically religious confessional realm and put it in a political realm. If I say I am an American, I've just made a probably buttress and reinforce some of the perspectival and procedural aspects of me because I'm an American, I'm not going to burn the flag. You know, I probably won't burn a Union Jack because I don't think flag burning is a particular good thing to do necessarily. And I would probably only burn a certain flag if I won't even burn flags that, that I don't care for because I think it's sort of a, it's something, it's, it's a, it's a way to annoy and antagonize people. And there are times to do that, but it shouldn't be our daily habit. So, but, but just staking my claim and my identity in a propositional way that I am an American, I've been, I was born on American soil and I plan to be an American till the day I die, that propositional aspect figures into the whole identity and relational economy and will probably keep me from doing some things that would betray my tribe. And so I think there's a great degree of utility for propositional knowledge. It, it, it really helps us cohere to the world, the world beyond our perceptions. Okay. Because that's always a struggle for us is to engage in the, in the, you know, in the thing itself out there in the numeral realm, we might say we're always in the phenomenal, but we want to, we want to engage in the numeral realm and we want to, I mean, we can phrase this in all kinds of different ways. So the propositional is a really powerful tool to do that. And so that's part of why I sometimes smirk when I hear people complaining about the propositional because of reasons for science. And it's like, science is all about the propositional. It's a powerful, powerful way of knowing. And I think it's for that reason that it has become so dominant in, in confessional Christianity, but like with all powerful things, if you don't understand its limits, there are problems. And so for me, I think profession of propositional things about Jesus is vitally important, but Peterson in some ways brings up the other side and says, I act as if I believe. And Jesus has a parable that addresses this directly. A man had two sons and he told, told his sons to go out and do something. And one son said, yes, I will. And then he didn't do it. And the other son said, no, I won't. And then he went and did it. Okay. Which son is the obedient son? It's the one who did it even maybe, maybe he didn't even know he was doing it. So, but, but yet that knowing he's doing it is also part of obedience. So this is part of the complexity of these issues and why these issues don't go away. So if I can, I want to add something to this because there's a synchronicity happening here. I recorded with Mark and Jules, uh, talk about, uh, the religion. That's not a religion. And we went into this topic and the functionality of propositions and what we put on the other side is the mythos, right? Like that's the structure, uh, with the stories and how we gain understanding by, by living into the thing and, and, and understanding it. So we're going to hopefully upload that soon. And we have like a whole explanation about this thing. Good. Anything to add to what I just said? Well, well, the thing that I, I would like to add is, is that I think the proponent propositional structure is really sensitive to, to dogmaism, right? Like you can get dogmatic, uh, belief, right? So we classified it as, as a way into, into the fate, right? Like you have a point to go here around, right? Like you have this flag to rally around and have, have a way of, of putting all the noses in the same direction, right? Like we're, we're all here gathered to do this thing. Um, we all believe the same thing, right? So you get a sense of coherence of, of what is expected of you and what is expected of the person next to you. And you get all of these, these reliable relations with the world that you can expect from, from the people that are around you, right? So that's a really important function of, of, of these propositions. Yep. Yeah, I agree. I think that's very well said. I think that's exactly right. And, and the propositions, because they're so powerful, idolatries develop around them very easily because the strongest idolatries are going to develop around the strongest things because we want to overwork them and we see an opportunity to use them for other means, you know, it's corruption basically. But yeah, no, I think that's very well said. Thanks. Thanks Manuel. So very cool. Someone else wanted to jump in there? So I was just going to ask, does it worry you at all when propositional truth and utility truth seem to align? I think they will align. I mean, in truth with a capital T truest truth, truthy truth, the greatest truth, the summon bonum, when you get to God, everything aligns it's it's reality at all the levels and all the layers. And so, yeah, but you know, I was listening to which one was that again, I was just listening to these two Jordan Peterson conversations this week. The, the Douglas Murray, I think it was in the Douglas Murray one where Peterson laid out again, his, and I think this is, this is, Peterson is right about this. We have these five senses with which we engage the empirical world. Part of the reason we have multiple senses is that when something is in some ways, when something is true at multiple levels, it's truer than at one level. For example, I, yeah, I noticed sometimes if, if you're moving your head around, sometimes you'll see something out of the corner of your eye and it'll trigger something in your mind and you think you see something else as where hallucinations come through, you think you see something else and then you turn both eyes over and you look at, no, I was just, you know, something moved and my eye caught something. Okay. So I remember when, after my mother-in-law, before she had a stroke, stuff was going on, obviously in terms of her, her health, and she started to hallucinate. And I noticed that the hallucinations were, you know, she would see things that sort of had the shape of other things, and then she would kind of go off on them. And if you talk to someone who is hallucinating, you can follow up on hallucinations because I see a person there. Okay. Well, go over there and talk to that person, see it, try and touch that person, try and smell that person. We have all these different senses to, to, to help us find out what is real and more real than just say something I see out of the corner of my eye. So in that way, and Peterson was talking about this and he has, he talks about this fairly regularly. So, so we have the five senses. And so those five senses, when they all line up, we find something that is, that is quite real. Now we also know that there are other realities that are not empirical. And so then we have other ways of testing them and we have other ways testing them in terms of multiple layers and multiple levels. So the propositional is sort of think of it as one sense. And, but then there are other like pragmatic truths that are, is another sense. And the most real things are most real because they engage, you know, we have five senses, but, you know, potentially there, I'm expanding senses metaphorically. Now there are more and more and more and more ways of sense. I mean, mathematical sense is not empirical. It's sense as such. So, but the things that are most true go at most levels. And that's why math math math is very powerful because it tends to work at other layers than just itself. And so, yeah, when things are, when things are true, let's say, when things are true in terms of the five senses, I say, wow, that's really true. But in terms of, but all of my five senses are limited to my time and space. And so if I say people can't fly because I've never seen an airplane or Rick was showing me Rick always shows me things on YouTube. Rick was showing me, you know, these jet packs that people are doing now while he's flying, well, you know, on and on and on and on. So yeah, when, when two things line up, it can be very powerful. And so on one hand, any, anything that's powerful is subject to greater deception and greater evil. So yeah, it worries me, but also it can't worry me. It's, it's all that opponent processing aspect of reality. All right. I left this, I left, uh, I, I should learn. I'm too old to learn French, but I should learn it. Um, let 10 tour air asked last time, and he was in the voice chat about, I'm an atheist and I wanted to know if these open question and answer on discord are open for atheists to engage with. If so I'm interested. And I, so I decided after listening to that, that I wanted to have a week, which was, um, non Christian questions and questioners only. So next week I will, I have jury duty and it's always hard to know my availability when in a week when I have jury duty and if I get put on a panel, that might be longer, but I think it's important for me to do my public service. And it's kind of fun. Yeah. They very seldom let pastors on panels and juries. So, um, prosecutors and defense attorneys look at pastors and say, do we really want him on the jury? It's just a, too much of a wild card. So, um, but, so I will say Friday, February 12 will be Christian hold back. Day. And so I'm just asking that if you identify as a Christian, to whatever degree you do, just hold back on questions that day, and we'll just have as many atheists or non-believer or Buddhist or any, any non-Christian questions, because we tend to get a lot of questions from Christians here. Two weeks from Friday. All right. Okay. Next question. Max of meaning. How to unveil the manifest image I patch in a modernist child's objection to the dinosaur less seven day creation account for its disc for its discordance with the geologic time scale. I now grasp the scientific narrative to world's grammar clumsily with a temptation towards naturalism. But I don't learn that way, but I didn't learn that language until recently and might've missed it entirely had YouTube not taken me down the Jordan Peterson funnel to you, PBK. Do most children find dualistic realities intuitive? How might this, how might this reality be obviated to those without that gift? You might be surprised because I have been how early on we as children are brought into the worldview of our environment. People are formed. And I think one lesson that can be taken from the kinds of polarization we see politically and why we should have a lot of patients for those who see the world politically differently from ourselves is because I hear both sides politically. You know, this part of the benefit of the political polarization has become such a salient sermon illustration. People, people saw the events around the Capitol in two wholly different ways. And then there's all the question, how do we see the world differently? How do those events relate to what happened in Seattle or Portland with Antifa or Black Lives Matter, yada, yada, yada, yada. People are all over this all over and they are seeing it's this goes back to Scott Adams, two different movies. This is happening. Why? Because our ability to interpret the world is dependent upon a tremendous amount of individual, cultural, social experience. This was a big part of the point that Jordan Peterson was trying to make in his first talk with Sam Harris. We do not see the world as such. And, and in fact, I talked last week more about projection. So much of what we see the world is projection. And that goes to a very, very deep level. And, and we say, well, I wish, why can't we see more clearly? Why can't we see directly? And then listen to all the cognitive science. They'll tell you the world is just too big. And so you need all of this interpretive mechanism to frame the world. One of the huge issues right now is, and we're, we're feeling this now as, so one of my favorite places to go in California is Yosemite National Park. And on the backside of Yosemite National Park, there's Tioga pass. And if you drive down that curvy road and Tioga pass, laying out in front of you is Mono Lake. Mono Lake is a fun place because it's, Mono Lake has all these, what they call the tufa formations. And these are just kind of weird salt towers, probably not salt exactly, but that they're mineral towers that are visible because, well, because why? Because California is always in need of water. And so what water districts have been doing for a very long time, especially in the eastern Sierra, is taking waters from the streams that come out of the eastern slope of the Sierra. And what that meant was that Mono Lake was drying up and then they had the big save Mono Lake. Yada yada. Hi, Carol. Save Mono Lake, et cetera, et cetera. And because not as much fresh water was coming into Mono Lake and because there's no outlet to Mono Lake, the water level is going down and these tufa formations were being exhibited. Okay. Now these tufa formations were always underneath the surface, but now we see them because the lake levels are down. Modernity is receding and think about that recession as a lake losing water. What is happening now is that older, more durable forms of knowing are once again coming to the fore. And that is irritating modernity. And there's also a lot of deceptive forms of knowing that are coming in all of the kinds of deception that Vervecki has all of these words for too. All of that is happening too. It's all happening at the same time. When modernity hit, so when the lake was filling up, let's say, when modernity hit, a lot of questions about the relationship between storytelling in the ancient world and physicality came to the fore. And modernity hit with so much power and so much force. And a lot of it was powerful and helpful. And we bear a great debt of gratitude to modernity for all that it's given to us. But what it accentuated is this question that you find in historian all the time. And if you listen to Tom Holland's podcast, you can hear him always dealing with this. We want to know what really happened. Okay. So let's, and I had this conversation with the BookWave people this week and I posted that video and that video hasn't gotten a lot of views, but that was a really wonderful, that was a really wonderful conversation. Because what we were doing right there is a couple of people had, had been, especially in the United States, two from Texas, two from Ontario. It's kind of a nice balance in their group. Both of the people who grew up in Texas had grown up going to Sunday school. And so when they read the Bible for the first time, they had different filters than those in Toronto who didn't have, who weren't growing up in the Bible belt. And that just demonstrates the fact that we don't see the world directly. We need filters by which to see the world. Now, if you read the Iliad, so I recently started looking at the Iliad again, because I was listening to Tom Holland. Part of the reason Tom Holland translated Herodotus was in the modern period, archaeology really found its heyday after the Renaissance. And in modernity, we have much better texts from the ancient world than we had in the medieval period. And so during modernity, everybody starts to translate these ancient texts. And you might think, well, translation is easy. You just translate it into English. Oh, but what do you do with the fact that you read these ancient texts and the gods are doing this and the gods are doing that. And the people are doing this and the people are doing that. And as Tom Holland noted, they don't self-identify as religious. They're just working the world. Well, where are the gods and how to deal with the gods? And again, if you read, let's say Plato, if you read Plato in Greek, some of these issues are present and they're more present, but when you read them in an English translation, the translators, and they're doing it innocently sometimes, the translators just sort of take that out of the translation. And so then people growing up in a modern frame don't read it. So, or, or, or it just glides by until you point it out. And, but now, because the Bible has so many living traditions around it, like the Tufa, the, the Tufa formations in Mono Lake, now suddenly there's salience around these things. And so the people who grew up in the Bible belt say, well, I read these stories and you know, there's the magical elements of them. And I said, well, when you read the Odyssey or the Iliad, did you read the magic in them too? And you see Tolkien knew this, which is why he wrote the Lord of the Rings in the way that he did. Because the Lord of the Rings for somehow a fan, you know, he pretty much developed fantasy literature, but he developed secular rich fantasy literature. And that's different from, and Tolkien knew this because he was an expert in these ancient texts, as was Lewis. This is totally different from if you read ancient texts and, you know, Tom Holland, to his credit, loved reading ancient texts and he began to notice this bias in modern translation. And so part of what he did with Herodotus is try to not, not de-mythologize the ancient world, because Tom Holland to his credit recognized that if you're going to see the ancient world, you should try to see it as they saw it. But that's really difficult for them. So now when we read the Bible, we want to say what really happened. Okay. So let's think about the events of January 6th in Washington, DC. What really happened? And well, and actually Douglas Murray pointed this out in his podcast about the corruption of U S media, because he said, U S media were saying things like everyone in that Trump march stormed the Capitol and Douglas Murray said, no editor of any place I've ever worked for would allow a statement like that. Did everyone storm the Capitol or did some storm the Capitol? And of those who stormed the Capitol, what were the menu of reasons that they had at least consciously with it? And that doesn't even get into what were all the unconscious motivations beneath it and, and, and we can't even look at an event that happened earlier this month and come to agreement on what really happened. Now there are levels of physicality that are fairly easy to track. And this is where you get into again, the strength of propositional knowing. You can look at this one woman who was shot and say, she was there. She was shot. We've got it on video. There's a physicality that you can see, but what we're noticing now is modernity recedes is that there are all these other layers that are also critical for figuring out what goes into this word really. And so those are also at work in ancient texts. And so when ancient texts tell us what really happened, well, what kind of speech are we using to relay that text? Because probably you can retell, just, just listen to everyone retell the story of what happened in the Capitol. They can't help, but frame it within their conceptualization of the universe. Now they do it subtly and we do it in ways that are within the menu of options of us telling stories in our culture. But, you know, look at, let's say the movie from the fifties, Inherit the Wind, which was about the Scopes trial. Okay. But almost anybody who knows anything about film will say, well, Inherit the wind was about the Scopes trial, but it was really about the McCarthy witch hunts. How can that be? Because they're talking about Dayton, Tennessee, and, and, and the monkey trial and that whole circus. Yeah, they are, but they're framing it in the light of McCarthyism. So now we're reading ancient texts. How do we deal with this? How do we deal with this? And now the modernist answer has been, oh, well, it didn't really happen. Oh, how do you know? And, you know, my, my conversation with John Sooke, John Sooke sort of, you know, in those conversations, especially first conversations with people with whom I might have, you know, for one reason or another, get into a little bit of bickering or squabbling about things. I'll really try to resist that impulse with them, even though it might make fun YouTube, but I want to be a generous host and a generous guest to the conversation. So, but, but here's the thing. We're not going to be able to, we're not going to be able to put that line down now, and there, there are, there are well-known areas in the Bible of, let's say what seed did Moses, what seed did God separate from the Bible? Did God separate and allow the Israelites to cross on dry ground? Was it the Reed Sea or was it the Red Sea? And, you know, you can find Jacob and he'll tell you about, you know, some of the issues in that text. And the Bible's full of that stuff. But the modernist way of just saying, oh, well, that's just mythology. It didn't really happen. Well, some of what you've now done to people, not only because of what you've said about the text, but what you've done psychologically in the people's heads is you've just destroyed any connection that they might have to the faith. And, and I think it's for this reason that we've seen the modernists got a lot of things right, but they destroyed their own churches and their own faith in some cases. Whereas the fundamentalists, they, they might've had a fairly naive perception of the Bible, but they got a bunch of their own things wrong by trying to read the Bible modernistically, but their faith endured. And it's part of this reason why certain older traditions before the modernist fundamentalists divide and that was brewing throughout the post and the Enlightenment period, and then kind of came to a head at the end of the 19th century and early 20th century. Part of the reasons that older traditions like the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic and some of the early reformational traditions like Lutheranism and my own didn't have such a difficult time in the modernist fundamentalists fight was because actually in our traditions, we had some things that were preserved that meant we didn't feel this collision quite so strongly. And so these traditions were more like those two exhibits in mono lake. So there's no, and trust me, Max, I have been working really hard to try to figure out ways to explain this in terms that regular Christians on both sides of the divide can listen to and understand, but it is really hard and to figure out how hard it is just go to a group of people on the other side of the political debate and explain the plain truth to them. Probably not going to go well. Well, that's because we all see through the eyes that we have and the eyes that we see through are formed by our experience, our tribe, our education, our culture, all of these layers. And so to actually speak across them is, is really, really difficult. And the only reason the naivete with which we approach ancient texts is preserved. It's because the ancients are no longer around to yell at us and tell us, you're not understanding me at all. I was saying this. And so this is where a certain, I think this is some of the advantage that post Renaissance and enlightenment scholarship blessed the West because almost everybody had to learn Greek and Latin and they all had an introduction into this dilemma. And what has happened now as, oh, we've got to fix education and the pragmatists are partly responsible for this. How is it useful to not have people learn Latin and Greek and read ancient books and know the classics? That's not useful. We need to, and then we get into other realms where people say, Oh, all those, you know, all those pedophile Greeks and, and, you know, all, all these ancient people who don't measure up to our moral standard, we're going to burn or ban those books and we don't want anybody reading them or learning them. Well, we've just cut off the branch that we're sitting on. So I wish I had a, I'm telling you, Max, I, this is a problem I have worked on for a very long time. And in some ways, this is the problem that I, that drove me to Jordan Peterson and this whole journey I've been on for the last three years. And if I had a simple answer for you, I would give it, but I don't. It is, it is some ways the hardest thing for us to deal with right now as a Christian minister to help people engage in the Bible productively. And actually what I often find it is that those who are most naive, because they're completely naive to the issues often do better. And I think it's for this reason that fundamentalist and conservative churches do better than modernistic and liberal ones, because as Jonathan Peugeot mentioned in his own thing, he at least growing up evangelical understood the Bible, he knew the book. And so if you really want to get a handle on this, a place to start is read old books and, and, and, and try to read them, read old translations of old books. And if you have the capacity, learn the original language, you know, this is a, this is a back to the sources move on making, but if we really want to deal with this question, science alone won't help you because science will only give you a certain aspect. You're going to have to deal with the human legacy of storytelling. If you really want to hear your ancestors with some degree of faithfulness. So that was a big speech, but any, any, any pushback or comment from the voice chat. If anybody wants to learn Hebrew, there's this really nice channel for people. Hebrew. There you go. Find Jacob. He'll teach you Hebrew. He was doing it in one of the, one of the chat rooms one day. I thought it was great. If anybody is considering learning Hebrew, I do want to warn you. It is just as bad as they say. Learn. And again, if we would teach these languages, we would be able to teach these languages to people before they're 25. You know, even if you learn it in seminary or college, it's a little late, but, but, but again, even learning the ancient languages won't necessarily resolve this. This is, this is a tremendously difficult question. And yeah. Paul, when I'm, when I'm asking this question, it's as much a, a hypothetical parenting question for my God willing future family, as much as it is for, for me to understand because I had a lot of confusion with this stuff growing up. And like, I'm, I don't want my kids to go through all the confusion I've had. Yeah. Well, I, I wish I had better news for you, but it'll, it'll be tough. And, and again, I think, especially with children, just teach them the Bible stories and just teach them the Bible stories, cause here's the thing. What, whatever they do when they grow up with respect to being a Christian or not being a Christian, one of the, one of the real gifts that Jordan Peterson gave us was he, he, he reintroduced, I mean, even Richard Dawkins makes this point. He reintroduced this text, which is so completely foundational for any reading of literature over the last 500 years or any reading of literature in the West. How on earth can you understand almost any of the important thinkers over, over the last 2000 years without having some knowledge of the Bible? It should just be basic learning. Richard Dawkins of all people makes this point. So I'd say read your children Bible stories and that they eat, that they eat it up. And yeah, you'll, you'll probably not go into the rape of Dinah or lot having sex with his daughters, you'll probably glide over some of those, but don't, don't protect your children too much because children have in some ways their own protective filters that when you read them something that they're not emotionally or developmentally ready to understand, they don't take it in. They don't apprehend it. It just kind of goes over and, you know, David and Goliath, that one they'll get. And the walls come a tumbling down and all those cheesy little Sunday school songs, these things grew up because they work and because Cain and Abel, you know, as the children grow up developmentally, they'll begin to appropriate really only what is appropriate of, of it. And that there's plenty of children Bible story books, but don't, don't go down the moralistic path by the walls. The walls come tumbling down. Yep. Yeah, just like way in real quick here, Paul. I think there's an important difference for everybody, especially children, but even adults, right? There's a difference between reading a story to understand why people are doing things and what motivates them and what connects them in their actions, as opposed to the scientific sort of worldview, right? That just tells you how to do something, right? As you talked about this as a recipe. And, and I think that's accessible to anybody, right? That two sides, if you will, although they're not sides, it's a continuum, right? Between the recipe of how to do all of the things or all of the possible things versus the connectedness, the participation in what the motivations might be and how all that ends up playing out, maybe in spite your best intentions. Yep. Yep. Well said. Yep. That's exactly right. All right. Matthew from Scotland, UK, me again with the weekly guide question here. You're going to have to, you're going to have to hold back on February 12th. Have we, whatever this broad community on the theistic side of the IDW post-IDW sphere is, in our crusade against those who wield God, who wield God, participated in a great irony by wielding God ourselves to do such a thing. Yep. Yep. Yep. It's these, these, these gotchas and these traps, they just abound. You know, it's like, it's like the, the, the part of the difficulty with identity aspects, we're going to resolve racism or sexism or, or bigotry of, of certain kinds by illuminating it and focusing on it. And what you often wind up doing is reinforcing it. That's, that's, there's so much of that in human agency. If so, what can we expect God to do about that? Oh, God, God will do what's right. And some, some of those things we won't like. So, we'll have to work through that. All right. Joey deleted a question that belongs in a different Dear Abbott personal question and answer. So Joey continues to do his job of, of, of making sure that questions are questions. Um, Indy Defense asked, what is the Protestant take on the Virgin Mary in regard to original sin? Well, original sin, that whole conversation theologically is its own really difficult and esoteric piece. So I'm going to sort of sidestep that and say that Protestants do not believe that Mary was sinless. Now I understand why these Protestant Catholic Orthodox issues are so important. These Protestant Catholic Orthodox issues are, are really tricky and nuanced because it, you can understand why a doctrine develops that Mary should be sinless because how is she going to transmit, you know, I don't want to, if I start talking about Roman Catholic theology, I'll get it wrong. So there are deep reasons why different takes on Mary came up in the Protestant Reformation. And in some ways, Mary got a downgrade with the Protestants. Um, and, and as a response to that, Mary sort of got some upgrades in the 19th century in the Roman Catholic church. So these things are tricky. And Protestants take on Mary is that Mary was a, a, she was a, she was a, you know, she's defavored by God. So she's, you know, a wonderful, you know, certainly their top tier human being, but she was, she had a Protestant's belief. She had a natural birth and that she was not perfect without sin, which Protestants only reserved for Jesus himself. And yeah, but, um, I think, I think as we continue to hopefully move to resolving the protest so that the protest will end and are in negotiations and conversations with our Orthodox and Roman Catholic brothers and sisters, that, um, we can come to some kinds of, uh, meaning of the minds on Mary. And I'm recent years, I've been seeing Scott McKnight, for example, wrote a wonderful little book on Mary. It's just that again, Protestants tend to prioritize or limit, um, texts to the Canon more than the Roman Catholic and Orthodox do. So, yeah, yeah. So that I'll, I'll try and keep that short because I've afraid if I go too far, I will stray too far. All right. Drew Minnicker. Hi, Paul VanderKlay. I've been listening to you for a couple of years on Apple podcasts. We audio listeners still don't know what the famous cell phone stand looks like. Here it is. I originally posted this to YouTube comment on your, on your recent Glenn Scrivner interview, but deleted it to esoteric. I thought decided to post it here for you to talk about in the Q and A. I think your work along with Peugeot and Peterson, et cetera, has successfully critiqued materialistic fundamentalisms by shifting the focus from the world as space matter and mechanism group A to the world as meaning and substance and story verse group B. But my question and partial critique is this, and hey, it's okay to critique. Let me say that out front. Uh, Vervecky did a nice question and answer recently on the awakening from the meeting crisis discord, and they record those and post those as well. And it was, you know, Vervecky is right. Part of what we're doing here is not trying to avoid critique, but ideally, ideally in the academy, this is true there, but people's egos get in the way there just as they do everywhere. The purpose of critique is hopefully a blessing so that we improve our arguments and we improve our knowledge together. That's, that's why we do this. So critiques are welcome. But my question and partial critique is this Peterson's project, along with the rest of the IDW has been greatly motivated by the mandate to celebrate and save Western civilization. I think as a consequence, this little corner of the internet has been operating from that Western frame to address the Western meaning crisis in the Western audience. I think that's right. And, and I think there, there is, like with many things, there's a strength to that, but there's a weakness to that. I'll keep reading. Following Tom Hollins and Peterson's logic, Christianity versus atheism is essentially the West debating itself. And I think that is true. I think atheism as we're seeing it, this brand of atheism is late stage Protestantism. And I think as Jonathan Bezos says, it's sort of, it's sort of lifts off the earth in a way, but ironically it sort of excludes the middle. Now, if you look at, I forget the missionary's name, but a lot of the missiology I was reading back in the, back in the eighties and nineties, when I was doing foreign missionary work, talked a lot about the excluded middle. And I think part of that is what we're seeing that atheists sort of, you have the excluded middle and then atheists sort of take off the top. And now with Daniel Dennett, you know, when I heard him on unbelievable saying there's matter and information. And I thought, you just, you just gave up your tribe. You know, you should be a trader for allowing, once you let information into the door, you sort of lose materiality and our materialism. And I think it's a lot of that, that John Vervecky is trying to, to address with his, with his physicalism. And you can look at his conversations with JP Marceau for that. There's a lot of anthropological literature on post-colonial nation states around the world, grappling with the issues of modernity and tradition. That's true. And we're not paying enough attention to it and finding meaning from within. Consider secular Arabs in Cairo returning to Islam as a solution to their own meaning crisis. And I think that's right. I'm not saying it's correct. I'm saying that's what they're doing. Oh, Lisa Horn gave $49 in a super chat. Thank you. Thank you. Are we streaming on YouTube again? Oh, we're live again. Okay, good. Thank you, Rick. Well, thank you, Lisa. Rick just came in with a super chat. Super chats, not only because I turned off the computer next to me, because I thought the live stream wasn't working. Anyway, I'm derailing myself. At some point competing story versus need to enter the conversation. Yes. I'd like to see Islam at some point, enter the discussion or other religious viewpoints. Yes. The utility of postmodernism in the kind of apologetics is that you deal in that you deal and has a downside that I'm wondering if you might address. On one hand, it is useful for problematizing the materialist worldview, but you now have the Pandora's box of endless story versus to deal with. Yes. Which is part of why, I mean, it's important to recognize why modernism arose and if you go back to my earlier videos where I was sort of working through Peterson stuff, but adding a little bit more Protestant history. The product, if you look at, and Tom Holland gets at this sort of, but I don't think Tom sees it all the way through because Tom, Tom will recognize the demythologizing power, which, and Tom quite rightly says, takes this all the way back to the Hebrew prophets. And Jesus does it. And this is sort of Barfield's polarity, initial participation, loss of participation, final participation. This is also a cycle that goes back and forth. The Hebrew prophets do it. Jesus does it. It happens in the Protestant Reformation. And so when Tom Holland mentions that, well, the Roman Catholics were on team miracles, yeah, they were. And then when modernity hit a certain point, fundamentalists were on team miracles, even though they were Protestants, as were the Catholics. See the part of what the, part of what happened in the Protestant Reformation is that the Protestant reformers looked around at all of the relics and all of the mythology and all of the story verse and said, enough, we need to limit this. Because if you don't limit this, anything can mean anything. And again, now, given the fact that we are, it's a complex dynamic by which Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson's time has come and it's a function as Dr. Jim had noted, it's a function of receding modernity, but not too much recession and so symbolism and its power and mythology and its power is coming back. And that's good. But as, as Drew points out, and he's right here, okay, all story verse without connected to physics as a problem too. We just float off into the air. And, and ironically, you know, even these models that I'm using to try to articulate the dualities don't quite fit because on one hand, Peugeot is right that in some ways atheism is Protestantism floating up into the air, but it's also Protestantism emphasizing the materiality and it's doing so as compensation for the floating up into the air and the middle is getting lost. And so Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson's work is helpful, is helpful to address losing the middle because the parabolic knowing, which I think Mary and Manuel and Mark are pointing at, those are a lot of the connecting tissues in between. Okay. And the goal is real at all the levels. And that again is why I keep saying in these last three years, someone who listens to me and hears me playing around with some foundational elements of my own religious tradition or at least playing around with them. I don't believe I'm in any way denying them, but I'm going into the basement with a flashlight and that makes people nervous because again, if we go back to the original things, you've got, you've got policing going on in the territory and part of the policing is don't take your flashlight into the basement. And if you talk about the foundation, always use the safe words about the foundation. And that's what churches do. Okay. Always use only the safe words about the foundation. Please don't try to reformulate it in other words, because if you do, those things can go astray and they can. You know, missiology is the seedbed of heresy has almost always been, but missionaries must go out into the world and risk heresy in order that the gospel can cross cultures. So we must go into the basement with a flashlight and we must learn to say things in new ways. And again, I think Brett Sackle's book pointed that out in terms of the difference of, of between Aquinas and Luther. So the great gift that the West gave the world was one in the blood of the Catholic, of the reformational wars, because what the reformation forced onto the Catholic Church was a certain degree of discipline. And the Catholic church as almost always the case, most of our correction is unwelcome. And Martin Luther in the long run succeeded in reforming the Roman Catholic Church. But along the way, modernity was created and modernity has done some wonderful things. We have science, we have technology, but there are real downsides to science and technology. Are we, are we smothering the earth and CO2? Are we poisoning our lakes and rivers because of industrialization? Are we, you know, all of these, all of these human wielding and colonizing have, have downsides and unintended consequences. So no, you're, you're very much right here, Drew. And at some point we're going to have to deal with them. But see, part of what's going on though, is so again, again, I think Tom Holland is a vitally important person in this. He's sort of like Jordan Peterson and that he kind of stumbled into it. And if you want to look at Tom Holland stumbling into it, look at Tom Holland applying modernist historical tools to the story of Islam. Boy, he, boy, you know, they were pretty reactive. Now the thing is by virtue of all of the blood that was shed in the wars following the Protestant Reformation, we now have in our culture, a tradition of no longer praise the Lord, burning at the stake or hanging heretics at the end of a church meeting. I think that's an upgrade and an improvement. Okay. It's a common grace improvement. We're risking the antithetical in it, but nevertheless I'll count it as an improvement. All right. Islam doesn't seem to have that upgrade so much. Now, maybe that's not a fair statement. If not, I'm, I'm welcome to retract it, but I could understand why Muslims were really did not appreciate Tom Holland doing to them in his book, In the Shadow of the Sword, what Christians had been doing to themselves for the last 400 years. And if you want to see the Christian's discontent of that, look at the fundamentalists and listen to Jordan Peterson saying, Hey, you know, let's, uh, let's take it a little easy on the fundamentalists because that's not easy to take. And if you want to be kind to certain kinds of minorities out there, whether they be ethnic or sexual minorities, and you want to emphasize kindness, why don't you be kind to other kinds of minorities that are less, that are, that are more distasteful to you? I mean, if you really want to be kind, why don't you be kind in 360 degrees? And again, I think the West has done fairly well at that. Even, even though we're in the middle of a hot culture war right now. So, yeah, I think it's a great comment, Drew. I'm sorry you took it down. I thought it was a great comment and I read it and I actually posted it on Twitter because I thought it was a great comment. And I, you know, I think it's, I think it's really wonderful that we have Jacob here in the discord who brings a, brings a really observant Jewish perspective to our conversations. And I think it's really terrific that we have Sam here who, who asks awkward and uncomfortable questions from a, a well, a well-educated perspective. And, you know, I think having some more Islam and some more Buddhism and some, some more diversity in this estuary only makes the estuary stronger if we can learn how to have productive conversations and grow from each other. But it is terrifying because this kind of work is the seedbed of heresy. And you can, you can, you can hope to avoid heresy by only using this, the sacred and holy words and all the ancient formulations, but you can avoid heresy and lose your church because your words no longer mean what they used to mean and you're avoiding heresy and you're risking the Protestant reformation. And again, Brent Sockold's point in his book, Transubstantiation is that if Luther had had a better understanding of Aquinas, this might have gone better. Why did Luther have a bad understanding of Aquinas? Because the language has changed. I mean, who of us is ready to really wade into the difference between essence and substance? I mean, we might poke at Strahd out there who's been poking at those things. So, and then add the Eastern Orthodox energies and, you know, Strahd over a year ago was sending me emails about substance and essence and energies. And I was like, I have no idea what you're talking about. Now I have a better understanding of why I was talking about it, but it took me a while to get to this point. So no, and I, you know, Peterson's answer to this question was I can only learn so much and in some ways that's my answer too. And I have to deal with the people in front of me. Part of what's happening with globalization is that, well, people are moving around in the world and this question about Islam, Europe's going to have to handle it, Europe's going to have to come to terms with this and, and in a sense, niceness isn't going to cut it. You're going to have to, I mean, at least in the West, by virtue of the reformational wars, we have some implicit agreements that I am not going to, I am not going to put a pipe bomb in the assemblies of God church across the street because of their deficient theology. Christians have stopped doing that. Praise be to God. But that's within our tradition. I've seen plenty of YouTubes, not plenty, but I've seen enough YouTubes of, of attempts to converse with Islam on this. And again, they have their own spectrum of people. So when you look at, what was the name of that woman from the Netherlands? Um, her, she married a Brit. I don't remember. Um, but you know, she's in the IDW space too. And you know, she has a point. She moved to Europe and was like, gosh, well, that's the fruit that that's, that's, that was what was purchased by the blood of the, of the Protestants and Catholics who died in all those early reformational wars. We finally stopped killing each other. Praise be to God. Now let's see if we can talk to Muslims and Buddhists and Hindus. Remember Hindus and Buddhists still kill each other in India. Muslims and Hindus still kill each other in India and Pakistan. These are ongoing concerns and what secularism afforded was at least a, a sort of a, a truce and an attempt at a neutral space. Praise be to God. But that's ending. Modernity is receding. The two for the two for formations are showing. Yeah, it's going to get rough. People are going to die and that's terrible, but your point, Drew is dead on right. So, all right. Uh, how are we doing on time? Oh boy. You guys keep adding to it. Um, yes, PVK mook. You may certainly pray for me. Kevin asks if names have specific meanings and names are written in the book of life. Then when, when the saved are given new names, could the book of life be a history book written entirely with names? Yeah, that's a really cool idea. Boy, some smart person who likes writing might make a, write a short story about that. And I think in, in some ways, the book of life is exactly the story of history. That's a, that's a, that is such a cool image, Kevin. That is such a cool image. I'm going to rip that off. Consider yourself stolen from, but this kind of theft doesn't mean you don't have it. And I do say that's one of the weaknesses of physicality. Um, I steal this from Kevin and we both have it. I steal this from Kevin and we both have it. What a cool thing, huh? All right. Uh, God, please heal this man's foot from the back to the foot. Um, well, the Johnson titles of the book of lamentations that Psalms, the Psalms that complain the book of Job and all mentions of pain in the Bible pass away into vanity and not survive to heaven. What I'm about to say now is speculative and it should be heard that way. But I think for me, a potent theodicy is the knowledge that stories are made better by suffering. Miroslav Volf has a very interesting book called exclusion and embrace where he really wrestles with this question of evil and memory and heaven. And I had never even thought about those questions until I'd read that book. I mean, I've read that book before. And I had never even thought about those questions until I'd read that book. I read that book years ago. She probably reread it. It was quite a powerful book. It's an important book, but, and he tries to get into exactly this question. Will, will our, um, will our, will we develop amnesia? And if, if you believe in, let's say a, a great divorce at the end of this era that let's say you're not sharing the same space in the new heavens and the new earth with, let's say your children or your parents or your spouse would, would, would their absence take away from the joys and bliss of heaven? That's a tough question. Does God just erase them? You know, this is where, this is where questions about the next age, whether they be conversations about universalism or annihilationism or all of this, this is where all of this gets tricky because we just don't have a very broad frame of reference and I don't think that we can because we are so formed by this particular dispensation. So my thinking tends to be informed by Jesus scars. Now, now because the resurrected body of Jesus Christ is, I think the interpretive key or the best interpretive key we have of imagining our resurrection and the life of the age to come, the scars remained. Why? I think the scars and you can see it in a lot of different ways. The scars become trophies. The scars become emblems of, and I emblems of the suffering, the suffering doesn't go away, it's perfected. It's, and that's what happens. So let's say you're a fan of the Marvel, Marvel cinematic universe. And let's say you go to that last movie where finally the big purple dude Thanos is beaten, you know, and that scene in that battle where Dr. Strange comes back and he's opening up all of these portals and all of these people who were extinguished by Thanos with the, with the, with the snap of a finger are now coming back into reality. Well, there's an image of the resurrection in some ways, isn't there? And that, that moment in the movie is made more poignant because of the end of the previous movie where these people were lost. And so in that way, joy and gratitude and all the feels are enhanced because of the loss before, and for me, that is a little, that is a little theodicy sample of the age to come, and it's informed by the scars on Jesus' hands. Because when we see him, now you're going to make me cry. When we see him and when we see those scars, we'll know that those scars were for us and that's why we're so excited to see him in the movie, and we're going to be so excited because we're going to see him in the movie, and we'll be so excited to see him in the movie. And that's a range of joy and of meaning and of connection and of love that couldn't be had if there was any other way to have him be there with us but those scars. And to me, that affords me understanding of Christianity, and that is a very hopeful thought. Oh, Rick, am I still on? My video froze. Oh, boy. I'll assume I'm still on. Does someone in the chat room want to say something so I know I'm still on? You're still on. Okay, good. No, so I think this is, I think this is a very, very, very, very, very I think this is, this is why I don't buy conceptualizations where the personal isn't translated. We're still on? Okay, thanks, Rick. Where the personal isn't translated into the age to come. This is why I don't buy ideas that will somehow be dissolved into some great sea of indistinction because I see all of them as less meaningful stories. Maybe that's personal preference. Maybe I'm wrong. That could all be. Maybe it's just a fantasy. That could all be. But what I see in the Christian story, what I see in the wounds of Jesus Christ and that the scars remain, I don't know. The scars remain as I see a God who takes history in this world seriously and individuality and my story, my personal story, and not just the good things that I do, but the pains and the even, even, you know, even the sin I do. And I started out, started talking about pastors sins, even the sin I do. When I see the scars in his hand, I will know. I will know that I will know my sin, but I will also know his love. And I know no other story that shows that to me better than this one. So, I don't know. I need a moment. Anybody, anybody have any response in the voice chat? Yeah, I'd like to add a little something really quick. That's all right. Yeah. So in regards to us personally, like our, our, our specific, um, pains or scars, um, whether or not they'll survive into heaven. The kind of cliche hokey thing that came to my mind, but I think that illustrates it well is like the idea of a metamorphosis specifically. Like with a caterpillar to a butterfly. The, the old in a sense does, does die, but it also remains within the new in some form. So it's specifically the new couldn't be there without the old. So in a sense, the scars survive through that. And then even in the idea of a seed needs to, in the process of blooming into a tree, a seed ultimately is destroyed in some sense, but without that seed, that tree couldn't be there. Yeah. Yes. Thank you. Thank you. Oh, very true. Good. Golden, uh, Christian Golden in fact has own little YouTube channel. He's got some songs he sings on it and he has some, so, uh, he should, he should post the link somewhere in the, uh, in the discord. I'm kind of running out of time. I want to get a, get to Gandalf new house because Paul yesterday, you had the opportunity to hear some of our moments of our second official bridges of meaning talk in German. Actually, I spoke with Igor this week and he gave me permission to share the video. And so that'll probably be coming out next week. Another German in our community. What do you think about it? I think it's awesome. I think it's again, what do I want to see in this discord server? I want to see cameras on and maybe even sometimes like in the strange and it's a strange room, the open studio room with cameras on and Mike's muted where we're sort of seeing each other. It's like, wow, what is this? But it is a chance to sort of see someone who you've only seen their name in here. You haven't, you don't know hardly anything about them and it might spur you to send them a message and ask them a little bit about themselves or ask them what they're doing or something like that. And so I, I want to see. I I'm happy to see a German, you know, a German voice chat channel. And a Dutch one. And so I, what happened was I came, I had, I had a couple of conversations in the morning and I wasn't in the open studio. And so, you know, after intensive conversations, I want to, you know, take a little break. And so I'll just kind of go over to the discord server and look at the latest memes and, you know, see what people are chatting about and know that people are in voice chat and video chat. I want to see what's going on. And I see some of the faces and names I recognize. So I, I want to see my friends. So I open it up and say, Oh, a whole group of people are in this one channel. And I go in there and it's like, I don't understand what you're saying. And I listened a little bit more. They're speaking German and well, I don't understand German. So I wasn't going to hang out, but, and I don't want you to stop speaking German. So, so then I left that room and I said, Oh, there's another room with people in it. And it's like, they're, they're all women in this room. And of course women are, I don't know what percentage, maybe 5% on the discord server. And so I drop into that channel and it's a whole group of women and they're doing knitting and crochet and they're sharing their work with each other. And, and that was cool. And they said, Oh no, you're welcome to stay. And so I chatted a little bit, but I didn't want to, I think they should have their little room to work on their handwork. And that was, gosh, that was, that was cool too. So then I went back to where I belong over in the open studio and I talked to Andre and had a chance to say a prayer for his cat. So happy birthday to his cat. And this is why do I want this? Because the internet is this place of. It's a cool place. The internet is such a cool place. And sometimes I see things that are so funny and so delightful and so clever on the internet. I think, ah, this is exactly what the internet is for. And then sometimes I see people ripping each other up and, and, and destroying, destroying the bonds that hold us together. And it's like, Oh, this is, this is horrible. And then I come to the server and I see, I see you all making friends with each other and sharing your, your needle point or your crochet or your knitting. And I see you sharing, sharing, speaking in German together, or, you know, we'll need a Dutch enclave. I also did a talk with a Frisian this week and that was fun. So, so yeah, um, keep, keep doing what you're doing and keep being creative with this tool and keep trying new things. But some of the values again are, you know, where, where possible, where appropriate. Again, we can't do it here because there's a limit on discord. How many people you can have a room with the cameras on, but where appropriate share, share your life with each other. You know, show your dog or your cat on the camera. Um, you know, show your show, you know, take your camera to work day. Um, you know, I loved it when Sherry showed us, you know, you know, outside it was snowing, um, and a little bit of the farm and, and Topher shows up, up the, shows us the speaker fixing and the horizontal drilling from Zach. And, you know, my, my office is boring and a bunch of us work on computers, but, you know, some, some illustrators are there. Ivan's in there often. And, you know, I've gotten to know Andre a little bit cause he hangs out in the open studio and, and, you know, sometimes I've gotten to know Mark a little bit better cause he hangs out in the open studio and it's kind of a place to catch each other and have a little, you know, five or 10 minute conversation instead of an hour or two hours. But, you know, I work in a, I work in a building alone most of the time. And, um, if I worked in a building that had offices with a hallway, um, and windows and offices, you know, you walk by and you get to know, oh, okay, there's Topher and there's Joey and there's Andre and there's Mark and there's Ivan and there's Jess, so that's why it's cool. That's why it's cool. So yeah, German, Dutch, you know, any, any other language group that we have present, you know, we have rooms here that are devoted to the Orthodox and you should just have a channel listening to Ginger Bill read stories to us because he's got this, this lovely, beautiful voice and on and on and on and on and on. So it's probably a good place to land the plane. Um, any final comments from the voice chat that someone's just dying to get it in? Yeah, I need to slip this in. So this is going right back to your very first question and you were discussing about sort of the burden of holding confessions. And I think that helped me see something, but I want to check if what I'm seeing is signal or noise. Okay. Do you think this relates to why it is a bad thing for us to have knowledge of good and evil? Because in modernity, it's really hard to see the fall is actually a bad thing. When we associate it with knowing good and evil. And yet I think you've provided an example of where knowing these things is actually, it's a burden to carry, not a benefit. Yeah, I think that's true. And, and so among pastors, sometimes pastors can be gossips, you know, because they, oh, and that's just a, you know, and Jonathan Haidt writes about this well in his book, the happiness hypothesis. There's a reason we gossip, we gossip because we're keeping the community together and we're, we're figuring out who can't be trusted and who can't be trusted with what and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So gossip actually plays an important function in human community, but sometimes you'll be with a group of pastors. And also sometimes when we have information and other people don't have it, it's, it's simply sort of a, a exciting thing to be the first one out there to share information, you gain status with that. So pastors will start telling sad stories about other pastors. And after you've heard enough of this, you're exactly right. Sometimes it's like, I don't, I don't, I don't want to hear about Ravi Zachariah and the massage parlors he owned. I should hear about it because it's true, but I, I'm, that makes me sad. And to me, I don't want to hear about Bill Hybels and his relationship with some of the singers and the secretary there and back rubs that went too far. And then part of why I don't want to hear about these things is because I, I know I'm a sinner too. I've got my weak spots. I've got, I've got things that I've done in the past that I'm not proud of. And you know, Ravi Zachariah, okay. But it doesn't mean, it doesn't mean he didn't, he didn't speak the truth in other ways and he wasn't used by God and he didn't have powerful gifts. You know, we're, we're, we're saying Ravi, you're a sinner. Yeah. Well, we all are. And this is, you know, part of Calvinism. We all are. And, you know, even, even someone like, um, the politics of Jesus, I forget what his name was right off the top of my head, but, you know, Julian actually had a really interesting conversation about some of this with, with Esther and yeah, after you see sin, you know, you don't, someone comes into your office. Oh good. Tell me about your childhood abuse. I, I will listen to it because I love you, but I don't hear it with joy or relish because I've seen, I've seen what sin does in this world. And I look forward to the day that it's resolved. So yeah, no, that's. And, and I think all of those levels are in, you know, the, the, the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. And, and in a sense, when the serpent says after you eat it, you'll be like God. Okay. So now maybe we have a window into the burdens that God bears, because if you think about a conscious personal God who sees the gorgeous sun, sunrises of billions of planets every morning, simultaneously. He also sees all of the barbarity and evil and horror we do to each other and think of each other in this sad world. What a burden. Can you blame him for being angry? So, yeah, it's a good point. Good point. Well, that's a kind of a sad note to wrap it up on, but, um, I think it's, I think it's good to wrap up. So again, thank you all for joining us in the, um, in the convo chat and the bridges of meaning discord. At some point, I don't know what the limits are, but if we get to a limit, we'll have to find a new system, but we've got Joey and Rick and other smart people around to figure that out. So I'm not going to worry about that. But I, I, again, I like, I really appreciate you all coming in and listening. And, um, I will, I'm sure the stream got interrupted because we had some death technical difficulties. So I will post a, a full recording of it and, um, I will make an audio version for the, for the voice only podcast version. And next week, I suspect I'll be here just because I've been on jury duty enough times that usually it's kind of one day in and out and they don't usually put me on a panel, but if I'm not here, it's because I'm on jury duty and I'll try and let you all know before that. I would know the day before. Um, if I, uh, but two weeks from now, hopefully we can plan on that. That's Christian's hold back question and answer. And so if you're a Christian, um, hold your questions for another week. And, um, if you're not a Christian, it's your time to have a little bit of relief from the herd and, um, yeah, so that's what we'll do. So thank you all for being here. And, um, I'm going to have Rick and transmission and that's why, let's see if we get my studio monitor up. It knows exactly what I'm saying. When I say that, get my studio monitor up so that I can see him. Now that seemed to have crashed. Um, and thank you for joining us and until next week or two weeks from now.