https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wlu8A3XN52I

 All right. I think I should put the light on in the office. I have a hard time seeing you. It's all dark in there. Welcome to the first ever taking questions from the YouTube live chat. We have no idea how this is going to go. Rick and I are just setting this up this morning. And in honor of Jonathan Peugeot, I would have to say that Rick's setup is absolutely Byzantine in terms of it's very circuitous. We're actually on the discord as well as on the live chat. Rick was looking for a volunteer who could maybe cut and paste questions from the live chat because very quickly as people start commenting in the live chat on my previous question, questions might get lost. YouTube sort of manages this through super chats, but I'm not going to do anything like say I'm only going to answer super chats. So even though Chad already did a super chat, thank you, Chad. I posted my conversation with Renee, which I thought was wonderful. And tomorrow, hopefully you should have at the usual 6 a.m. time, the rough draft for Sunday if I can get that done this afternoon. And then at 10 a.m. tomorrow, I'm also going to post my conversation with Chad the alcoholic. So that will come on the channel tomorrow at 10 a.m. Pacific. I will be busy this evening and tomorrow at an event here in Sacramento where Rod Dreher is coming in, some Orthodox group, I assume, brought him in. So I signed up for it right away. So I'll be listening to Rod Dreher and the various ways that I should probably freak out about what's coming down the road. That's my joke. Rod Dreher is an alarmist and Free Rillian had some comments about that on Twitter. So, OK, let's start the questions. And some of them have come in. I was worried that some of them might not be in right away. This is new to me. So I have to figure out how to manage my screens in my office. Thank you, Drew, for the for the super chat. All right. Does Christianity entail an exclusive truth proposition? If so, what is it? Well, I would have to say that the one at the heart of Christianity is the divinity of Christ. Now, obviously, that'll get a little bit of question from our dear friend, Sam. But that seems to be the key. Exclusive contribution that Christianity brings to the world, that the creator of the world came and became human, one of us in Jesus Christ and that his story then becomes our story. So I think that's the exclusive truth proposition, and it's an enormous one. And I don't know how I think you still have a religion without the divinity of Christ. But I don't know that you actually have Christianity. So and from that. A lot of what Jesus taught, you can find in the Hebrew prophets. But that. The universe. That Jesus Christ. The man becomes the interpretive key for all of creation, I think, is the claim, and it's an absolutely audacious claim. And I think actually, if you look at something like Jonathan Peugeot's work, you can see how. You know, when I was listening to Peugeot did an interview with a guy from Australia that appeared on his channel a couple of days ago, and I was listening to that one and I was that this question reminds me of that, that when you start integrating perspective, personhood, again, it all comes back to Christ as creator God. I think that's I think that's it. I think that's it. I'm going to try and be I'm anticipating a lot of questions in this way, so I'm going to try to be a little bit more concise. Pray for me. What do you think about Jonathan Edwards sermon, Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God? I read it in high school. I read it in college a number of years ago when I was doing a lot of listening to Tim Keller during sort of the heyday of the Young Restless and Reformed movement. I reread it. Then I started rereading George Marsden's biography of Jonathan Edwards, which is a I read that. Oh, gosh, I read that 10, 15 years ago. It's a monumental book, but it's a really amazing book. Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God. At the at the heart of that book, at the heart of that sermon is the assertion that is so contrary to the instinctive belief of Americans today that God just loves us so much and can't wait to have a relationship with us. God is sort of like this fawning wallflower just waiting for our attention in this weird attention economy. Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God puts that on its head and instead sees in some ways the battle that John Calvin saw in his Genesis commentary of Jacob at the Jabok River, where on one hand, God fights with God fights with Jacob with his left hand, but upholds him with his right hand. You get this interesting divine drama in Calvinism, where God is in some ways on both sides of the war. And that's amazingly dramatized in Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God, because part of what God wants to do is plunge us into the fire. But on the other hand, he loves us and can't let us go. You see that pathos, for example, displayed in the book of Hosea. And now I completely understand why in our given culture people read Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God and are just horrified that anyone would think like this, because even people who are sort of weak on imagining that there is a God, the God that they imagine is this absolutely patient sycophant for our attention. And I think part of what Jonathan Edwards notes in that sermon is that is not God. And so that's just a few thoughts. I haven't read it recently. I could have more thoughts about it if I had read it recently, I'm sure. All right, Chad the alcoholic. If you had to describe what this little corner of the internet is up to, what would it be? Also thank you, keep up the good work, keep krillin' it. I speak for the krill. I can't believe that these guys meme that. I can believe that these guys meme it, because sometimes I say things and the moment after they slip through my mouth, it's like, oh, this new squad on the block, I'm going to have a conversation with them next Monday. These guys have become my clip channel and they're clipping the most embarrassing moments of PVK. So back to the question, if you had to describe what this little other corner of the internet is up to. Well, so Sevilla coined that from the conversations that Jonathan Bejo, John Vervecky, myself, I think people in The Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord, the whole symbolic world corner, the Bridges of Meaning corner. I think there's an excitement about the potential of working across this atheist-theist divide that John and I spoke about in the conversation I posted yesterday. That we look across the religious battlefields and say, we would like to have the kinds of conversations that all of us will find engaging, interesting, and productive. And we suspect that if we can do this, we will learn a lot, we will enjoy each other, and we will make the world better. And I'm now, Peugeot has-how to measure these kinds of things is always difficult. Of course, in some ways where we're drafting off of Jordan Peterson, but increasingly less so as, you know, we'll have to see what becomes of the second wave with Peterson. But Peugeot's, you know, Rebel Wisdom is sort of in this corner too, I would say. And, you know, they're up over 200,000 subs on YouTube. Peugeot is up over 100,000. I'm one of the smaller members of it, as is Sevilla and Rando's. But I think what we've seen is that the tools we have available to us now are fit to serve the kinds of conversations that we want. And we believe that these conversations will be fruitful and life-giving and productive in terms of building community. Building something sustaining and hopeful. And it's not simply church work. Of course, Jonathan Peugeot, I think, has been deeply instrumental in in supporting the Orthodox Church. I hope that I have been helpful in people finding and pursuing the Church generally. Obviously, for John Vervecky and Rebel Wisdom, that's not their goal. Rebel Wisdom's goal is men's work as such. John Vervecky has his religion that's not a religion. If you didn't catch John Vervecky's comments at the beginning of the question and answer of the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis question with John, he does that every month or so on the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord server. Maybe someone can drop that link in the notes here or somewhere here for people to find because it is on YouTube, too. It was amazing to me when John likened what he hopes for as something analogous to the way the Church inherited the Roman Empire. That comment just blew my mind. But I take it as well meant in the sense that in many ways Christianity saved the Empire from itself. Not politically as such because the Empire continued to be a mess, but it saved civilization from the Empire and it saved the world from the Empire. Now, it didn't deliver to us a perfect world, that's obvious, but Christianity did that. Now, John knows full well that I am a Christian and I believe that the revivification of the Church, the renovation of the Church, will once again be what helps save this world from itself. John's more skeptical about that than I am in terms of the Church's institution. Obviously, if you're Roman Catholic, you have a deep belief in an institution. So that's what I think this little corner of the internet is up to. We are definitely outside of the Church as such, even though I am an office bearer of a Protestant denomination. But we believe that having, as Joey once said, Jordan Peterson style conversations, conversations that are bold, that dare to challenge orthodoxies of various sorts, that's what this little corner of the internet is up to. But it's done in good faith. It's done from a secure posture where John and I can differ over significant things, but we can find a place in the middle, his idea of dialogos. I think John has gifted all of us with a whole bunch of interesting language and categories that we've been using. And for me, John has been able to educate me in terms of scientific language with respect to cognitive science. So this is an exciting place to be right now. And as I said to John at the end of our conversation, I'm just amazed that we have the good fortune, that sounds like a terrible thing for a Calvinist to say, perhaps I should better say the gift of God that we can have these conversations now and bless each other and do so publicly so that others can be blessed by it too. I really think that's what this little corner of the internet is about. All right. Yeah, I'm going to try and get through as many questions as I can today. What are Paul's musical influences? First of all, I would have to say the Psalter hymnal of the Christian Reformed Church, probably circa 1975, even the one before that, definitely the 1975, 76 edition. And church music, both the whatever was left of the Geneva Psalms that was played in my church growing up. And then the hymns that were in sort of that that were in sort of that Psalter hymnal as the Christian Reformed Church continued to deal with both its tradition of psalm singing plus the awareness that to operate in this English language world, we were going to have to borrow some hymnody from the great revolutions of hymnody that went through the English language church. And then African American spirituals, and I lift every voice and sing was a song that I learned in my youth. Daniel, I can't really talk this morning. I'm live. I doubt he heard me through the door. I think the next influence was probably the songs out of the Suzuki method of learning the violin. That's where I learned to play music and not just participate in it in church. Probably after that AM radio, you know, I've got a memories of Tony Orlando and Dawn and Paul Simon, me and Julio down by the schoolyard. And then in my college, in my high school years, a lot of Kansas loved Kansas. And then of course, as the 80s began in college, you've got a lot of 80s music that came in. Eventually, Michael Card became a big influence in me for a while. In terms of more contemporary music, Jennifer Knapp, love her music. Some of that extra angsty Christian wondering stuff I've listened a lot to. And then probably the last genre was the new appropriation of hymns. You can find that in Indelible Grace, The Young Restless and Reformed. So those are some of my musical influences. When I worship in church, I'm a Christian. I intentionally try to keep my hands off the music that is played in church, partly because in a small church like this, I already have way too much influence and control for my liking. That's just sort of the part of being a pastor of a small church. So I try to keep my hands out of as much as possible and as the church sort of diminishes as much as possible. And so that's the church sort of diminishes as it's in its decaying, aging, dying cycle that it's in now, my local church. Pete, pretty much, I never monkey with the music. Pete and the elders give their input to Pete to some degree and the people of the church. But often when I sing on Sunday morning, I ponder the ways in which singing is so instrumental and bonding for us as a group. And I was thinking about that when I was listening to Jonathan Haidt and Jordan Peterson talk. So yeah, music influence is not by any means a throwaway question. We are all deeply influenced by music. That is this powerful, powerful force. So it's a great question. How can a God of peace allow conflict? Can this question be dealt with in the same way we deal with God permitting sin because he loves us, gives us free will? I don't know that God permits sin because he loves us. I think God permits sin because of his own agenda that he will receive glory come what may. And when you ask about a God of peace, I would wonder about both the implicit definitions of peace and conflict that we hold. Peace comes from shalom, which is a much broader category than simply absence of conflict or absence of violence. It's much more well-being and an overall picture of communal well-being. I've seen marriages in which there is not enough conflict, and that is definitely not shalomic. In other words, a peace which is merely the absence of conflict is probably tyranny or avoidance or something of that nature. The theodicy questions of why would God permit suffering? Well, I was mulling over in my head this morning the possibilities of addressing this slavery question that keeps coming up in the theist, atheist debates. Part of what you have to look at in addressing some of these questions is what are we bringing to the question? And listening, thinking about Bishop Barron's conversation with Cosmic Skeptic, suffering is not always evil. Suffering is mostly evil when it's unproductive because anyone who pursues meaningful effort in this world knows that suffering is integral to meaning. Things that come easily are less meaningful than things that come with suffering. And so this turn towards meaning that Jordan Peterson really kicked off, Job has been less present I think partly because his child has been present in his life. And I just love the thought of Job as a father and Job is such a brilliant guy. And he's so thoughtful and he's so sincere and he's so honest that I just know that all of the learning that he's going to do by fathering will bless me and bless all of those who call him friends. So Job has been not terribly visible in this channel or probably on the Discord server, not like he used to be. But he sent me a really wonderful video by Jonathan Sacks, Lord Rabbi Jonathan Sacks about words and Job's been on a sax kick lately. And where was I going with that with this? Theodicy is such a strange thing because whenever we sort of decide to take up that challenge, I think there's something really hazardous to it. I'm not saying the challenge itself is sinful, but as many times Bishop Barron tried to remind young Alex, that's his name, Alex O'Connor, we can't know. We can only know what we can know and we're pretty small. And so to to sort of imagine we can judge existence, that's sort of the hubris and perhaps the defining evil of modernity, that we can sort of self transcend and judge eternity even to the point of judging the author of existence. Okay, toddlers do that. We should probably grow up a bit from our toddlerhood. When we say God is good, that is not the same as saying God is nice. Because after a good workout, after a good meal in which there is crunching and chewing and digestion, we are mashing things, we are some subjecting them to acid. Yeah, it's C.S. Lewis sort of sums it up and he's not a tame lion. So good question. Hi Paul, can you explain the relationship between the relation, explain the relationship reformed theology has to the doctrine of divine simplicity? Glad you asked the question that way because the answer is no, I can't. Sorry to disappoint you in your question, but I'm glad I haven't given that very much thought. I'm sure some reformed theologians have touched on it, but I haven't given a lot of thought, so I'm just going to basically duck it. All right, Tyler Helfers, fellow CRC pastor and campus minister here. I'm curious your thoughts on what, if any, role confessionalism and aestheticism have played in the cultural engagement and randos conversations? I was talking to a friend yesterday and he brought up this book about beauty that I've heard others refer to. It could very well be that in the decline of modernity, beauty will be our way out of some of the difficulties we have with truth and goodness. Confessionalism obviously has always been with us. It reached sort of a fever peak in Protestant ecclesiology at the beginning of modernity, and those relationships aren't incidental. Confessionalism won't go away because the propositional aspect of knowing won't and can't go away. I think it's part of who we are as human beings, in terms of the upper and lower register. Part of what was interesting about that Jonathan Sacks video was that I think he nicely, he didn't really show it because that wasn't the point of his message, but part of my takeaway was there's something deep about written language and the way that is. There's something deep about written language, deep connection between that and the upper register, same with logos. We will always have a need in one way or another to express our knowledge in confessional formats. It's helpful to remember that part of why Protestant confessional development happened the way it was, it did, was that maybe if we can systematize and articulate something essential about how we're seeing the world to each other, we can then do some of this dia logos rather than just have unproductive, tremendously costly conflict. Pundits on the news will sometimes say Islam needs a Protestant reformation. That's a big statement and we should probably let the Muslims figure out what they need. But we would like to not have planes flying into buildings and suicide bombers blowing up people in Afghanistan or Israel or Egypt or how many other places around the world. I think what they're trying to say, I think they're saying more than they know a lot of these pundits on the news because what they actually express is that part of what flows out of the Protestant reformation in Europe is increasingly an ability to talk through our differences and negotiate ways of coexistence that will slow down our impulses and help us over time to learn to love and live with each other. Now, aesthetics is. If a deeply underappreciated aspect. Of reality for Protestants. Sally, in this little corner of the Internet, has who is an artist. Has on a couple of occasions said to me. Yeah, I don't think Protestants will ever really get art. She has a real point. Orthodox obviously have a place for artists in their community. The Roman Catholic obviously have places for artists in their community. But part of what probably holds Protestant artists back is this tyrannical hold that in some ways confessionalism has on the tradition. And there are good reasons for that. And in some ways, partly because of the shape of Protestant confessionalism and its history of iconoclasm, certain aspects of art have been. Inordinately. Challenged such as the visual arts. Protestant confessionalism has produced some really lovely hymnody. And continues to produce some lovely hymnody. So music doesn't seem as out of step with Protestantism as visual arts. So I think as modernity continues to recede, I think we will see. At some point, the light at the end of the tunnel for the Protestant protest, I think we will see more productive conversations. We're already seeing them between Protestants and Catholic and Orthodox. And hopefully part of what will come out of that will be better Protestant aesthetics. Now, in terms of Rando's conversations. You know, Sally, I've had. I mean, the second conversation I had with Sally. That was a profound conversation. And. You know, Sally was at a place that she was. One of the beautiful things about some of these Rando's conversations is sometimes you catch people at the point of where they're willing to speak their truth in a blunt and frank way, but yet not necessarily a hostile way. They can share their pain and their frustration in a way that. Refreshes us all. And I think my second Rando's conversation with Sally was like that. So, yeah, I don't know if that's a full enough answer to your question. It's a great question. And. I think that's part of the journey that we're on as modernity continues to recede and we don't exactly know what comes next. But part of the fruit of this and this is one of the most exciting things about. What I've been able to participate in in this channel has been. You know, wonderful communion with Catholic and Orthodox Christians and even. You know, tremendous relationships with with non Christians or non theists like with, you know, that conversation I had with John. Verveky was just a beautiful thing to participate in and. I have a tremendous amount of hope that. Some of what this little corner of the Internet will produce. Will feed. Will feed the world and it will feed it with new ideas and words, you know, YouTube and. And many of us are sort of like that, but. Hopefully artists as well. So great question. Paul, are you happy? I've always been a happy guy and truth be told, I'm getting a little bit of a headache. Be told I'm getting happier. You know, it's easy and I do it sometimes to to sort of dismiss happiness as a shallow thing and and the word itself is a little shallow. Joyful is a better word. And I. I had no idea when I made sat down and made that first 20 minute video about Jordan Peterson. You know, three things, three, three reasons why this pastor thinks Jordan Peterson is important, something like that and sort of open the YouTube. Floodgates to me and began to learn that. Talking into a personal computer, recording it and sharing it with the world would actually be productive for others. I had no idea how happy this would make me happy in many ways. Got to take a drink. Throat gets dry with this much talking. I've always been a happy person. Jonathan height in his happiness hypothesis talks about the cortical lottery and. You can look at this with Jordan Peterson's big five personality profile to you know, some of us are just born happier than others and part of that certainly has to do with. The nature of your parents, the time that you're born into I was I had wonderful parents. I was I had wonderful parents. I, you know, I was not born into. Luxury on an American standard, but on a world standard, a historical standard. Absolutely. I was born at a time and place which, which is tremendously fortuitous. I was, I was blessed. I've been blessed by a wonderful. Segment of Christianity, Dutch Calvinism, and I was blessed by the, the sacrificial cruciform missional spirit. My parents had to pour their lives out. For African Americans who were fleeing Jim Crow and trying to make a life in Patterson, New Jersey. I was, I was blessed by Christian school, Christian education and the hundred some odd people I went to school with. I was blessed by Calvin College and you know, some tremendous professors and students and friends that I've had with me all my life. I was blessed by a beautiful woman who agreed to to marry me and who in many ways is iron that has. Sharpened my iron for now 30 some years. I've been blessed by five tremendous children who are beautiful and brilliant and. Moral and serious, wonderful people who are just in the beginnings of their adulthood. I've been blessed by a, a little church that. A little church that you know, has been patient and tolerant with me to ride all of these hobby horses that I go on and all of the ups and downs of my personal life and to and to stick with me through them all. And you know, it's for that reason that, you know, I want to stick with them and you know, maybe I'll go down with the ship with them. Who knows what God has in store for living stones. And over the last three years, I've been blessed by Joey and Rick and James and Tyler and many others in the local meetup. You know, with whom, you know, I've become friends and I've been blessed with with Job and Luke and Sally and Andrea and. You know, lists are, are troublesome because he didn't say my name. So forgive me. But with all of you in the discord server and in YouTube land, and. I've just, it's just been blessing upon blessing. And I've been blessed by the gospel and the resurrection because. Part of what happens in the age of decay is that when you realize. Decay and death and betrayal and just crappy human depravity are going to rob you of. Of these astounding blessings that you've been given. If you don't have. If you don't have a, if you've not been gifted with a. An enduring belief, faith in the resurrection, then then in some ways, all of the gifts that you have been given are cruel because they will be taken from you. And, and okay, it's better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all. Okay. But with the resurrection. With the, with the guarantee of the body of Christ, I have a firm and certain hope. I have, I have a faith that all of these blessings are but the beginning. They're but the beginning. Of, of the blessedness and the meaning and the joy that awaits me. And, you know, I'm going to let God sort out my friends in terms of the afterlife. I'm a Calvinist that's at heart what Calvinism says. God does the sorting. No one else can or should. And giving us what we, what we want and need. But I have a belief that. All of what has started here. Is but a seed. And a seed can be a beautiful, happy thing, but the seed must fall into the ground and die. In order to produce fruit abundantly and read CS Lewis's, the grand miracle. On the seed imagery, Christ only uses it once, but Lewis is like that. Every pagan would completely understand the story because of the seed. Because I believe that no matter how grim this world gets. Even God has a way of taking even our depravity and turning it into greater glory. And so I know that people are worried about, I'm going to go here. Rod Rear, the Sabbath. I'm going to go to the Sabbath. I'm going to go to the Sabbath. I'm going to go to the Sabbath. I'm going to go to the Sabbath. I'm going to go here. I'm going to go here. Rod Rear this afternoon for Pete's sake. Um, I know that people are anxious about the future and of course we should be, who knows how we're messing up the world. You know, it's almost always, you know, we're, we're, we're watching. A whole series of things that could really bring us much grief and pain and suffering, and if you look back over history, it's often things that people we're completely blind to that come through and do tons of damage. Yeah, that's the way this world is. But be of good cheer little flock, I have overcome the world. And so I am a deeply happy person. And I am happy, and it sounds so trite I know, but I am happy because the creator of this world designed such a story that all sad things will become undone. And that's why I am a servant of this story. Because it brings me happiness and it has the power to bring happiness to others in a way that the industrial revolution or the information revolution or any of these revolutions cannot do. Because in some ways, all of these revolutions are mixed expression of the potential that the creator God has built into this world and into us. And what we find in Christ's resurrection and ascension is the promise that that potential will be achieved. So yes, I am very happy. All right, oh, super chat. Thank you, Drew. Long time creeper here. Thanks for doing this. I know Rick said, oh, we should do it just on the live chat on YouTube because I mean, discord is a quirky weird thing, which is really good for building communities because it limits. But there are others out in discord land who I'm sure have questions or out in YouTube land who I'm sure have questions. And if I just keep doing it on discord, you'll never get a chance. And that's, that hardly seems fair. So we'll probably do this again at some point. This is, this is enjoyable. Hopefully I won't, it doesn't look like I'm in danger of exhausting the questions. I'll try to keep it moving. What would Christ think of modern ways of separating Christian life from the busy life? Dallas Willard once said to John Ortberg, ruthlessly eliminate hurry from your life. John Calvin said in riffing on the Sermon on the Mount, I think it was in his commentary on Daniel, to the degree that we heard, to the degree that we worry, we doubt God. And I think that can be extrapolated to, to the degree that we hurry, we doubt God. Now that's really difficult because part of our hurry is because if we didn't have writing, if we didn't have the internet, if we didn't, if we didn't have all of this stuff, we would probably be less hurried because we would be waiting for the crops to grow or waiting for the buffalo to migrate in or waiting, waiting, waiting. And in the process of waiting, everything would have its time. But there's a way in which all of this technology is opening us up to more and more people and therefore more and more image-bearers that shouldn't be ignored. So with this question, it reminds me of John 11 where Jesus receives word that Lazarus is sick. And the assumption is that Jesus should hurry to Lazarus's side to heal him and keep him from death. And the text is very clear that Jesus tarries, intentionally so, to let Lazarus die. And of course, when Jesus gets there, Martha is upset with Jesus because, you know, if you hadn't taken so long, he wouldn't have died. I think John 11 is, I don't think we pay enough attention to John 11 when we think about our theodicies. Now, again, this horrifies us because all the way back to, we think God should be, we think God should be like so many of his servants, quivering masses of availability. God is not that. Anybody who attempts to relate to the living God knows, there's no pushing him. There's no hurrying him up. He's going to do what he wants. Sometimes he will take his own sweet time and let his friends die. There's an ancient wisdom there and a deep trust that I think we should appreciate. So great question. Have you had any interaction with Michael Heiser's Supernatural Worldview? Some, many people have pointed me to it and I've read some of him and I've looked at some of his videos. I basically see it as, for me, a lot of what he says there is pretty mapped territory and I can very much understand how he comes up in these conversations because it's very parallel where, I think it was Peugeot said in, again, that recent interview, he said, and quite rightly so, he said, many modern translations have been trying to smooth out what's in the text basically because we don't understand it and we don't want to see it. And that's why the Protestant reformers and in the post-Renaissance Protestant Reformation, the emphasis was back to the sources. Learn Hebrew as best you can, learn Greek as best you can, and you might be able to escape the tyranny of the moment. So I think Michael Heiser is doing that and I've liked a lot of what I've seen. I just haven't paid that much attention to it because it seems parallel and I am always looking at people who are giving me something new, something challenging, and there's just so much in common with what he's doing, with what we're working on. So yeah. Is Pope anti-Christ? You mean the office in general? Which day of the week? The more interesting question seems to be, is the Pope Catholic according to all the dissatisfaction I hear from many Catholics? So, you know, when during the Protestant Reformation, you know, Luther especially would see the Pope in that light. You have to understand something of what goes into that term. Now, most Protestants today would look at the Pope as the leader of a sister denomination that's very much seeing the Catholic Church through Protestant eyes. So there are a lot more competitors to a lot more aspirants to anti-Christ than the Pope in my opinion. So no, I don't think so. Do you hear Heather and, did you hear Heather and Brett talk about C.S. Lewis in their latest podcast episode? I heard the first half of it then I had to rush off and do something. I was amazing, it was quite impressive. I have thought of Lewis's living in an atomic age many times listening to Brett who is perhaps one of the more apocalyptic. Peterson is much more apocalyptic because he's into the symbolism. Brett is more alarmist. The evolution of Brett Weinstein is really rather remarkable thing. And in some ways overshadowed by Jordan Peterson because Jordan's story is just so dramatic. But Brett's story is quite something too. And he's an interesting guy. I know a lot of people dismiss him and don't have a lot of respect for the brothers Weinstein but I find them to be interesting cats. I don't know that just reading that essay in a context like that will produce as much shock and awe as it should, but I was heartened to hear it read. Of the two, Brett and Heather, I'm often more impressed by Heather. I think she's a patient. They're both thinkers, but I'm so glad that they're doing the podcast together. And it's adorable in many ways because they clearly love each other and love being with each other and can challenge each other. I don't watch them that much mostly because I don't have that much appetite for, there was a time in my life when I needed a little bit more exposure to anti-woke than woke because I had to be challenged on some things. And now I really watch my diet of anti-woke because you don't wanna be merely reactive. Wokeism grew out of a number of important realities such as evil will take upon itself institutional and systemic expression. Well, absolutely, it always does. But the real problem with wokeness is not that there are problems. The real problem with wokeness is that their solutions to such problems are infantile and often just make the problems worse. So that's the problem with wokeness. Not that there isn't racism or sexism and people haven't been needlessly cruel to same sex attracted individuals or people who are struggling with, people who are struggling with sexual identity. The problem is that the solutions being offered are likely only going to make things worse. So, and so Brett and Heather, yeah, I think probably one of the more interesting things is how the undoing of the academy. So at the beginning of the modern period, the church was the most important institution in Western culture. And towards the end of the modern period and George Marsden chronicles a lot of this, the academy, the university becomes the most vital institution in the world. The university becomes the most vital institution in Western culture in terms of the search and quest and propagation of knowledge. And the academy is killing itself. And so when you see people like Brett and Heather and Jordan Peterson and Peter Boghossian, I mean, his letter of resignation was fascinating. When you see them fleeing the academy and now basically making their living on social media, instructing the world. I'd love to see Brett and Heather and Jordan and Peter sort of turn from the anti-woke stuff to using social media to educate much more in the realm of their disciplines. And I think Brett and Heather have sort of turned that way with the publication of their book. But when I watched Jordan talk to someone like Jonathan Haidt or John Vervecky on YouTube, part of me is sad because you could just really have a sense that Jordan loved teaching. He just watched those recordings of his classroom lectures. It's just brilliant lectures. It's just astounding. And from what I've heard, Brett and Heather likewise were the most popular professors on the campus. Not a junior college, I got that Nate, four-year college. I'd love to see them all figure out how to use YouTube in a better way to have the fullness of their gifts on display to a broader audience at the price of either having to endure crappy YouTube commercials or YouTube premium. I'd love to see them do that if they can do it. And believe me, it's not easy because in some ways, that's part of my quest with my own YouTube channel. And I know there are very good reasons why the Sunday sermon isn't really fit for YouTube. My Sunday school class is a little bit better fit for YouTube, but there's a lot of learning that needs to take place there. And okay, Brett and Heather and Jordan, you've already got significant channels, channel enough probably to much more displace and expand what the university provided. Start figuring out, that's the one thing that I think Jordan really needs to, once he has his health back, really focus on, okay, what's university 2.0 look like? And I suspect it looks a lot more like YouTube and various other things around it, Discord servers, Patreon, lots of things, than it looks like what we're doing now. So you've already been kicked out of the university, build its competitor, you're already competing with it, learn to compete better. And in some ways, the church has been working on that for a long time. Did you know there is a C.S. Lewis film? There's a few of them out there, Shadowlands, there's both a UK and an American version. Rick keeps telling me I should watch the play on Netflix. Yeah, there's a bunch of them. Lewis is an interesting guy. Early Christianity seems to have been very communal with people sharing their food and belongings. Fairly socialist, of course, we look at it. We look at an attempted application of those glory days of X2 and X4, of the vision that those chapters have inspired upon us. Nowadays, Christians tend to be associated with conservatism, what happened? Why would you assert that small groups of people living together, sharing their property, is progressive? Hasn't that been what human beings have always done? A strange thing to reckon with is that the story of the Bible starts out in a garden and ends in a city. And the real question is, to what degree can that be done happily? Look at Geneva and Zurich, they've tried it. New Haven, Connecticut, Plymouth, America. So here's an irony, and this is one irony that Jordan Peterson keeps pointing out. Capitalism has, so I've told this story before, a good friend of mine, I still have that box of food in the back of my car, a good friend of mine who is a lovely person decided that what Sacramento needed was a food program to give food to the homeless. I, I think that's a good point. I live and work with the most hardcore homeless we have here. Food is never an issue for them. We are a washing food. Stuff is never an issue. We are a washing stuff. You know what's a far more precious commodity? Attention and love. We look at Acts 2 and Acts 4 in terms of belongings. Well, fair enough, and the ancient world belongings were a big deal. Just even in the difference between my life in the Dominican Republic and my life in the United States. In the Dominican Republic, belongings had value. In the United States, part of the problem of the city is that I can't drive down Amherst and not see sofas and televisions and we are a wash and stuff. You know what the homeless around me want more than anything? My listening ear. They want my love, they want my attention. They want my respect. They want community. So, you know, past and future are always in competition with each other. Even though change is happening tremendously rapidly, it's still the case that our best guide to the future is the past. So, I think if we would look at Acts 2, look at Acts 2, sharing food, people share food. I used to always say Haitians and Dominicans had more time than money. Americans have more money than time. And so, if you want to share your most valuable thing with someone, share what's most scarce. And for many of us, it's time and attention and love. Who let John Van Donk into the question asking? When is the soonest you envision a road trip, either in North America or in Europe? I don't want the next road trip to get interrupted by what the first road trip was interrupted by, which is COVID. So, obviously, I have to do some figuring and setting up about the next road trip, either in North America or in Europe. Maybe what I'll do is establish a fund here at Living Stones, where if someone wants to donate to offset expenses in getting to places in North America or flying over to Europe, people can donate to it and make it happen. So, yeah, I've got a conversation coming up with Dave from Germany that will probably come out Monday or Tuesday or sometime next week. And he's like, when are you gonna visit Germany? I'd love to visit Germany. I've never been to Europe. So, soonest you envision? Well, if COVID, if COVID contains, see, the issue with COVID is how it disrupts. If COVID disruptions can be reduced, and of course, COVID disruptions are due both to people and to the virus. So, if COVID disruptions can diminish, I'm hoping that 2022, we'll be able to do some road trips again. I can't afford a super chat. You don't need to. But I had a recent thought. Does the Holy Spirit fit into one of the God buckets? The connection between God number one and God number two? The part of the problem of using one and two is that people think God number one, Father, God number two, Son, God number three, Holy Spirit. And that's not at all what these buckets are about. The buckets are about these dualities. They're much more about the two worlds mythology or the upper and lower register, about transcendence and eminence and agent and arena. It's all about these dualities that we deal with. And so, God, so God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit and Christianity are all both God number one and God number two. They're just working on different, I'm talking about totally different things when I'm talking about that. So, that's a very common question that I get. What is the difference between Peugeuvian, Peugeotian or Peugeuvian? Peugeotian patterns and Platonic forms. Thanks for all you do. I thought again, that recent conversation that Jonathan did with the Australian, that John reproduced, republished on his podcast, was really helpful because the more John talks about his patterns, the better he gets at explaining them. The better he gets at explaining them. I think there's in some ways, gosh, this is such a complex question. I mean, it looks simple, but it really isn't because integral, so when you listen to Jonathan, talk about his patterns, he begins in many ways with Verbeckian terms of combinatorial explosiveness. The world is far too complex for us to manage. And so the only way we do so is by patterns. I mean, the chair has an infinite number of parts in a sense, not an infinite, but close to it, number of parts. How do we see it as a chair? It's a Gestalt. I actually see Peugeot more in line with some of the tensions that Aristotle tried to work through than necessarily the Platonic forms. And of course, Aristotle is downstream from Plato. So, but yet this gets complicated by, it is such a complex question. I don't tend to put them together too closely. See, part of what makes this so complex is that both of these Peugeotian patterns and Platonic forms live in my imagination in different ways. And when I put them together, it is such a complex question. I think that's a good question for Jonathan Peugeot. I much more see Peugeot's work in terms of Aristotle than Plato. And part of what is different, part of what is postmodern about Jonathan Peugeot is that Peugeot is upfront about how deeply human the patterns are. And in a sense, Platonic forms are high and lifted up. So I don't really see them that much together, but there definitely are connections. But again, I tend to see Peugeot's work more in line with Aristotle than Plato. I think it's better to say that the Platonic forms are higher and lifted up. So I don't see them that much in line with Plato. I think it's the best I can do briefly. I was raised an atheist and along the way, searched for God, the name I think we give to the feeling and experience of awe. It is difficult when language is, when language is, let's say then censored even within myself and I struggled coming to terms with it all. I think read the Bible. It sounds like such a tri-Protestant answer. But the conversation I had with John Vervecky was very focused on the fact that the Platonic forms are higher and lifted up. And I think that's the most important thing that I've ever heard. And I think that's the most important thing was very focused on God number one, the imminent God. Then when I look at what Bishop Barron kept talking about, which again, probably didn't raise people's attention when he kept talking about God speaking, you know, it's in some ways God number two. And if you were raised an atheist, the atheism is all about the denial of God number two. And in some ways the complete ignorance of God number one, which I think is part of why Jordan Peterson had the impact he did. Because suddenly Jordan Peterson had a way of revealing God number one to a world that was wanting to fight about whether or not God number two existed. One way to understand, I think, other religions and their quest for God or is that they in many ways were trying to find, they had access to God number one. The apostle Paul talks about that in Romans one. It's God can be clearly seen in nature, his general revelation. And Christianity believes that in Jesus Christ, God number two not only spoke as he did on Sinai and to Abraham and was the father of David, if you read the Psalms, and the God of Israel, and they were working out, is he a God like Marduk, a competitor to those, or is he God? And I think, again, biblical religion completely disrupts the ancient assumptions about Medi-Divine realm, et cetera, et cetera. And so I think read your Bible and go to church and worship because so much of what we do in church and worship and prayer and in Bible reading is relating to God in his agentic way, having a personal relationship with God in his agentic way. So I think search for God number two. What do you do when you know God loves you but you just can't feel it? Yeah, what do you know? What do you do when you know your parents love you and you just can't feel it, or maybe they don't know it? What do you do when you know your spouse or your kids love you and you just can't feel it? Understand what feelings are. Gosh, it really sucks to not have, not be a winner of the cortical lottery. And I think at times like that, you need friends and you need a church who can one way or another send you signals or say to you, hey, you know what? This world is better because of you and I value you and you matter to me. I think that's part of why God gives us his church because if God would come to us with skin on him, even though that meant he would become vulnerable to us and eventually our victim, part of why we have the church is that we need each other and we need to be together and we need love from each other. And when we receive love from each other, we receive love from God. And sometimes it might be a look, it might be a hug, it might be a word, it might be a gift, but when you know God loves you but you can't feel it, find one of God's children and let them love on you and feel God's love through them. The left-leaning church likes to say that the conservative Christian movement started because the state threatened the removal of tax exemption if segregation continued. How true is that? You know, the whole Bob Jones racism thing, I'm sure got the attention of a lot of people. You know, whenever we talk in such large generalities, there's always a certain fudginess to it. Any religion that bothers with books, any religion that bothers with almost any material instantiation of their past is conservative. Because that's sort of how we remember. I don't know that there's any religious movement that isn't at its heart deeply conservative. Because any religious movement that isn't at its heart deeply conservative will likely not endure and be known in the future. There are lots of religious movements that aren't known now because they didn't leave us anything. They left us no writing, they left us no building. They left us nothing. So all religions are conservative because it's a way that we're trying to instantiate in matter that which is immaterial spirit. Is it true that the only reason conservative Christian, the only reason, there's never an only reason. Even with one person, there's never an only reason. Is it a predominant reason? Is it a major reason? I mean, one of the things we have to stop doing is talking this way and I'm sure I violate it and will continue to violate it, but there's never an only reason. There's always lots of them. The only reason Christian conservative movement grew was because they were threatened by losing tax exempted over segregation. The left side of the church believes that abortion was an excuse. So if you give to Living Stones and you're an American taxpayer, you can receive a letter from Living Stones that basically, so let's talk about American taxes. You can receive a letter from Living Stones that says, you've given this much and you can write this off on your taxes. Now let's get into the weeds in terms of taxes. How can you in fact sort of write that off or credit yourself with your donations? Now, mind you, these aren't just to churches. You can donate to the McClatchy High School band. You can donate to the Kennedy basketball team. You can donate to the animal shelter. People often look at the church and say, oh, it's about taxes. Number one, we are a wash and do good in non-for-profit organizations that you can give to receive something where you can say, here's my charitable contribution and I will take this off my taxable income. So that is by no means simply a church thing or a religious thing. I'm sure that there are plenty of atheist organizations, even those that are committed to promoting atheism that you can donate to and receive a tax contribution. You can probably donate to organizations that promote abortion in a not-for-profit sort of way and receive a tax, receive a receipt that you can claim on your taxes. Okay, so let's on one hand say, in American tax code, this is not just about taxes. Number two, Donald Trump, Donald Trump. I'll say him again, Donald Trump. In Donald Trump's tax reform, as he would like to say it, or many would say it in other words, when they raised the standard deduction quite considerably blotted out what the vast majority of Americans can afford to give to charitable contributions and just made it better, so I do my taxes on TurboTax, just made it better to take the standard deduction depending on how much you give. So now are there, so that's one issue, that for many, many Americans, what they give or don't give, the standard deduction is now high enough, especially if you have children, that you're probably gonna take the standard deduction. And all of the money that you contributed to whatever not-for-profit organization will be of no consequences to the amount of tax you pay. Now, if you're an enormously wealthy person, maybe you'll have to talk to your tax accountant. If you're an enormously wealthy person, you probably have a tax accountant. So I really don't think, I really don't think this issue as any issue at all for people's motivation in terms of their conservative or progressive. I think it has a lot more, I think what determines it to a much higher degree is how these issues fit in their own imaginary and in their own personal lives. I really don't think it's about money. The blue or the gray Psalter hymnal? Well, I start, the first Psalter hymnal I remember is the blue, and then the gray came along, and now we just sing off the screen. What do you think of A.W. Tozer? Have you read any books or listened to any of his talks, any recommendations specifically on the Holy Spirit? I have not. That's easy. PBK, if you could turn back the clock and go back to seminary, knowing all you do now, what would you focus on learning there? I think I did it about right. So in seminary, there's a sort of a core curriculum, and then you have different electives, and I mostly took biblical studies electives because I found that studying the Bible was a tremendous amount of fun, and in some ways broke frame. So if you're a Protestant, the Bible is sort of the highest authority. It's a higher authority than your denomination, and in fact, in the Christian Reformed Church, that's what the Christian Reformed Church says, that everything is subject to the word of God, meaning the Bible. So might as well study the highest authority, and what you learn when you do biblical studies is that your systematics are trying to apply what you learn in the Bible over the whole picture to specific things, but the Bible's a very wild book, and it's challenging, and so I just found studying the Bible fun, and so I took most of my electives were biblical studies. Because I found studying the Bible fun because you start reading something in Greek and Hebrew, and it's like, the Bible says this? And now suddenly you have to start working with your mental map and figure out how to incorporate that in your mental map. So I loved biblical studies, I always get excited. I don't have as much time for sermon prep as I used to because I make all these crazy videos, but the point of my week I so look forward to is when I get to start preparing my sermon or my Bible study, and I think, okay, what does this book say? And lately I've been in Paul, and so the challenge has been this mysterious individual, Paul of Tarsus, who is he? And so it's been, and what is happening in the Roman Empire? And I love that, so it engages my historical desires, and here we have this book, this astounding book that, if you want to get any sense of the last 2000, if you had to pick one book that was representative of human civilization, you'd have to pick the Bible. It's an astounding thing. So yeah, is the American church the modern incarnation of Jonah and Nineveh grudgingly preaching to people they really don't care for? Sometimes, sometimes, but I think that sells the American church short. So let's talk about the main line. The main people in the main line, people in the main line keep bothering to go to church even though the Democratic Party has put a president in the White House. That's saying something. They have compassion for people who are victims of racism. Or sexism. And people who have been frustrated sexually because of often things in their lives that they haven't had any control over. God bless them. Let's talk about conservative churches. Let's talk about the kinds of churches that love John Wayne, shall we? Let's talk about people that see America and Christianity as one thing. You know what those people do? It's all there in the books. They give their time and they give their money. And you know who they care about? They care about poor people. Partly because those churches are so full of poor people. The main line churches are ironically often got a lot more rich people in them. People with lots of education and time and money. So they go to main line churches. Who goes to poor churches? Or who goes to flag waving, John Wayne loving, masculinity bearing churches? People who are struggling. People who are desperate to hear a word from the Lord. People who for them, America and John Wayne and Apple Pie and Jesus are all on the same page. God bless them. Because those people, you know, when the levy's in danger, those people will show up with their pickup trucks and their shovels and the sandbags and they'll fill them and they'll hold that levy for you. And they'll show up at your house. And if you got a rat problem in the backyard, they got a gun and they'll shoot those rats. You know, how about the black church? You know, they'll show up with a plate of food and a warm hug and they'll show up and help white folks and black folks. They will, they'll help both. The American church loves America. They love its people. Mainline, flag waving, black churches, Hispanic churches, Korean churches. I've yet to ever be in a church that doesn't love people. And they got all kinds of ideas about politics and the past and the future. And, you know, to be human is to have those ideas. But, yeah. Sometimes we're like Jonah, but often we're not. Jonah hated Nineveh for what Nineveh was gonna do to Israel and everybody could see it. I can understand that. The astounding thing is the invitation of God to love our enemies. And the American church for all its flaws sometimes manages to do that. But it isn't certainly without love. I've seen that in every church I've ever been in. Is it God or is it our covenant with God that removes our defects of character? Covenants are administrations of a relationship. They're not the relationship itself. They're not the relationship itself. You know, is it my wife or is it my commitment to my wife that removes the defects of character that my wife enjoys pointing out? It's God's Holy Spirit that works in us. And sometimes he uses covenants, sometimes he uses wives, sometimes he uses the sin that we commit. And when we look at our bloody hands or look at the bloody implications of our loose lips and we say, I am not the hope of the world. I myself am looking for someone who can save me. Pastor Paul, how to believe in the resurrection? How? I really want to, but how? I realize the silliness of the words, but the struggle is real. Amen, the struggle is real. I totally get that. How can I believe in the resurrection? Partly because I have been immersed in the Christian community from the day I was baptized by my parents as a tiny little baby. And good people have surrounded me all my life and they all believed in it. We believe in groups. And so if you want to believe in something, almost anything, immerse yourself in a group of people who really believe in it. And don't just believe in it as such in a propositional way, but believe in it in a 4P way where they're living out the resurrection. Now I believe in the resurrection because, you know, I watched my parents give their life for it. They weren't hedonists. You know, part of the reason I have, I both have no fear and no confidence that the woke will inherit the earth because they don't believe in the resurrection. They're a thin vision of utopia can't span even the group of unfortunates that they try to clump in together in some verbal way. It's never going to work. Throughout history, unless you have skin in the game, you're not going to accomplish anything. And the central story of Christianity is that our God put his skin in the game. He died for his enemies. And then he rose to say, I love you more than you love me. I love you more than you can kill me for. So I, again, it sounds pat, it sounds trite. You have to immerse yourself in a group of believers because we believe in groups. Jonathan Heights said it. You have to change the path. You have to change your herd. And yeah, you'll find skepticism about the resurrection. But that's the only way to, if you want to believe something, find the right group of people who believe it and live with them, you'll start believing it too. That's just cognitive science. Is it consciousness that is narrating the Genesis story? That's a good question. I don't know. It takes consciousness to have narration. Great question. My dad always gives God the Bible a hard time. I do my best to answer. Today he asked if God is all knowing and why did he allow Satan to be created? Love your dad. He's pushing against something. It could very well be that part of his pushing is because he wants to believe what he's pushing against and he's testing it. Children do that to their parents. They test their parents. Do you really love me? Will you love me if I say you don't love me? Will you love me if I say I hate you? Will you love me if you say you hate me? Will you love me if you have to say you hate me? me. They start doing that as toddlers. They continue doing it into adolescents. They keep testing their parents. Embody the love of Christ to your father. And that is the best answer you can give to any of these hard questions. The best Christian minds of the world have wrestled with these questions to try to give verbal answers to them, hoping that verbal answers will somehow clear the field. It's amazing how little philosophy Jesus formally taught. It was what he did that was the most powerful instantiation of what he taught. Do likewise. Do you recognize Mahoney's good war, bad peace distinction? I don't know what that is, meaning that in direct opposition to modernity, Christians believe a just war can be good and a decadent degenerate peace can be bad. Sometimes there needs to be a war in this world. That's possible. But applying that in any given situation takes a lot of wisdom. Should John 11 be read against 2 Kings 4? Almost a rejection of hurrying of Elisha. Jesus tearing to save a life versus Elisha hurrying. In both, the woman close to the dying man goes to a holy man he believes can save her loved one. Clearly connected text. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Great. That's why the Bible's so cool. It keeps talking to itself and it lets us listen and it makes us ponder. Is that Brandon Guy the Antichrist? There's a little Antichrist in all of us, my friend. Hi Paul, how should we as Christians relate to the Israel-Palestinian conflict and the modern state of Israel as a whole? And will Israel play any vital role during the end times? Thanks, regardless. It is an astounding thing that Israel as a nation was reconstituted in this period. However, is the relationship with it between a people and a nation? That's a really complex question. I'm going to wrestle with that question a little bit in my Sunday school class this week. 930 Living Stones Church Channel live streamed every week. A little commercial for you there. I think Christians should have a lot of humility about this situation. I think it's enormously complex. I think the whole thing is just an... I can understand why in 1948 crunchy Christians who believe the Bible is the word of God applicable to life said, oh wow, there's a nation state of Israel. What on earth does that mean? Yeah, that's a good question. Nobody can be evil. Nobody can be evil if they don't have a nation state. Nobody can be evil. Nobody can be evil, can they Paul? I don't know. Have you met a human being? I can be evil sometimes. Evil is in us, not any one or few of us. Peace builds cooperation. Jesus made that clear. Okay. Isn't making the Bible the inherent word of God making it into an idol? We can make almost anything into an idol. You know, the bronze serpent became an idol. We're idol makers. Hey, quick question Paul. In left-wing YouTube, there is a size small political spat between Vouch and a woman named Professor Flowers. Vouch, my old debate mate. Have you heard of this? I have not. Professor Flowers wants her own country specifically for Africans and have their own ethnic determination. Read a good biography of Malcolm X. If you learn a little bit about Malcolm X, it will help you understand some of the perennial tensions within the race relations in America. Our boy Vouch is against this. It says that she has reversed racism and a potential genocide or there might be trouble in the post-Christian eschaton. Any thoughts? There's always trouble. That's fascinating. I'll have to check that out. Here's the question. When do I stop taking questions? Rick, we never worked this out. I don't even have, let me get rid of this screen so I can see Rick. How do we figure out how to end this, Rick? I don't know. I guess at some point I just stop. I'd see on the Discord server, they get, oh there's Jobe and his baby. See, that's the reason I didn't look at the screen was because I knew it was going to distract me. I can't look at babies and not be distracted. I love babies. So it's waiting for my children to do their duty and get married first and then produce one for their papa. Anyway, does the woke religion self-reference relationship to its sacred texts like Butlerhoods, etc., therefore make it conservative in terms you just described? That's exactly right. And if you want to hear someone speak really eloquently about that dynamic, talk to Joey because Joey at our local meetup really lays that out quite well. How in many ways progressives are deeply conservative because they're attempting to conserve a whole range of ideas and some of those ideas are already quite passe. Hi Paul, are the fruits of the spirit unique to Christians? No. You can't find love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith, gentleness, self-control in people other than Christians. Of course you can find them. But that is what the fruit does. And when Paul says against such things there is no law, he's recognizing that these are things are broadly given and recognized. That doesn't mean that Christian conversion and quickening is not unique. But things have to be jointly valued to be recognized and appreciated. What does it mean when Christ compares the spirit to the wind and so it is with those born of the spirit in John 3? Well part of what he's doing is simply showing what the word spirit means and he's looking at both original participation and final participation in barfield. So all right it's I'm getting lots of questions here. I'm going to try and move through them as fast as I can and I could spend all day on John 3. It's an amazing passage and in fact if you go back through the Living Stones archives, Sunday School archives, I spent I don't know how many weeks on John 3. All those born of the spirit. Part of what we're struggling with is, oh this is so much here. I'm going to keep going. Okay Paul, just what was it, just what was it that broke the Christian worldview and made the Reformation inevitable? Why did enlightenment, why did the enlightenment have to happen? Now that it's been done, can we put it back together? Tom Holland does a wonderful job in Dominion of noting that the tensions within the Hebrew prophets get picked up by Jesus and some of those same tensions are in the Reformation and they all have to do between heaven and earth and how these two things meet and apply. You have the story verse and the matter verse and the story verse and the matter verse have to come together perfectly. That's really hard for us and it's really hard. One way to understand the fall as we say in Reformed theology is that one of the things that we lose in the fall is the union of the story verse and the matter verse. You can even see this in Barfield, wind and spirit. Wind and spirit should be one. My speech which is wind is also spirit. Part of what the Protestant Reformers you know there's various elements to the Protestant Reformation, clerical abuse. Look at many of the issues in the Protestant Reformation and you can see this line. Relics, what are relics? Relics are the physical remainder of the Reformation. The physical remainder of heaven and earth touching. In some ways relics prompted miracles. Listen to the rest is history about I forget which English saint's body that wasn't decomposing. You find that all over the place. All those issues are all about the meeting here of heaven and earth. Luther just wanted some recalibration and then the conflict got going and it got worse and worse and worse. I very much understand Lewis's desire that everyone had just sat in a room with pipe smoke and pints and talked about these issues in a reasonable way instead of plunging Europe into blood and flames. The Roman Catholic Church had become quite tyrannical. You know the only reason Luther didn't follow in Jan Hus's footsteps was Luther had a protector that was not about to let him go and the printing press could out print book burnings. The Enlightenment was in some ways, oh so Luther's idea that reason plus a better copy of the text won't eliminate our problems. The Enlightenment then says well maybe if we look at really reliable things like the rate at which balls drop, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which the ball drops, the rate at which balls drop from a from a from an Italian tower. Upon this we can build a world view with unity but then the bottom then your physicality is going to really get out of sync with your story verse and that's exactly all the issues we're dealing with today. It doesn't get put together until heaven and earth are one and that is a gift from above and so we try to bear witness to that gift from above but we also wait for it to come because it is beyond any of us. How do you think about Vatican II breaking its own law by electing an Argentine Jesuit? That's Sonic, that's Pope Francis. I got no dog in that fight you know. Part of the luxury of being Protestant is you kind of walk away from some of these things so I'm going to play my Protestant card and say it's up to you Roman Catholics to figure out. We got plenty of mess in the Christian Reformed Church. How do you read the Urantian book? God's one and two seem to be mentioned here in depth. I'm not familiar with that book. Just because from Queenie to all of you, ah Vixen Dixon, our queen, our queen. How you manage to win that first game so reliably is beyond us. Win that first game so reliably is beyond us. Is the internet founded? Is U2 somehow based in the UK? I have no idea. Thank you Vixen Dixon, always a pleasure. Explain faith begins with the fear of God. Respect, awe, humble subservience. Well, obviously there's an issue in language in something like that. All right, no more questions. I'm going to draw them here. I'll do it. All right, so Noah Walker's question is the last one and the way YouTube works, um, if you put your questions after that, I'm sorry. So what is faith? Boy, there's, there's, there's so much in this question. There's so much in this question because it gets into the question of God number one and God number two. When, when, when John Vervecki says being is good, that requires faith because if in fact you are suffering, you are tempted to believe that being is evil and to fall into despair. Faith begins in recognizing that the world around us is not safe. And especially if you're an ancient, I mean, part of the ancient puzzle was why is the world so chaotic? Or maybe that's what they simply assumed. And so what happens in Israel with their conceptualization of God, that it's a, it's a tiny little narrative in which faith grows. Part of it is a, a recognition that fear will come to you in this world. That things may go horribly wrong with you. That suffering is nearly inevitable on this planet. And yet that is not the whole story. And that there is hope and that hope can be pursued. You know, I listened to, Job sent me that, that David, that, that Jonathan Sacks video, and I thought a lot about that video and about Jordan Peterson's observation of the world and the world around him. And I thought, I thought, I thought, I thought, I thought, I thought, I thought, I thought, I thought a lot about that video and about Jordan Peterson's observation that in some ways, sacrifice is the invention of the future. And I think in some ways, faith begins with the fear of the Lord is analogous to sacrifice being the invention of the future. That I can lean in to this God and sort of in the words of Job, though he slay me yet, while I trust in him, that's faith. And I've Job sure had plenty of floundering and frogging and anger and all of this, but at the end of the story of Job, God doesn't, God doesn't think ill of Job. For all of his struggling, he, he says to Job's friends, Job did better than you with your, with your simple, with your simplistic theological formulas. I, I pushed Job to the limit and he stayed in the relationship. There's faith in some ways, if you live a golden life, where everything you try succeeds, everything you hope for is realized, all the things you want to see happen, your life does not require faith. Your, your life of faith only begins when you begin to realize that disappointments will come and loss will come. You could, you could say, you could say it in another way. The couple that has only bliss in their marriage never really knows love. You say, well, what do you mean? They have all sorts of affection and happiness. Yeah, but they never really know love. What is love? Love is sticking there. Even when it hurts, even though you feel it might be futile, that's love and it's stronger than death. So what is Gnosticism and how is it dangerous? There's a huge debate right now about Gnosticism. David Bentley Hart has been blogging about it on his substance. He's a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very good. David has been blogging about it on his substack. It has to do with this question of the relationship of heaven and earth. And I think in some ways, a skepticism about the goodness of the material world and its hope for the future. That's about And the reason it's dangerous is because as a good physicalist or materialist will tell you, you are not merely thought, you are also physical. And you are the stuff of earth and the breath of God. And I have no better way of saying it. I often have, being a good Protestant, realized that speaking the words of the Bible are the best way I can say something. That's what we are. And Gnosticism says, you're the breath of God. Oh, okay. But it's not true. And what you lose is the resurrection. Jesus was God and man. And that's all the way back to the first question. What's at the heart of Christianity, the exclusive truth proposition, it's that God became man and dwelt among us so that we could be gods, that we could be, I gotta be careful with that, so that we could be united with Christ. I used gods as possessive rather than plural. But there's some of that too, theosis and all. Do you plan on writing a book? If so, what about? I don't know. I want to, I want to, I very much want to do more writing, but writing, people say, well, how can you do so many videos? Because I'm always thinking about this anyway. So I have a thought and then it goes away and then it's gone. Okay, that's sort of Gnostic. If I have a thought and if I start to write, that's really good because it helps make, bring my thought down here into this world in a more durable way. But that takes time and writing requires much more order and synthesis. What I discovered with YouTube is I can appreciate some of that benefit by flapping my lips instead of moving my fingers on a keyboard. And I blogged for years. You'd find a ton of my writing on my blog, paulvanderclay.me or leadingchurch.com. There's tons of my writing there. Probably won't care to. It's, it's in some ways like my talking into this machine. But to write a book is to sit down and really discipline and organize yourself. And that takes a lot of time and a lot of energy and a lot of attention. And I just don't have that right now. I've got a church. Now, if my church dies. And if I don't go working for another church, then I'll probably sit down and start working on a book because then I'll have time. But here's another little thing about books. I can in some ways support myself better talking than book writing. Unless and until I can write a book that is not only interesting enough or important enough to receive at least a little bit of monetary benefit. And now that I have a YouTube channel, I'm sure plenty of you would buy my book and I'd get, I don't know how much money of royalty for the book, yada, yada, yada. So I have lots of colleagues who have written books and. I'm sure it was a helpful thing. A lot of people just don't read books anymore. So I don't want to write a book until I know that I can write something that will be helpful for people. And I'm thinking that all the learning that I've done over the last few years. Maybe has helped me get closer to being able to write a book. But I'm not like, I mean, I was talking to John Vervecki before we started recording and he said basically this last year has been one of the most fruitful, productive years of his life because he's not in class with students. And, you know, what? So at some point I would like to. I enjoy writing. It's just really challenging. And that's why I say that my monologue videos, they're all first draft. They're not very organized. They're a lot rambly. So that's just what they are. But this medium lends itself to it because I know, you know, Chad, the alcoholic is laying tile and, um, you know, John Maddeny is riding his bike into work and, um, some of you are driving in your car and Luke's cooking for the family and all of your coders are sitting there doing stuff with your fingers and you need something for your brain to do. So that's what this is. A book, maybe someday. Hi, Paul. Hope you're okay. I'm more than okay. I once asked about this, but why is non-existence or the end of all things bothering me so much? I repeatedly watch some of the videos about the end of the universe when everything dies, goes cold, et cetera, Adams too, and trillions and trillions of years. Another question. Well, why, I wonder if the quotation marks in the wrong place. Oh, I think it bothers you. I would say, I don't know. I suspect it bothers you because you see value in the universe and you have a sense that for everything to go away is a loss. That bothers me too. It's part of the reason I believe in the resurrection. Another question. Where's the similar meaning in that? The only answer for now I could, I could find was, well, Ecclesiastes, everything shall die unless God then does a creation 2.0, which is exactly what Christ's body is, his body is creation 2.0. There's an, there's, there's another chapter in the story, but even then, I don't know, still bothers me. Maybe it shouldn't. I can understand why it bothers you. It's sort of back to the faith. Um, fear of the Lord is the beginning of, of, of knowledge of wisdom. Maybe the fear of the end is the beginning of the desire for the resurrection. John M. Would you recommend a book on the book of Job? I don't really have one to recommend. I've got some commentaries up there, but I haven't found any of them terribly helpful, so I'd say read the book itself. Um, there's a lot of good stuff out there in the book of Job. It's a, it's a, it's a puzzle of a book in many ways. How did Venetian influence and corruption cause the reformation by the way, PVK, and how they push the printing of texts from Luther's and also the Venetians manipulated the religious wars. You know more than me about that stuff. So I can't answer from what I don't know. I, you know, it's obvious that the, the Italian Renaissance and the Protestant reformation are deeply tied as is, you know, the history is just so weird. You know, you don't get Aristotle without the Crusades and we're writers on this. What does it mean to love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your mind, apart from keeping his commandments? Well, that's the summary of the commandments. And the commandments are all subservient to that. That is its head and the commandments are applications of that. And that's why context and command context often vary the application of the law and commands are applied. The applied heart of the law to contexts. So what does it mean? You know, one of the beautiful parts of my conversation with John Vervecky was, you know, finally to fulfill the law, you fulfill the law in action. And part of what reformed theology says is that the law was fulfilling the actions of Christ. Well, does that mean, well, what does that mean? Well, we want to continue fulfilling the law. What do we mean by fulfilling the law? It's, it's, it's bringing into material reality what the law always hoped for and pointed to bearing witness. Now we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're, we're really small and really dumb. And half the times we make bigger messes when we're trying to do good, even than when we're just being stupidly evil. But love the Lord your God with all your hearts, all mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. That's the summary of the law that Jesus gives and everybody, when Jesus said it, understood and accepted what he was saying. Okay. I think that fulfills the list. Um, I don't know if any poor person put something at the end of the list. Didn't get it in. Thank you so much. Um, Bazzani, um, swag like, um, Kyle, Lou, and those of you who put questions into cut and paste of the questions into the discord. So I didn't have to sort of sort through the entire live chat. And well, let us know maybe in the comments, cause after, so the way YouTube works is we're going to end this transmission and then in the comments afterwards, uh, you can write comments. So if you have comments on the video itself about how Rick and I did it, put your feedback in the comments to this video and we'll do this again sometime. Won't we, Rick? Yeah. Rick says yes. So you want to say something, Rick? Cause if Rick says something into his mic, it will go out. No, he says, no, he ain't doing it. So I would always put a camera on Rick so I can, you know, I saw zoom. I saw zoom. I saw dune, you know, and I read dune when I was a kid. I loved that book. And it's always so much fun looking at someone try to do a movie because obviously you have to do things in it. You have to flesh things out in a movie that were only sort of described in the book. And when I saw those little hand gestures, they were doing, Rick's on it. When I saw those little hand gestures they were doing in the movie, I thought, Oh, that's what Rick and I need. So Rick can make these little hands gestures and, and I can know just what Rick is thinking while I'm doing these questions and answers. So thank you all for the super chats. Thank you. Uh, Rick for making this happen. Thank you volunteers on the discord that cut and pasted the questions into the discord. So I didn't have to hunt for them in the midst of the live chat. Thank you for those of you who have watched this live and showed up for it. And thank you for your time and attention. For those of you who will listen on the audio only version of this, I hope it was worth your time and attention. So thank you very much. You can end transmission, Rick.