https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lgVZri_XWmA

 Please Philip. Welcome to your... We're on the air Fred. Hey Fred we're on the air. Hi everybody. How we doing out there? Howdy doody time. I was gonna say welcome to the Freddie and Paul show but Fred wants to rename the show. Why do you want to rename the show? Because you are the founder that found YouTube and you are the man that does in command and you deserve all the credit. I'm just here as a disciple but you're my preacher so don't you know we are a reckoned teacher. You're my teacher and we're not a reckoned teacher I mean and what I'm saying is I'm a disciple and you're the preacher I listen to you and I try to disciple. But Freddie and Paul to me sounds better than Paul and Freddie. I like Paul and Freddie. You like Paul and Freddie better? It has to be like that or I couldn't. Okay so now I don't want that. You know what happened when it was called that before? You get all the credit. You're the one that teaches me I don't teach you. We teach each other Fred. I know but you know more than me. Way more. We teach each other. So maybe now we haven't done a show for a very long time. Okay well. And do we want to say something about that? Can I talk? Absolutely. No I know I'm not like that. I just had something to say. I didn't mean it like that. I really didn't. Okay anyways okay I'm mixing the blessings right now. Okay. If anybody out there that you know I'm not trying to say. Don't ask for money. Not money. I'm saying if anybody wants they I read a comment they said if he needs to be helped out if he's homeless or whatever or needs rectory they said they would help. How can we help Freddie? That's what it said. I told them that they should pray for you. Okay. And they did and you're back. I'm just saying if they want to help me. You want to say anything about your absence? You didn't feel good for a long time. I missed my birthday. You missed your birthday. And I didn't like it in the hospital. Yeah. I was only there one or two nights but no I was only one night. You were in and out quite a few times. Oh okay yeah all right. Yeah you're right. You're right. Anyways but it was fine. It was a hard road. I had to go because someone took my stuff and it wasn't right. Yeah. And God don't like ugly. Yeah. So it'll come back at him. But anyways I'm doing good. You are doing good. Hey guess what? Guess what Paul? You gotta look at the camera. Guess what Paul? What? What about those Sacramento Kings? What? They've been winning four of three in a row. Yeah and they might make the playoffs. Damn dogs. They're doing good. Anyways they're awesome. Huh? Are they still in contention for the playoffs? Can they make the playoffs? Yeah they can. And two of them were in the All-Stars. Bagley and Fox. Wow. Were in the All-Stars. Wow. And you know who else is doing good? Who? Warriors. Yeah. Well they're a good team. You know they got Kevin Durant still. They still got Kevin Durant. Yeah. And they still have, Gilman went to San Antonio. Okay. Okay. Yeah. So there, anything else you want to say Fred? Yeah I wanted to know how, when are you going on your trip to the south, I mean southern California? No I already went to southern California. How was that? It was good. It was good. We had a good meetup. Wow. And it was a good trip. So my next trip is to Australia. Can you get me an Australia shirt? I love to have shirts where different constants are. I'll see what I can do. No I'm not done. I'm going to sing a song. I thought you weren't going to sing a song. Oh no I'm not done. I've got to read this. Okay what are you going to read? Consumers, some we do of God. The mystery of testing goodness is Jesus being tested. Basics of life, see you through Jesus more than your self faith. Do you? Do you? Do you see? Do you trust Jesus more than your own self faith? I'm going to sing a song. Okay you can sing a song. You know what? I'm going to do my favorite song. Okay. We Three Kings. Alright go for it. I know it's not Christmas. You ready mom? We Three Kings. We three kings of orient are travel gifts we travel afar. Field and fountain, lord and mountain, following yonder star. Oh star of wonder, star of right, star with every beauty right. Westward leading, still proceeding, guide us to that perfect light. Don't you see I'm back the boy they call Fred D. Don't you know I'm good to go without a word to say. I prayed to God and now I got it on all good. You see one two three. You know it's me coming up in the kids' history. Thanks for your prayers. I thank you a lot. I would love a comment because I got my own slot machine coming in like disco fiends. But when I'm on the microphone I'm good to go and I love my mom really though. Pastor Paul is the preacher and he teaches real good don't you see though. Alright. Alright now we gotta close it out. This is number one. This is number one of the Paul and Freddy show. Alright so this is number one of the Paul and Freddy show. We gotta do One Love this time for sure. For sure. Because we're back. One Love. Thank you CJ if you're watching. Props out to CJ and Gordon. Alright number one.