https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=e-McjYZSgqw

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current, whatever it is of my Sunday sermon. It varies from week to week. Today is Friday and I usually keep thinking about it and then Sunday morning polish it up and give it a go. You never quite know how it's going to go. Pastoral ministry in some ways doesn't change that much and we're seeing this as we're following Paul now on his what's sometimes called his second missionary journey. After Thessalonica, Berea, Athens, he settles down in Corinth and he does some letter writing. Silas and Timothy leave Thessalonica after an extended stay for teaching and discipleship and already the sheep have been pulled out of the ditch and in some ways they've gone back in it. And a couple of weeks ago we looked at First Thessalonians and now we're going to look at Second Thessalonians. Some people want to debate the authorship of Second Thessalonians. It seems hard to debate given that it's mostly about the stuff in First Thessalonians because he has to revisit it because everything has kind of gone in the ditch. Well, maybe not as bad as that. What he's doing here is he's sort of modeling a shape of ministry that has been enduring for 2,000 years. Now when we talk about these missionary journeys, we're not talking about some little two or three week tour. These things, this one, he was in Corinth for a year and a half. He was in some of these other places for weeks or months. We don't really quite know exactly how long he was in each place, but you can get a sense by the overall outline. He'd go into a city and he would, of course, meet in the synagogue and then that would sometimes blow up and then he'd have this little group of a church and he would teach them and teach them and teach them and teach them and then he'd go on to the next place. And he would establish some leadership in that place, but how would that go? We know that there'd be waves of other itinerant preachers and people who would come through and they'd have their teaching. And when we finally get to the book of 1 and 2 Corinthians, that probably won't happen at least until next summer. Well, you know, things can go in all kinds of different directions because with each with people coming in, people get new ideas, stuff happens. So he started, you know, he started so many places that he started writing letters back to them and we don't really know how many letters he wrote. We only have the letters that we have. There are references to other letters and that keeps New Testament scholars busy in terms of how many letters to Corinth, when were they written, so on and so forth. And he used scribes and that makes that raises questions about, you know, Ephesians, Colossians, they sound quite a bit different from some of the other letters. Was this because of the way Paul phrased things and word choices he used or scribes? So there's a lot we don't know. And but part of what's exciting is we're really getting a window into the beginnings of the church very, very early on and we can see things among them that are that are really fascinating to note just how early these things are happening. We live in this, this, this perpetual tension between development over time, which is hopefully progress and corruption over time, which is usually loss. And this is what happens in groups. They sort of grow in some ways and they sort of recede in other other ways. And part of what's beautiful about this window back into the beginnings is hopefully, well, this is really what the Protestant Reformation was about, an attempt to sort of get back to the sources to recalibrate according to what we can figure out from the very earliest times of the church. Now he begins the letter with just a very brief salutation. At the 930 class, we're starting the Book of Romans and so we'll be looking at this long salutation in Romans in the adult Sunday school class. And as you can see, it's all this other stuff built in and in the Romans class, we'll talk about that. But with Thessalonians, this is the second letter. He was just there not too long ago, so a fairly short salutation. Paul, Silas, and Timothy to the Church of the Thessalonians. In God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace and peace be to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Now some of you who are in church or watch the whole service know that these are exactly the words that I use to open the church service. If you compare Paul's letters, you'll see that there's certain structure to them and usually Thanksgiving comes early as it does in this letter. We ought always to thank God for you brothers and sisters and rightly so because your faith is growing more and more and the love all of you have for one another is increasing. Therefore, among God's churches, we boast about your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and trials you are enduring. If you remember back in the book of Acts, some of the difficulties that happened in Thessalonica when Paul was there. All this is evidence that God's judgment is right. And as a result, you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God for which you are suffering. God is just and he will pay back those who trouble you and give relief to you who are troubled and to us as well. This will happen when God is revealed from heaven in blazing fire with his powerful angels. He will punish those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. They will be punished with everlasting destruction and shut out from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might. On the day he comes to be glorified in his holy people and to be marveled at among all who have believed. This includes you because you believed our testimony to you. Now what's interesting here is that you might not have noted it, but what Paul is using is the Old Testament. He's using portions from Isaiah 66. He's using other portions from Isaiah and Psalm 89. And that is all going into all of this talk about coming judgment, powerful angels, everlasting destruction, all of this stuff Paul is taking from the Hebrew prophets and updating it to the church in Thessalonica and their particular context. With this in mind, we constantly pray for you that our God may make you worthy of his calling and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith. You notice that sort of a prayer included as he goes through this. We pray this so that the name of our Lord may be glorified in you and you in him according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now if you remember from first Thessalonians, this was a topic he treated. Now he goes back to treating it because obviously things have changed. Well, this is what happens. You pick up something from TV, from radio, from Facebook, from a neighbor, from another book that you've read, from a magazine, from a movie, from Twitter, from YouTube, from your neighbor's pastor. And then suddenly you talk about that in the church and ideas get swirling and the stuff that Paul talked about when he was there, well now they're on sort of to something else. So sort of like that sheep that gets out of the pit and jumps back into the trench. Well, now he goes back to where the sheep is in the trench and says, okay, it's Paul. Remember me? Let's get, let's go over this thing again. A lot of what happens in churches going over things again and again and again, because that's how we learn and that's how things are reinforced. All of this stuff that you heard plays on fears, insecurities, pride, greed, ambition. And now there's sort of a mess in Thessalonica. And so you hear him bringing them back to what he talked about. Now there's an issue here because he keeps reminding them of what he talked about, but he doesn't actually say in the letter, give us a lot of specifics of exactly what he talked about. And this has in turn sort of caused difficulty throughout the history of the church because he gives us so little, people then extrapolate on those things and we sort of go on and on and on and on. Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, something which very much interests people once they believe, once they get an understanding that, well, Christians really believe in this thing, that Jesus will come again and are being gathered to him. We ask you, brothers and sisters, not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by the teachings alleged from us. In other words, some people have said some things that are allegedly from Paul, Silas, and Timothy, but Paul is saying, no, that didn't come from us. We didn't say that. Whether by prophecy or by word of mouth or by letter, asserting that the day of the Lord had already come. In other words, now suddenly the people there think, well, God was going to come and bring judgment and bring redemption and we missed it. So what does that mean? And Paul is saying, you didn't miss anything. Don't let anyone deceive you in any way for that day will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the man doomed to destruction. Now there are echoes from something that happened in the intertestamental period here. There are echoes of later things that will happen and because of that, people sort of pick up on this and imagination start to go. It's sort of like, again, we're talking about the the world stay saved and the apostle Paul will probably think, why didn't they just stick with what I told them? Why did they move on? Now we don't know exactly what Paul told them and we would love to know. And if there's an absence like this, we try to fill in the gaps. That's just what our imaginations do. And we usually fill our imaginations with fear, with anxiety, and with ambition and with ideas of control. Don't you remember that when I was there with you, I used to tell you these things and now you know what is holding him back so that he may be revealed at the proper time. For the secret power of lawlessness is already at work, but the one who next comes back will continue to do so until he is taken out of the way. And again, there's, you can open up biblical commentaries, there's a tremendous amount of speculation about this. And when the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will overthrow with the breath of his mouth and destroyed by the splendor of his coming. The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how Satan works. He will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie and all the ways that wickedness deceives those who are perishing. They perish because they refuse to love the truth and so be saved. For this reason, God sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie. Now, I want to reduce this to some takeaways because like I said, things sort of get wiggly in here for a lot of people. The power of lawlessness is already at work. This is a constant thing and it's consistent with a lot of what is said about Satan, about lies, father of lies, deception, deceiving people. And it's usually the easiest way to deceive people is to deceive people along the lines of either their fears or their ambitions. An instantiation of this spirit will rise and Christ will defeat this spirit. Those perishing will be deceived, but God will bring you through. That's the mark of this because remember they're afraid that the day of the Lord has come. They've missed it. They're in deep trouble. Paul says, no, you're doing fine. Keep going where you're going. You've not missed the day of the Lord. I told you about these things. And then he gives us a few little tidbits which sort of lead us to speculate. Now, what else did he say? And this really gets complex fast because our cognitive biases kick in. All of these ways that we're used to thinking our fears or our ambitions and we start projecting our hopes and fears onto all sorts of things. I often tell the story of when I bought a little blue Subaru and I drove it around and after I bought my Subaru, I was shocked by just how many blue Subarus there were on the road. Why did I suddenly see blue Subarus all over the road? It's because I was driving a blue Subaru. I didn't really increase the number of blue Subarus all over the road only by one. But what changed was my attention paid to things. Now, part of what has gone on, part of what has been talked about about this passage really, especially since the 19th century, is the idea that, well, everyone in the Bible sort of got the timing of Jesus' second coming wrong. Everyone was expecting it to come quickly and they were all wrong. And so if they were wrong about that, what else were they wrong about? That's been an idea that really cropped up in the 19th century and has been going around quite a bit ever since. Now, there's another issue which is if Paul is giving them specific things to be concerned about in their time, well, what does that leave for us? Now, there are little tidbits in Paul's writing such as bring my scrolls and cloak, which obviously don't pertain to us, but then the question is what if this pertains to us? It would do no good for us to read it today. A little bit interesting to hear about his cloak and his scrolls, but no real teaching for the church. Now, part of how this is best answered is by thinking about what in nature are called fractals, because one of the things that we see is that things scale in certain patterns, large and small. You see this with capillaries look like trees, look like leaves, look like branches. We see it with crystals and rocks and waves and various formations. A lot of this that Paul is dealing with is the day of the Lord theme, and I've spoken many times about the day of the Lord and talked about how this scales down into our personal lives, even to our own events in our lives and all the way up into the rest of creation. The Bible does this all the time with its language. If you open the book of Revelation, you keep hearing about Babylon and you ask, why are they talking about Babylon? Well, Babylon destroyed the temple and Rome destroyed the temple, but if you're writing in the late first century after the temple has been destroyed, you don't want to badmouth Rome or you could be found dead, so it's very easy to badmouth Babylon. In the New Testament, they see in some ways they relate the destruction of the temple in the New Testament to the destruction of the temple in the Old Testament, and that goes into how the story gets put together. Now, what you do in this then is you watch for the patterns, and it takes discernment. Don't let anyone deceive you is actually the center of this teaching. When the day of the Lord comes, you'll know. If the day of the Lord comes to you individually, you'll know. When it comes to the earth, you know you're not going to miss it. It takes discernment, and the goal is to not be deceived. We often get things wrong, and we ought to be able to admit when we are wrong. In other words, don't waste your credibility. The main point of this entire passage is in fact not so much giving nuts and bolts about a man of lawlessness. Was that Adolf Hitler? Was that Napoleon Bonaparte? Was that Nero? People have been working through this for a very long time, and it could very well be that particular instantiations are instantiations of the spirit of lawlessness as they go through time. The important part is basically where Paul lands. We ought to always thank God for you, brothers and sisters, loved by the Lord, because God chose you as firstfruits to be saved through the sanctifying work of the Spirit and through belief in the truth. He called you to this through our gospel that you might share in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold fast to the teachings we passed on to you, whether by word of mouth or by letter. In other words, settle down. It's going to be okay. Listen to what we said, and remember that. Don't go off in all kinds of crazy directions. But this is how we are, and this is what we do. We get bent out of shape, we get all kinds of crazy theories, we get ourselves back into the ditch. We ought to thank, and so Paul says, God's grace. We ought to thank God for you, and we ought to thank God for you. And we ought to thank God for you, and we ought to thank God for you, and we ought to thank God for you. And so Paul says, we thank God for you brothers and sisters loved by the Lord because God chose you as firstfruits to be saved. You are here not so much because you chose to be here, but because God chose you. The grip that is holding you is not your grasp on him, it's his grasp on you. That is a very comforting thought because we lose our grip. He doesn't. He called you to this through our gospel that you might share in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is his work in you. So how should you respond? Stand firm, hold fast. He's hanging on to you hang on to him. Hold fast to the teachings we passed on to you, whether by word or mouth, word of mouth or by letter. May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and our God and God our Father who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal encouragement and good hope, encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good deed and word. Amen.