https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=g6mXd_JXSnQ

 Must be the Senate of the Christian Reformed Church. We can never get things right the first time. This is my third time being a poet. Once in Canada, once in Chicago. Once in Canada, and once in Chicago. Are you good now? Are you going to keep messing with this thing? Alright, too many sound men back there I suspect. So I would like to read my poem called Pella Belloni. I was born right here in Pella in 1952. I was a little Dutch kid, so what I say is true. My life has been a slippery slope, bad breaks, I sure have caught them. But as your Senate poet, I've clearly reached the bottom. I'm a full-blood Dutchman. I may be reprobate. I've chosen to come home again to this place where I am known. I love the gouda cheese here and Pella's fine bologna. E. When Weier was just a kid, he lived right here in Pella. He's buried on Boot Hill. No ketchup. I'm a little Dutch kid, so what I say is true. I love the gouda cheese here and Pella's fine bologna. He was a long-living fellow. I also was a Pella boy, but wrong-headed as a mule. I tried to be a good boy, but I had broken every rule. You can see by my attire, I'm from the Arizona classes. I live out in the Wild West, bringing gospel to the masses. I moved to Tucson years ago when we paid our missionaries. Now they serve as our church planters eating cactus roots and berries. Four years ago at Senate, I was asked to be the poet. And then just four years later, there's this problem. Don't you know it? I might have done some damage as a Chicago resident, because as of this week, it seems the college lost its president. Steve Timmermans is called to lead us to do more than rearranging. Instead, he's called to execute what's called adaptive changing. I'd like to say good luck with that. Get a Pella here to change? And reading in that cowboy on the Arizona range. On Sunday when I worshipped in the church of my baptism, I went down to the basement and tried to foment schism. I got some cake and coffee and I looked down on the floor. And I mentioned that the tile had been there since 1894. Steve, you should keep Joel Boote around. I think you'd be astute. And you could blame him for the bad stuff when you finally give the boot. See what I did there? He'll assist you finding closets where Borgdorf hid the bones. And find Aunt Bronson's mother in that basement. Two years ago I took a trip to bless Canada with my rhymes. And suddenly their hockey teams experienced trying times. Could you hockey fans enlighten me on these elemental things? Just where in Canada might I find the Rangers and the Kings? Just a reporter for the committee. Just a reporter for the committee. When I first moved to Tucson I was looking for some friends. I thought joining with the RCA might pay some dividends. I met up with their missions team. One thing I couldn't show you was that I was a very good friend. I didn't shake because the campus wouldn't sing the Psalms so I burned them at the stake. RCA folks stole this college from the Baptists long ago. If you wonder why we're meeting here, I think that I might know. The RCA has all gone home to live in harmony. So let's steal this place while they are gone. Did they get CRC? You might think that that's divisive and just a bit fragmental. But I see an opportunity right here at Good Old Central. Some say that we should love these folks and take a different tack. But I say grab a flying dudge and strut him on a rock. If the RCA would thwart our coup, becoming tough contenders, it's good that into center we have the Dort Defenders. Okay, okay. I might be wrong. Forgive me. Never mind. I'm sorry that I said those things. Let's go back to being kind. We work with Methodists and Baptists, but the ones we want to roast are the people closest to us who we should love the most. So let this be a lesson to those who share my table. If we have a difference of opinion, you'll be like my brother Abel. The folks who work on SPAT to stop the Exodus are kind of hard to understand. They're acronym-onious. I'm going to use your rhyming, okay? Five streams all flow together into the BOT. That flow chart on page 380 is bound to set a spree. If you're looking for a good time and would like to join a Bible study, just go looking for Canadians who are hanging with their buddies. It won't be hard to find them. They raise glasses to the crown. You won't have to walk too far. There's just one bar in town. I had lunch with two Koreans, Chris Cho and Ronald Chu. And Ron asked Chris, are you from Seoul? As Koreans always do. Chris said he wasn't Inchon Cho. And then asked, well how about you? Ron said he moved from Busan back in 1982. On and on they chattered while I sat there in that section. They kept on saying names until they finally made connection. I find it so annoying. Since I hardly speak their lingo, they must always play that game they call Korean lingo. My father was a Hewkin. His cousin's name was Mel. He was a wise professor so his name should ring a bell. My mother is a Banstrup girl. Her first cousin's name is Andy. He taught young seminarians so that makes it pretty dandy. I should have headed off to school and joined the seminary. I might have been a theologian instead of big and hairy. And I want to warn Dr. Tempranen about something causing pension. As a commissioned pastor, don't think you'll get a pension. The first clerk broke tradition and that still has me sulking. He knew the sergeant arms should be burly, big and sulking. His daddy business teacher, that tiny Diane plug, tried to box us all around like a squasher. He knew that she was little but thought she might be mean. He said she taught him Sunday school when she was just 13. I don't mean to disrespect her as she carries around her scoop. But here in Pello we use those to shovel out the snow. She just can't find a run. Ron Knight of this retiring life, I don't know him much at all, But he had the wherewithal to teach his students empathy. Though he had those poor folks reeling, he made them give three minute hugs and get in touch with feelings. I got up from my airplane seat, much to my alarm, I ripped my jeans half off of me when I caught them on the arm. I asked you, Dr. Knighton, what is pastoral caring when you must retrieve your luggage while at the same time over sharing? You tell pastors when they are attacked to not say see you later, instead they should remember that it's just info, only data. The attendant had some safety pins, but I'll never be the same. Before you're off and leave your job, help me with my shoes. When it comes to Carl Basta, I don't wish to be a toward, but he was each year's recipient of the Killing Trees award. He says he loves Brazilians, but he destroyed their forests by handing out more paper than sinners ever put before them. For retirement means a move before you, Dr. Bosman, please decide. What will you do with all your time now that those trees have died? It's 9.30 Sunday morning, Carl. What are you going to do when you're not selling luggas to the Scythian Greek and Jew? You are both beloved professors, and despite my silly jests, we know that God will hold you. We love that you'll be blessed. Thank you for your service. You've run an awesome race. You're good and faithful servants. May God pour out his grace. It's true, I've not been sleeping well. On that bunk bed in the door, my legs are hanging off the edge. This old body won't conform. I forget the college for the matches, since I've never been petite. But it sure would be nice if they'd provide a proper fitted sheet. Central College has been gracious. It was fun that we could meet. These folks have been so helpful, their kindness can't be beat. I never studied Hebrew, I don't know a lick of Greek, but I know the humble followers of Congress who we see. It's been good to be at sinned, to serve our mighty King, to gather all together, to listen, pray, and sing. It is grand to be forgiven. Have Jesus bear your sin, to know the tender grace of God. You can't go home again. Thank you.