https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6JDg3KILMa4

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current edition of my Sunday sermon. You never always quite know how I feel about these on Friday, but I do a lot of mulling on Saturday and Sunday morning and so it's subject to change. This is Pentecost and Pentecost is a big deal. Last week we had Ascension Sunday. Jesus sits at the right hand of God the Father and does what? Well, as we read in the NT Wright passage, heaven is the control room of earth. It's overlapping in a way, it's connected. That's why the disciples stay in Jerusalem and they stay by the temple because that's the closest place to the temple in heaven. Sort of like when I lived in the Dominican Republic, the closest place to the United States was in the embassy. And that's sort of how this works. Now a recurring theme over my videos over the last while has been the question of how to change the world. How does the world change? We've talked about love, we've talked about the vine in John 15 being grafted into Christ. We talked about how the resurrection begins this slow, mimetic, sacrificial change and how Jesus multiplies himself through us. Now how exactly does this happen? Pentecost is key for that. When the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place. Suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting. Now those of you who have been watching for a while know that wind and spirit is the same word in Greek and in Hebrew. And so the blowing of the spirit, of the sound, violent spirit came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting. They saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them. All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them. Now Pentecost was a festival in the Jewish celebration calendar, ceremonial calendar that was 50 days after Passover. The Jewish people associated the outpouring of the Spirit especially with the end of the age. And several signs God gave on the day of Pentecost indicate that in some sense, although the kingdom had not yet fully consummated, its power was being initiated by the Messiah's first coming. Pentecost was celebrated as a feast of covenant renewal and that's critical because of course the covenant is the law at Sinai and Pentecost was a feast of covenant renewal where once again you're reminded of the covenant and you're reminded at least with respect to the law the ways that God's will should shape the people. Now the law is one way in the sense the law is sort of one spirit to shape the people and so I've preached on tongues, I've preached on wind, I've preached on all of these aspects in past Pentecost and today we're going to focus on the connection with Sinai and covenant renewal. Some later texts celebrate the giving of the law on Mount Sinai. Some commentators have suggested that Luke intends a parallel between Moses giving the law and Jesus giving the spirit but the law Pentecost connection may be later than Luke and little in Acts 2 suggests that Luke makes the connection even if some Jewish Christians before him might have. More significant is the crowd drawn to the feast. Now I think actually there's quite a bit of connecting tissue in this text and we can see that sort of by comparing and contrasting Exodus 19 and 20 with Acts chapter 2. In the book of Exodus Israel liberated by the death of the firstborn and now humanity is liberated by the death of God's firstborn. In Exodus liberated Israel with the mixed multitude assemble at Sinai to receive the And again the law is sort of a one means of transmitting the spirit, a spirit to the people. Liberated Israel with the multitudes of the earth assemble in Jerusalem to receive the good news of God's spirit led work. In Exodus God descends on the mountain with fire at Sinai. Now Israel and Jerusalem is this is Mount Zion so there's another mountain experience here. Now God's spirit wind descends on the disciples with fire at Jerusalem. Now in Exodus the people rebel and indulge in revelry that happens in you know when Moses is too long up on the mountain. Now the people gather visitors gather because of the sound of the wind and they wonder if the disciples are drunk, revelry. God speaks directly to the crowd to scare them into obedience that's talked about in the book of Exodus. Now God speaks through Peter and the people are terrified by what they've done against God so you've got the element of terror also in that passage. At Sinai God speaks law to form the people and that way law is a sort of transmission of the spirit. Now Jesus engages with the law in the Sermon on the Mount. You have heard it said of old but I say of you and in many ways the spirit the Sermon on the Mount is a way of sort of intensifying the spiritual formation and emphasizing that we've got the letter of the law and then we often talk about the spirit of the law. At Pentecost through Peter God builds on the prophets to through narrative to reshape the people into a broader experience than law can simply fulfill. See Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount. He talks about the spirit of the law and this is the spirit that fulfills the law. So let's go through the rest of the chapter. Now that we're staying in Jerusalem and you can sort of piece together the elements that I put together in that schema for you and I'll have it at the end of the sermon as well. Now there were in Jerusalem God fearing Jews from every nation under heaven. When they heard this sound a crowd together came together and bewilderment. You have sort of this revelry aspect because each one heard their own language being spoken as many have noted and I've noted in past sermons this is also sort of the undoing of the Tower of Babel. Utterly amazed they asked aren't all of these who are speaking Galileans? How then is it that each of us hears them in our native language? Parthians, Medes and Elamites, residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus in Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and parts of Libya near Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and converts to Judaism. Now here we see again sort of a mixed multitude similar to what we saw at Sinai. Cretans and Arabs we hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues. Amazed and perplexed they asked one another what does this mean? Some however made fun of them and said they've had too much wine. Again the revelry. Now Craig Keener has a bunch of different notes in this. There's a question about where exactly is this taking place? Did they move from the upper room to the temple? The most sensible setting for this encounter Luke describes are the temple courts where the disciples were described as regularly meeting. If the disciples are still meeting in the upper rooms in 113 this point is debated, they would be near the temple. Very large upper rooms were found only in Jerusalem's upper city near the temple. One would imagine that these rooms would be for rent for use of people coming into Jerusalem and spending time there for the feast days. So this is likely one of the upper rooms where they gather and the question is once the wind blew and the tongues of fire did they in fact move towards the temple? Text doesn't say they did but that's some of the debate. Jewish people from throughout the Roman and Parthian worlds would gather for three main feasts Tabernacles, Passover and Pentecost and in fact you read in the gospels where Jesus comes down for Tabernacles, he's there for Passover which is obviously when the betrayal and crucifixion and Lord's Supper happen and then resurrection on the Sunday after the Passover and Pentecost. Because Pentecost was only 50 days after Passover some who had spent much to make a rare pilgrimage to Jerusalem stayed between the two feasts. Pentecost was probably the least popular of the three pilgrimage festivals but Josephus attests that it was nevertheless crowded. Some commentators have thought that this list of nations corresponds to ancient astrological lists but the parallels are not very close. Most likely is the proposal that Luke was simply updating the names of the nations in the table of nations Genesis 10 and then Genesis 11 you have the Tower of Babel. Those nations were scattered at the Tower of Babel where God judged them by making them unintelligible to each other. Here God reverses the judgment in a miracle that transcends the language barrier. Writers whether writing fact or fiction often used questions to set up a response. Ancient writers sometimes described inspiration in terms of drunkenness. Greeks believed in frenzied inspiration by the gods and Philo a Jewish writer thoroughly in touch with Greek ideas wrote of divine intoxication more than any other extant writer. Less experiences of the transcendent whether God inspired or moved by base spirit possession sometimes appeared to outsiders as ecstasy similar to drunkenness. Although drunkenness was common among the Greeks it would have been a grievous accusation in Jewish Palestine where it was regarded as obnoxious and sinful. So then Peter stands up to address the crowd. Peter stood up with the eleven raised his voice and addressed the crowd. Hello Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem. Let me explain this to you. Listen carefully to what I say. These people are not drunk as you suppose. It is only nine in the morning. In the last days God says I will pour out my spirit on all people. He's quoting from the Book of Joel. Your sons and daughters will prophesy. Your young men will see visions. Your old men will dream dreams. Even on my servants both men and women I will pour out my spirit in those days and they will prophesy. I will show wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below. Blood and fire and billows of smoke. The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord. And everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved. What's interesting is that Peter here associates Pentecost with last days and with the day of the Lord. I've mentioned in many of my sermons that the day of the Lord is sort of a pre-echo. It's the last final day but it's all of these other days of the coming of the presence of the Lord. And so right here it's very much a Sinai event which is the day of the Lord type event with darkness and fire and billows of smoke. And so this is quite similar to it and Peter says this is another example of the day of the Lord. God is drawing near to you now through his spirit as he did with his law and well at first Sinai the people trembled and wanted God to be quiet. Fellow Israelites listen to this. Jesus of Nazareth was a man accredited by God to you by miracles, wonders and signs which God did among you through him as you yourselves know. This man was handed over to you by God's deliberate plan and foreknowledge and you with the help of wicked men put him to death by nailing him to the cross. But God raised him from the dead freeing him from the agony of death because it was impossible for death to keep hold on him. David said about him, I saw the Lord always before me because he is at my right hand. I will not be shaken. Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices. My body also will rest in hope because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead. You will not let your Holy One see decay. You can see the themes that Peter is weaving from the prophet Joel and from the Psalms. You have made known to me the paths of life. You will fill me with joy in your presence. And Peter obviously thinks that this is David referring to Christ. Fellow Israelites, I can tell you confidently that the patriarch David died and was buried and his tomb is here to this day. But he was a prophet and knew that God had promised him on oath that he would place one of his descendants on his throne. Seeing what was to come, he spoke of the resurrection of the Messiah, that he was not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay. God was raised, God has raised this Jesus to life and we are all witnesses of it. Exalted to the right hand of God, he has received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit and was poured out what you now see and hear. So now you see with Jesus the story has moved forward. For David did not ascend to heaven. And yet he said, the Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet. Psalm 110. Therefore let all Israel be assured of this. God has made this Jesus whom you crucified, both Lord and Messiah. Then the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and to the other apostles, brothers, what shall we do? You see the reiteration of the fear at Sinai and the request that God speak to them through Moses. Now God is speaking to them through Peter and they want to know what to do. And of course at Sinai they were given the Ten Commandments, they were given the law. Peter replied, repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. This is in a sense the law but moving forward as we saw in the Sermon on the Mount. The promises for you and your children and for all who are far off and for all whom the Lord our God will call. With many words he warned them and he pleaded with them, save yourselves from this corrupt generation. Those who accepted this message were baptized, about 3,000 were added to their number that day. Which is a considerable group considering that the group was probably around 100 or so people. And then the response. And this is in a lot of ways now a new response that sort of parallels or is contrasted to the desert wandering because of course Israel when they get to the promised land they shirk back and a generation dies in the desert only to have another another generation eventually go up into the promised land. But here in a sense you have entry into the promised land. The Book of Acts has these halcyon day passages in chapter two and chapter four where in a way there's a little inkling of the kingdoms coming among the believers of the new age dawning and breaking out amongst them. They devoted themselves to the apostles teaching and to fellowship to the breaking of bread into prayer. Everyone was filled with awe at the many signs and wonders performed by the apostles. All the believers were together and had everything in common. They sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need. Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. And the Lord added to their number those who had been saved. Again, back over the list. Israel liberated by the death of the firstborn. Now God in many ways completes the story by giving by giving his firstborn to die for the sins of the people and to liberate them. Liberated Israel with the mixed multitudes assembles at Sinai to receive the law. Now liberated Israel with the multitudes of earth assembled in Jerusalem to receive the good news of God's spirit led work. They receive the spirit just as at Sinai they receive the law which is sort of spirit because it begins to move in them the patterns of God. God descends on the mountain with fire at Sinai. The spirit wind descends on the disciple with fire in Jerusalem. The people rebel however and indulge in revelry. The people wonder who watch this whether this is in fact revelry whether this is some form of intoxication. Peter says no. God speaks directly to the crowd to scare them into obedience at Sinai. God speaks through Peter and the people are terrified but now they're given a productive response. You're not going back into the desert to die and have your children inherit. You yourselves can begin to inherit the promised land. God speaks directly to the crowd to scare them at Sinai. God speaks the law to form the people at Pentecost through Peter. God builds on the prophets. Prophets too, I should probably take that too out, through narrative. It's been a while since I've edited the rough draft in the middle of the video but I used to do that quite often. God builds on the prophets through narrative to reshape the people in a broader experience than law can simply fulfill. See Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount when he talks about the spirit of the law and you have heard it said of old but I say to you unless your righteousness surpasses that of the scribes and Pharisees you cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. That's why the spirit is given. That now through Christ the spirit comes and we are formed and shaped and remolded. This spirit that fulfills the law. God's spirit has been moving through the world for the last 2000 years and I point this out often in Tom Holland's book Dominion and after reading that book, you know that book really opens one's eyes to the ways that Jesus and his spirit have in fact continued to move through the world. Our values have changed. Our moral yardsticks have changed. Our expectations of the law have changed. The church has continued to grow. None of this is perfect but the transformations have been remarkable. Jesus sits at the right hand of God the Father. He will come to judge the living and the dead. We have to ask ourselves, do we want this spirit? Will we receive this spirit? Will we walk in step with this spirit? Will we allow God to use this spirit to fulfill the law in our lives with each other? Amen.