https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uBxSJdk0Ut4

 coming on. This this guy has been sending me emails for quite a while. He doesn't he doesn't he doesn't abuse it at all but whenever he sends me one, it's like oh because he always comes at me with some really interesting ideas and interesting backgrounds. So, you're gonna have to pronounce your name for the camera. I can't hear you. Uh oh. Uh oh. He's been in the do it. Do you hear me now? I hear you now. Dude, because it was only from this. Oh, okay. Okay. No, the reason wasn't any father away. I am really uncomfortable saying my name for English speakers because I spent six months in France a decade ago and I'm so used to it. People can't pronounce it but here we go. Wow. I'll just uh we'll just we'll just take that little snippet and um and maybe maybe Grimm Grizz will put that you know into a clip and you'll be please don't please memorialized on um as branding in uh Grimm Grizz lands. So, Alty, um tell tell us a little bit about yourself. Okay. So, where should I start? Uh yeah, I've been uh following you. I think from 2018 or 2017. Yeah, you were very early. Yeah, I found you quite early. He originally my uh reason why I started following you and uh YouTube from US has anyways was to try to understand that what on earth is wrong with the US uh Christendom. Um well, electing Trump as their president. Terribly wrong with you. I'm saying and I need to know what it is. So, that's why I've been following you and uh many other channels originally. Hey, I'm trying to understand what's wrong with you people. Well, did you figure it out? Uh we won't know anything. I wouldn't. About Trump is just a hole that everyone goes in and few come out. So, yeah. Um let's not let's not go there. Let's not go there. Um but you're still here. Yeah, I'm still here but you're not. Are you still there for all the other channels you started watching? Uh not not all not all but I still follow Pajot. I've have uh found uh Glenn Schiffner with oh yeah. That's really interesting channel. Uh I I have doubled into the one of the Rando's channels few years ago but sadly I haven't had enough time to follow you the this wonderful uh community that is in the chat had very uh more intensely. Okay. Uh so, I'm just gonna pull up what you you you you had you had a mission impossible pitch because you said if if I am not selected, this uh this pitch will self-destruct at the um at the beginning of the um so so okay, you're you're clearly a Christian. Um uh are you Protestant or Lutheran or yeah. Yeah. So, I'm Pentecostal uh from birth. So, my mother has been you came out of the world speaking in tongues. Uh no, I he started speaking in tongues when I was 18. So, I'm a late. You're a late bloomer. Yeah, late bloomer in that had uh but on theological, theologically, I'm actually quite Lutheran because uh Finland is a majority Lutheran country and uh we it's such it's just seeps in seeps in him. Uh I'm actually quite liking Jordan B Cooper's uh videos because it's nice to hear young conservative Lutheran who is actually he uh he committed to his both his confession and his faith which in a majority he Lutheran country with the cultural split between the conservatism and liberalism and everything is really well it makes the uh situation much more well different let's say. And and Jordan B Cooper is I mean there aren't a lot of that on the on the internet. I mean Lutheran's um they're kind of I don't know what's going on with the Lutheran Church but there's not not that they're they're very given the size of the church they're very underrepresented in places you would expect them to be. So, that's sort of why Jordan B Cooper is pretty important in that space. Yeah, it might be something to do with the fact that they are very uh what is it? Uh sacramental. Yes, they are quite sacramental. Yes, how and uh they don't do much uh the or the what is evangelization is not on the the type of evangelization is not what they do is not on the forefront and uh and not of the same variety that you see that produces YouTube channels. So, right. Those are perhaps the reasons. Well, I'm looking for I in the back of my mind, you had a mission for this and um you often have a lot of really interesting. You point me to a lot of interesting things when you email me. Uh here's the pitch. Follow the channel since 2018 to better understand US culture and you clarified that. How to Randall's conversation around Easter 2020. A um married two children, lifelong Christian Pentecostal flavor. Um I would like to talk about is my um recent observation that even TLC Oh yeah, this is why I really wanted to talk to you because this gets into Verveki's Hermes. Have you followed any of that? Unfortunately, no, I haven't had time to uh who follow on Verveki for quite some time. I looked 26 episodes of his original uh series and I have have watched him uh collaborate with other people but his own content. I haven't had time to watch. So, this Hermes. This is his conversation with Jordan Peterson recently where he mentioned that an archetypal presence came in and introduced himself as Hermes and that very much connects with um and I loved your little comment here. Um there's um there's been talk about school spirit, etc. which is all well and good and has expanded my understanding of the supernatural but ignores the truly supernatural like spirits that can show the seer their future. My father died two months ago and I had to revisit my um uh tribal um and family history which have a stark reminder of the realm of these spirits. Yeah, you got my interest. Let's go. Okay. So, well, uh one of the things that just a here's some uh the last month which brought this up to that I should be talking to you about this was uh seeing the one clip from uh Cosmic Skeptic and uh Shapiro. They were on speak uh where were they unbelievable? They were on unbelievable. Yes. Yeah. The one conversation there where which nobody recommended for you because it's not a good conversation but there was a clip where Alex made a case that on the um morality of the Bible on slavery in the Old Testament but the thing what really caught my attention was that he said that God has uh made laws forbidding imaginary crimes like witchcraft. I was like what? Huh? Excuse me. There are so much wrong with that idea starting from the fact that if if there is a supernatural god who has given us the Bible then clearly there is a supernatural realm and witchcraft is not an imaginary crime. So, right. You are you're really confused with that idea there. Right. And then the other part uh there was few I don't I think it was from Glen's videos. He has had these uh comments on from uh public atheists that actually even a supernatural intervention would not make them believe because most they would actually think that it's more plausible that they have gone mad. Right. Than some supernatural being comes and uh talks to them. Right. That would be more plausible and there I thought you have not enough imagination. You don't have enough imagination what these things can do and just to and the uh example I wish to give and this is a very well known phenomena uh but how how should I tell it? Uh it's called it has few names. It has one name is which means uh something from afar are it and then our local in a mine village. It's called which means a forerunner and say what happens it what happened to my uh once to my uncle when he was child his cousin comes to him and says that where is your father? I saw him coming from the uh town by his he was already coming back with his bicycle and he had a uh gas bottle all with him. He had bought it and my uncle said uh no he still he hasn't come back yet. He hasn't come back. Oh his cousin went away. He he I thought he already did he came here half an hour later. My grandfather comes with a bicycle and he has the gas bottle at the back of his bicycle and it's making noise which the uh cousin had heard. So people see things that happen after it. Then uh there was a well known uh there was a case that was uh in our local newspaper uh few I think it was only a few years ago. It was from a uh a recently a deceased uh person who was a well known uh story collector and uh they asked him a very simple question. Were people in the olden days afraid of these forerunners that they saw and he gave a really simple explanation uh answer. Of course they weren't afraid of them because you didn't know that you were seeing a forerunner because what you would see is somebody is coming and you hear or you see someone coming and then at the last moment when you are supposed to meet them you realize there's no one there and you are surprised what's happening. You think you have seen uh seen things just imagined things but then in the next hour the very same thing will happen. And this is so well known that in a local newspaper when people can be asked are where people afraid of these things and he had this his story about a well respected couple who had heard in the winter these many times these happen in winter because it's easier to know that there was actually nothing there. They heard two people were skiing over the lake, frozen lake. They heard the sound of skiing. They even heard that people came to their her uh in the front of their house and they he pulled up their skis and put them on the he by the wall. You could hear that sound. No one there. Then they went what didn't we just hear two people coming here who are they where are they no ski tracks anywhere no one has come. Then an hour later two people their neighbors come over the lake. When these uh professors or these public atheists say that there is nothing that a spirit supernatural being can do to make me believe that I have not gone mad. They it's because they he think that this is all delusion. Yeah yeah yeah everything supernatural is just within here. But these kind of things don't happen when in your head you cannot see the future at least if you are a materialist that should not be a possibility. And yeah these you know CS Lewis begins miracles with the same story says the only person that I know who claims to have seen a ghost doesn't believe in ghosts. Actually Malcolm and Simone on their channel this morning Simone was talking about this that people have an astounding capacity for complete self-contradiction without any qualms about it. And um you know I've seen that so often in in life where they these things happen they say this would never change me and it's like yeah it might not because but that doesn't say that what you're experiencing isn't real. It just tells me that you're stubborn. I mean that's just and people are people are committed to what they're committed to and if they've staked a lot of reputation on these things aren't real then so but at the same time people life is strange. Weird things happen and and we try to create systems to sort of explain it all. But our systems are our systems and they they they fall short one way or another so but I think this I mean this whole area is a constant for human beings and and what got weird is so the enlightenment sort of tries to put a a line through reality and says well this is here's the overton window for public discourse and and with some reason but you know what's funny is that people sometimes will dismiss Pentecostals because they'll say well you know God can come in and say anything and the Pentecostals are the ones that come up and say well God gave me this dream or God told me this. I said yeah and they live with it without any problem. They all sort of understand you know somebody in church was God told me to do this and it's like okay I can't say that God didn't tell you to do that but if God tells me to do it then maybe we'll talk about it. So it's it doesn't really change the world the way people expect it will change the world. Yeah that's that is also true that the there's one thing to have on some understanding or some knowledge of the supernatural it's a completely different thing that will that actually turn what will that actually do to the person and their beliefs and also their the way they live because I know people who know that these kind of things exist but it it doesn't make them very Christian right or they don't it doesn't make people faith heads right well and and you see that in the Bible you see the disciples of Peter let's just use Peter Peter sees Jesus do more miracles than anyone else and in the garden of Gethsemane he crumples and by the fireside during Jesus' trial he crumples and I mean Jesus sort of flatly confronts the disciples on this many times and so this week I've got the you know stilling the storm on the lake you know they're all freaking out in the boat and Jesus gets up and says you know tells the storm to shut up and he looks at his disciples and is like what you've watched me do the most astounding things and you're freaking out here in the boat and but that's us that's how we are so where miracles don't do to us what we think they should yeah but I would like to add one other thing and we still I think have a minute yeah there is also this question of what what makes us believe and especially on the if people are engaging in Apollo Apologia how do you actually pronounce well that's close enough poor Grim is really having trouble with Christian's channel since he put Apologia as the as the title but go on yeah yeah so Apologia we have this idea that people will come to faith through perhaps Apologia then there is the popular atheist idea that people come to historically people have been brought to the faith by the sword or some other coercion but I know for a fact that the reason what that actually made my ancestors to come to become really Christian and actually stopped trying to work with these spirits to who are to follow these spirits that create these phenomena it was actually the idea Christ Victor what is the yes Christus Victor yes yes because and that's actually it's part of the Pentecostal liturgy that we say that God has already won all the works of the devil yes we don't have written and dogmas very much but we do have some liturgy and that is really part of it yes God has already won on Satan and he's for everything that he has so the priests who served in Lapland they wrote in the 17th century that the reason why the locals are still holding on to their drums their fetishes their spells is because they are afraid that had that they need the protection of these spirits right but it is it was when they found the protection in Christ then they could leave behind and the sorcery the witchcraft yeah the spirits that you cannot trust yep and that and that story has been repeated throughout Christian history you see it in places in the world where let's say animism remains that part of why people flee to Christ is they finally want an end to living in the chaos of the spirit world because those spirits are not they are they are not your friends and they will use you and so that's that's why people come to Christ because I just I just need protection and so that's a very very common and it's historical it goes on the ortho the ortho boomer grandma made the point that you know there are three formal exorcisms at the monastery before an orthodox baptism and the you know in the when we were doing baptisms with the Haitians you know they were thrashing in the water and you know for I first saw it's like what's this about and I talked to someone who knew a little bit more and he was saying well the spirits are in the water and baptism is an exorcism and you know so they're drowning the spirits out of the people and so well Alti I'm gonna I'm gonna keep I shouldn't it's not fair to have you be on late there's somebody else that I'm gonna bring out in a second here but any any any last things you want to say you you don't have a channel or anything like that so you you have nothing you have to pitch you're just a you're just a you're just a civilian right I have a blog in Finnish oh okay acujarvi.net you can use google translate it will do decent job these days okay so it's just my surname dot net without the accent okay well thank you Alti really appreciate this I'm gonna I'm gonna bring in