https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JsLVwC9refM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is my rough draft for Sunday sermon. Every week I work on my sermon because I'm a pastor and the sermon develops throughout the week and since I've started my YouTube channel on Fridays, I usually do a rough draft of my sermon. Now, the sermon may change between now and Sunday. If you're interested in seeing the Sunday version, sometimes I drop the link a little later, sometimes I forget, but you can always find it on the church YouTube channel. This week is Pentecost and this week is also the week when a film by Paul Schrader is being released. Now, not everyone may know that Paul Schrader, who's a celebrated filmmaker, grew up in the Dutch reform tradition. He went to Calvin College and this week it was quite interesting to find him doing the last few months doing the circuit amongst some people who are also deep within the Dutch CRC tradition. Just to the right of him here, you can see Rich Mao and Rich Mao, of course, taught philosophy at Calvin College for years, became the president of Fuller Seminary and this is Paul Schrader delighting a room of people talking about his films. Now, this is really rather interesting because Paul Schrader, in fact, after college, I don't think he even finished Calvin, I think he just put in two years and then he went out to make his way in the bigger world of Hollywood, always writing things that would, you know, it's interesting because Schrader grew up at a time in the Christian Reformed Church when movies were not allowed and The Sound of Music was kind of the movie that got the church into the theaters and Paul Schrader went on to make movies that were nothing like The Sound of Music. One of his films most directed at the Christian Reformed Church, at least at Dutch Calvinists in America, was Hardcore about a girl who goes off to a young Calvinist convention in California and gets sucked into the porn trade and her father, who was played by George C. Scott, goes to try to get her back and gets immersed into the sex, the porn trade and this is a movie written by this young CRC boy and he goes on to make movies such as American Gigolo, Cat People, The Mosquito Coast and especially The Last Temptation of Christ, which he wrote an adaptation of the novel and I remember quite well that Last Temptation of Christ being picketed ferociously by many Christian groups and here's this young boy who grows up in the CRC, makes it good and this is what he goes on to do and so now it's rather interesting that here he's in a sense being welcomed home and wined and dined by, you know, by the elites of the evangelical world and this is quite interesting. So it was interesting too when I listened to this interchange. Schrader not only grew up in the Christian Reformed Church but was also well versed with the broader evangelical world and here he tells the story of going forward at a Billy Graham crusade. The path toward the holy is a private path and it comes through waiting and seeking instruction. When I was a kid, I did go to the Billy Graham things, you know, and I came forward as George Beverly saying, just as I am. I felt that as a 10, 12 year old, I felt that real great feeling of going forward. But as I got older, to me it just seemed to be a kind of manufactured little bit of show business and I tried to find another way to get to that place. Now it's interesting here because he's talking about how our feelings are manufactured and so he had this experience as a young boy and it seemed supernatural but later he realizes that wow, I can produce this feeling in all kinds of different ways and he goes on to make movies that produce this feeling. And so what happens when you realize that all of the experiences that you identified as being supernatural now are somehow clothed in the natural and then is there anything left? And I noticed a similar thing this week. I think I've been doing some videos on Jordan Peterson and Matt Dillahunty who I had never heard of before this and he grew up in the church and he was Southern Baptist and he had these experiences of the Holy Spirit. Confirmation of, I'm fine with accepting that people have these experiences. I was for many, many years fundamentalist Southern Baptist and I remember standing in church and feeling what I would have described at the time as the Holy Ghost sweeping through me. Now many years later I look back at that and I say why did I describe this particular experience this way? It's a unique experience. It's of the same quality as something you might experience from a drug or I've experienced similar things from music and drugs and sex but they're not all exactly the same and this is kind of the caveat that the believers for any one of them would use is oh the thing you're talking about when you had awesome sex or you were on drugs, that's not the same as what I felt the Holy Spirit. I felt all of them. The reason I would have said at the time that I had been filled with the Holy Spirit is because everybody around me was saying that too. It's not like I have any sort of, any way to demonstrate a causal connection between a Holy Spirit and my experience. It was I had an experience and I like everyone else around me attributed it to the Holy Spirit. Now this gets interesting because Schrader is now in his 70s and Schrader is, you can tell in the little clip of the film I'm about to show, this is something that he wrote back in his youth but didn't dare to film and thought he would never film and thought he would throw it away but now in his 70s he returns to it and he's struggling with these questions of we feel something but do they connect to something else? Are they real? Are they just manufactured? And this actually in terms of the conversations that we are present today, we wonder is there anything out there but us? Can there be a God beyond what we experience and is this real and does it matter? And so then now Schrader makes this film and I'll just play a little clip of it. I've decided to keep a journal to set down all my thoughts and simple events of my day. I will keep this diary for one year and at the end of that time it will be destroyed. I encouraged my son to enlist. It was a family tradition. Six months later he was dead in Iraq. I was lost. My son's the reading of the Lord. Praise be God. So how are you? I'm fine. No really? It's been a while since we've talked. Even a pastor needs a pastor. Did you see the doctor? You need someone to take care of you. I want you to be happy. I know that nothing can change and I know there is no hope. Reverend Tuller? Yes Mary? You must come over. You must come over now. And so here we have this film of a pastor who is struggling to keep his faith. He seems to have lost it. He's going through the motions. His church has become more of a museum than a living vibrant church. His friend, his pastor in a sense, is the pastor of the mega church down the road who according to everyone would be more successful but that only begs the question as to whether all of this is a show. Can any of this be real? And if this isn't real, where are we and what matters and does anything matter at all? And so you see in a sense, Dilla Huntie in the confidence of, he looks like he's in his 40s or 50s, in the confidence of the strength of his youth, declaring dogmatically this is not. And then you see Schrader who has been down this road, who has climbed to the peak of Hollywood prominence, who has in a sense been to the mountaintops of this world, comes back and says, Oh, makes a haunting movie about, can we believe? What if all we have is the violence and degradation and corruption of this world and these things that we have invested ourselves in, there's nothing there. Part of this, I think, has to do with the spirit of where we live now. We talk about this Holy Spirit and Dilla Huntie talks about that and I felt something and it felt so real and Schrader says, I walked down the aisle but later I could manufacture this stuff. And so here we see our impulse. This is our default way of approaching experience. And we immediately ask, can we isolate it? Can we duplicate it? Can we fabricate it? Can we predict it? And if we discover that we can do any of these things, then it isn't real. But then we have to ask, well then what is real? Can there be any truth? Can there be anything real? And you might say, well, you know, you can indulge these things as a hobby. You know, you can produce these things with drugs and alcohol and sex and music. And if you enjoy them, go ahead. But they can't mean anything publicly. Publicly, you must follow along with whatever the dominant show is in your realm. And part of what we deal with here and now is that many of us in the West feel ourselves at the pinnacle of the world. We look down on the other places of the world where they actually imagine that the things that they feel are real. And we look at them and say, no, we've been through that. You're being fooled. How do we know? Because we have money and we have power and we have technology. And maybe we're not happy, but at least we're real, according to what we define as real. It's very interesting. I was reading in this book by Christopher Hitchens, less famous brother who followed Hitchens road. But while Hitchens became one of the four new atheists of prominence, Peter Hitchens reconverted back to Christianity. And one of his trips to North Korea, you know, this supposedly communist country, godless country, the godless, the god, the god that they would allow was the god of tradition, where every year they could go out and they could make a festival of rice cakes, because the family traditions were private. And so in North Korea, where the state dominates everything, that would be allowed. But certainly not any word from a god who might claim allegiance and authority in the public sphere that the dictators of North Korea know could not be allowed. And so then we see Pilate and Jesus has been brought before him. And Pilate knows that this guy hasn't been on the road at the Roman radar very much. They've probably checked him out and they know he's, you know, he's not showing all the signs of many of the other pretended messiahs of their age in terms of trying to raise an army and collecting weapons and plotting the overthrow of the Roman state. This Jesus hasn't been doing any of that, but the leaders want him crucified and it's easier just to see him killed than to fight them. So he puts him on a cross and puts a sarcastic sign just to stick it to the religious authorities and calls him king of the Jews. And when he is crucified, his disciples despair. Three days on the third day, he is then raised according to his disciples. But he doesn't parade himself before Pilate or Herod or Caesar. He doesn't do any of the things that the public script would imagine would be important to do. And then he appears to his disciples and then in this one appearance, he declares that all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to him. And in another appearance, he ascends and is covered by the clouds. And the disciples think, OK, but how will he rule? Now, our perceptions are funny things. I've been seeing some videos about them and hear this story about this, this, this jewel beetle in, this jewel beetle in Australia that that was almost brought to extinction because it confused beer bottles with female jewel beetles and made it like crazy with them, ignoring the real jewel beetles. And the person who made this video said, this is how we are. This is how our perceptions are. We're working on this interface. We're disconnected from a reality that is below us. And this is how we act. And we see this with and we've known things like this for a long time. Four percent of the population, they see sounds and we think, well, what sense does that make to see sound? And, you know, while we can maybe come to some understanding of it, where these people have weird wirings in their brains, but, you know, what does it mean? What does it mean for what we know? What can we know? How much do we know? Well, when the day of Pentecost came, which was a Jewish festival, they were together, meaning Jesus' disciples, and suddenly a sound like a blowing violent wind came from heaven. Now, notice there wasn't a wind. It was the sound of a wind. And they're all thinking, what on earth is this? And it filled the sound, filled the whole house where they were sitting. Then they saw what seemed to be tongues of fire, but it really wasn't fire, that were separated and came to rest on each of them. And they didn't know what this meant, or maybe they had inclinations. And all of them were filled with the Holy Spirit. Now, this is, of course, Luke writing later, because probably at the moment they probably didn't know what they were feeling, and they felt it innocently, and they weren't deconstructing themselves. And they began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them. Now, what's interesting is that there was a Jewish scholar named Philo who lived in Alexandria, which was a city of far more prominence, and he was trying to explain Sinai, which gives us some ideas of the terms that people in that day would have used. And this is how he described Sinai. Now, what's interesting is that this was clearly in the imagination of the day what Sinai must have been, when God himself spoke of the Spirit. Now, what's interesting is that this was clearly in the imagination of the day what Sinai must have been, when God himself spoke to his people, but his people said, shut him up, he's too terrible, we don't want to listen to him. The disciples caused this? They were told to wait and prepare themselves in the way that they knew, which was prayer and meeting together. This was something done to them. This was something done for them. This was both within and outside their frames of references. It was inside enough to be knowable, and it was outside enough to get their attention, and it was in accordance with what they knew before, and so they could somehow understand the meaning of it, but not fully see it, which is in keeping with what we see in the resurrection stories of Jesus. Now, they were staying in Jerusalem, God fearing Jews from every nation under heaven. This was one of the three big Jewish festivals, and the room where they were meeting was likely close to the temple, and little Jerusalem, which is kind of a small city with a very big temple, was probably overflowing with these people from all over the empire that had mother tongues and many languages. When they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard their own language being spoken. It was as if God was speaking to them individually. Utterly amazed, they asked, aren't those who are speaking Galileans? Because, you know, you can tell people by what they wear and by their dress, and so they'd say, these are Galileans, but Galileans shouldn't be knowing the languages of the empire where the Jewish diaspora has spread. Then how is it that each of us hears them in our own language? Parthians, Medes, Elamites, members of Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontius and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and all the parts of Libya near Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs. We hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues. Amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, what does this mean? Some however made fun of them and said, they've had too much wine. And as over the last number of weeks we've gone through the post-resurrection stories, every time we see Jesus showing up, on one hand they recognize him and they're excited and they're afraid and there's always some who doubt. This seems to be our nature and given how fooled we are like jewel beetles with glass bottles and how mysterious our perceptions are like synesthesia where people see sounds. This is utterly human, but isn't the entire story of Jesus, God clothing himself in that which is recognizable to us, but yet in some ways slightly different, strange, attractive and disturbing? Then Peter stood up with the eleven, raised his voice and addressed the crowd, fellow Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem, let me explain this to you. Listen carefully to what I say. These people are not drunk as you suppose. It's only nine in the morning and we wonder is this Peter? Is this Peter who under the withering gaze of a servant girl denied his Lord three times now amidst the crowds gathered from all over Asia boldly stands up? If you continue to read in the book of Acts one of the things that you note over and over and over again is that these disciples who were wobbly and faithless and full of doubt are now somehow bold and bold in a way that gets the attention of people in a way that some are cynical, but some want to listen and some want to learn. No, this is what was spoken by the prophet Joel. In the last days God said I will pour out my spirit on all peoples. Your sons and daughters will prophesy. Your young men will see visions. Your old men will dream dreams. Even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my spirit in those days and they will prophesy. I will show wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke. The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord and everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved. Peter reaches back into the prophet Joel and picks up this Old Testament tradition of the day of the Lord, which is the day of days. It's the judgment day. It's the fear and anxiety and excitement of the end of the world. Just today someone sent me a tweet and wondered about Yeats' poem about the second coming and I remarked to him that there's not a period when I study the Old Testament or the New, there's not a period in which everyone feels they're living on the edge of destruction, which is exactly what we feel like today. Either it was the Cold War early in my life or it's Islamic terrorism and 9-11 or its environmental catastrophes or its global collapse economy or it's one president or another or whatever have you. We always know we're inches from the grave and Paul and Peter says here, in these days God will send out his spirit and we won't know what he'll do with it. And here we'll live on the edge of catastrophe but on the edge of delight and wondering which way it will go. Fellow Israelites, listen to this. Jesus of Nazareth was a man accredited by God to you by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did among you through him as you know yourself. This man was handed over to you by God's deliberate plan and foreknowledge and you with the help of wicked men put him to death by nailing him to the cross. What's amazing is that unlike the impulse that so many of us mealy weasely preachers today, lying preachers even if you will, have of trying to ingratiate ourselves with the crowd, Peter says you have to begin by recognizing that the evils of the world are not out there. They're all in here. And if you see yourself as responsible, the probably apocryphal GK Chesterton story where there's a newspaper does a contest asking people to write essays about what is wrong with the world and supposedly Chesterton writes just two little words, I am. I am what's wrong with the world. I cannot fix this world. In the words of of of the pastor and in first reform, I sent my son to Iraq and Iraq took his life. I wrecked my marriage. I'm wrecking my health on the bottle. I am of no good to God and his church. I am the fraud. Can I believe? Can God act? Can I be saved? Can history be saved? Can the world be saved? But God raised him from the dead, freeing him from the agony of death because it was impossible for death to keep hold of him. The beginning of the resurrection. Seeing what was to come, he spoke to the resurrection of the Messiah that he had not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay. God has raised this Jesus to life and we are all witnesses as witnesses of it. Exalted to the right hand of God, he was received from the father, the promised the whole he has received from the father, the promised Holy Spirit and has poured out what you now see and hear. For David did not ascend to heaven and yet he said, The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand and not until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet. Therefore, let all Israel be assured of this. God has made this Jesus whom you crucified. Maybe we should read whom we crucified, both Lord and Messiah. When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, Brothers, what can we do? Peter replied, Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. The promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off, for all whom the Lord our God will call. With many other words, he warned them and he pleaded with them, Save yourself from this corrupt generation. Now this is the God who authors. This is the God who does things when we're not looking. This is the God who breaks into this prayer meeting and explodes it with the sound of rushing wind, who sets it on fire with things that look like tongues of fire, who quite unknown to the disciples speaking, they're being understood by this mass of people from all over the Roman world. And you have to believe that what this launches is this movement that starts. And so often it seems corrupt. It seems on the edge of extinction. It seems that day by day it's going to fall apart and it loses and it just seems to get always standing on the edge. It's always standing on that apocalyptic edge. By bit by bit it grows. And then we wonder, can we believe this? Should we believe this? It's always, it seems, mired by sinful leaders doing sinful things. It's always standing on the edge. It's always there at the precipice of despair. But yet it goes and it goes and it goes. Dallas Willard once made the quip, where do you find God? Do we find him in our feelings? Do we find him by demanding a sign? Do we find him by rushing in and say, look, here, I can show you God. I can prove God to you. Where do you find God? You find him at the end of your rope. Because again and again we see it's the poor. It's the desperate. It's those who have given up hope. It's those who begin to realize that I have no power. I have no strength. I have no knowledge. And it's those who ask and it's given to them. It's those who seek, who find. It's those who knock and the door is open. Now we are scared, insecure, fragile and mistrustful. That's what it means to be a human being. And this drives us frantically to take the wheel. And this is what we do. We climb the hierarchies. We climb the ladders. And we try and take control of our lives. And we do so in the strength of our years. But each one of us at one point or another will discover it is beyond us. And we are weak and our strength goes and even the things we build decay. We wind up doing so at the expense of others. And it's when we see we have blood on our hands and responsibility around our necks and how we fail. Suddenly we realize if I am my own savior in Lord, I have a bad savior. I have a bad Lord. And if I am my own God, I've got a pretty lousy God. We will even kill if we have to because in the secular frame you only live once. And so I have to get mine. But God works in his own timing. And God loves to surprise us. And God waits until we finally realize that we are small. How little we can control. How so often we only surrender to trust. When we tried almost everything else and we have little left to lose. So what should you do? Do you want to receive the Holy Spirit? Will it be a grand emotional experience? Maybe. I don't know that Jesus felt particularly filled with the Holy Spirit when he prayed in the Garden of Gethsemane. And God said no. Sometimes we feel the Spirit. Sometimes we don't. Sometimes we imagine we're feeling the Spirit. And sometimes we're fooling ourselves. I don't have a lot of confidence that we pierce the natural world that our eyes can see. But I have tremendous confidence that the one who made nature can pierce it. And in fact has his fingers all through it. And in fact rules it from the right hand of God. And in fact can do things that we can't possibly ask or imagine. And so Peter says repent, which means turn around. Repent, which means stop trying to control everything. Repent, which means start trying to trust and be baptized, which is a ritualized death. And be born into a new life and begin to live in a new freedom of release from cynicism. And release from sin and release from condemnation and release from yourself tyranny. For today is the day of Pentecost. And let the Spirit blow.