https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CK3kNwDU61U

 find value because there's there's always there's always the element where in this world much value creation requires sacrifice at one level or another. And there's it's almost always the case that sacrifice sort of has a delayed relationship with value. You know, let's say you're saving for retirement. There's sacrifice sacrifice sacrifice sacrifice sacrifice in order to benefit later on. And so and and so part of the value, you know, there's sort of a transition where you want to sort of put the value in. Okay, I'm reaching my goals towards this later. And and so it's it's not people people suspect that well if you just listen to customers, you can know what they want. And to me that's sort of like if you just listen to the people who are in your church, they know what they want. Well, they kind of know what they want. They sometimes think they know what they want. But the truth is, if you actually give them directly what they say they want, sometimes that goes okay. And sometimes it really doesn't go well, partly because you're also dealing with a community of people and not just individual individual people. So I don't know. Surely this has to be a big piece of what you're talking about. Exactly. Especially since more recently of the last 10 years have moved into health and brought a lot of thinking into health, which raises a lot of the points you've talking about. Before we get there, one of the things that fascinated me about innovation and creating new products and services is it's it's the business process that has the highest failure rate. People who've analyzed this have said, depending on which industry you look at 70 to 90% of new innovations fail to deliver the business case that gave rise to them. The failure rate is super, super high. So the one thing that fascinated me, why is this the case? Why are we so rubbish at innovation? And so I look deep more deeply into this to say, what are the reasons? Are we just not good at making stuff or whatever? What is it? And what I found from the people who have been researching this, the principal reason why innovation is not successful is that we never understood the nature of the problem we were trying to solve well enough so we can perfectly build the wrong thing. And this happens a lot in organizations. So I thought, why are we not good at finding out what people want? Most people go, oh, we do market research. We're going to ask all sorts of questions. But then I was looking at the market research and most of when you dig deeper into that, what questions are you asking people? Most market research has presupposed the questions that are relevant and missing out what actually matters. They're not even asking about that. And therefore, I came upon an approach which I've used quite a lot and any of your listeners who are into technology are probably starting to come across. It's called like jobs to be done method. And it's a very simple but very powerful idea, which is people don't really want products and services. They want products and services are simply tools or enablers to get a job done. And there's a classic kind of example used in marketing, which is back in the 1950s, which think a marketer called Theodore Leavitt made famous, which is people don't want a quarter inch drill. They want a quarter inch hole. And of course, everyone's focusing on the drill and the build the drill, the drill, drill, drill, drill bits, and they want them silver, they want them gold, they want. And actually, the person just wants a hole. Now, the drill is simply a mean to get a hole. And if there's a better way of getting a hole, I don't need your drill. So those involving providing services got so fixated by their solutions that they're not actually listening to or understanding the nature of the problem that someone is trying to solve. So the jobs to be done methodology is saying what what sweep off all products and services off the table. Let's just forget about that. Just sit down. What is it that people are trying to get done? What is it that matters to people? Because when you ask them, what do you want? Sounds like an intuitive question. But what you're actually doing is smuggling two questions in at the same time. What is the job you're trying to get done? And what do you think the solution is to your own job? Now, people are very good at talking about their problems. They're not so good at coming up with the solution to their own problems. That's the innovators. You're the expert in this area. So leaving those two apart and just saying what what is the problem or the opportunity or the job that trying to get done? Who's doing it? What context? How does it? How does it get triggered? Let's walk through the steps. What are the needs that exist in those by doing proper research like that and go? Ah, so that's what people are trying to do. And this is why they're trying to what they want to feel about it. OK, now we've got a detailed model and we can go back and think about what can we build or create that can speak to that? Maybe we've only got a piece of it. Maybe we need to partner with someone over here who can build something else. So how do we get much better understanding the nature of the problems we're trying to solve so we can collect the right things together and present them in the right way? That is such a fundamental piece that's missing around not just businesses, but public services, even charities. I would possibly say even into the church itself. Oh, absolutely. And when you said, you know, they got so fixated on their solutions, they forgot the job to be done. I thought, well, there's there's I. That's what pastors do. They get here is the solution. They keep selling these solutions out there and nobody's buying and the pastors are part of the religion as well. Well, that's because and then you can have the devil or itching ears or whatever and whatever excuse that they they fabricate for why they're fabulously unsuccessful. But no, that's that's that rings very true.