https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SPZwRTOoAHk

 If Job is in the video, then people will watch it. Yeah, that's good. Yeah, that's true. I've noticed that in the comments, but they're like, ah, this guy should come back. That's right. That's right. Everybody wants to see Job back. YouTube should be talking. I'm going to mute myself and listen. You're not going to mute yourself. Please don't. Please don't. I mean, I've watched you. You've got this tremendous sense of humor. I don't know how you do it, but you should be in there. We'll at least have to put him in the thumbnail so that he attracts people. But yes, also part of the discussion would be nice. Well, it's a shame I wasn't born a hundred years earlier, because then I would speak Dutch, but I don't. I suppose it's also nice for your viewers that we're speaking in English, I suppose. I am astounded at how good the English is of the Dutch. I mean, is the Dutch language going to disappear? I mean, your English is just flawless. We lack patriotism, maybe. I think that's it. OK, so we won't have Job introduce himself because he needs no introduction. But how about you two? Who goes first? Should I go first? Yes. OK. Yeah. OK. Hi. So my name is Aaron in Dutch. You would say Aaron, but for purposes of this conversation, I'll say Aaron. I am 22 years old. I'm currently studying philosophy and a research master right now. So also from, I suppose, philosophical interests, I sort of got back at religion. And yeah, I'm in a conversation with both my dad and you guys, which is just great. So it's really interesting to see how sort of this has combined our interest into this conversation. So we'll see what it brings today. I'm looking forward to it. Where are you studying, Aaron? Utrecht. That's also where we met up with Job the other day. OK. So it's kind of in the center of the Netherlands. I know that most Americans usually have the reference of Amsterdam, but then very few other cities in the Netherlands. But Utrecht is fairly close to Amsterdam. It's in American distances, at least. And if you grew up Yankee Dutch, you know that there's an important university there that's important for Dutch history. That's true. That's true. That much I know. I've never been to the Netherlands, but that much I know. Yeah, you're welcome to visit, obviously. One of these days I'll get there. Good. One of these days. And your father. Yeah. Yeah, that's the old man then. So I'm 53. You're not older than me. No, no, you're 57 or something. I'm 56. 56. So yeah, that's probably pretty accurate. So yeah, what's to say about me? I'm the proud father of this young Aaron, and he sort of cooked up this meeting. So I'm very grateful to him. I'm learning an awful lot these days. It's incredible what's happening. So I really enjoy it. What do I do? I don't know. I did industrial engineering. That made me an engineer. Then I went into finance and economics. And then I went to South Africa when Nelson Mandela was elected president. And came back, worked on public transport. And then did my PhD in theology. Wow. So it's a bit of a strange mix. You had time to have a kid along the way, obviously. Not just one kid. Not just one. How many? We have six. Oh, more than me! We're good, but reformed citizens. So we plan on making something happen. I don't know. I guess we always wanted four, and the last two don't know. So yeah. Oh my. And you've got the obligatory books behind you. Yeah, I saw you. You had all these colors with bookshelves. So I thought I needed to see them. I thought I needed to set up with bookshelves. Because you want to zoom in later on and see what kind of stuff is in the bookshelf. I understand that. So I respect that. Okay. And Job just has a kitchen for cooking protein. Let's see if we can get him to talk. He's just going to shut up the whole time. Smile and laugh at us. All right. So the time is yours. What do you guys want to talk about? I don't know. You go. Should I go first? Yes, you should. I don't know. I kind of want to talk about my dad's stuff, actually, because that's why I'm interested in combining all these people into one conversation, I suppose. For those who don't know it, my dad is currently working on a book, and he is really interested in finding sort of an audience that sort of would fit the message of that book. But he doesn't quite know which audience that would be. So obviously he tried to find a possible audience for it. So I got a copy of the book and I made it like I think a quarter through it. Not that I wasn't motivated to do more. I just didn't have the time, sadly. But it did sort of make me think like, yeah, who is this actually for? In the meantime, my dad must have been, I think, both frustrated as well as enthused by the fact that I got so enthusiastic by this non-theologian Jordan Peterson. Like, what is going on? Why is he interested in this psychologist interpretation of the Bible? Whereas I'm a theologian and I know much more. It's probably not the case. He wouldn't be the only theologian to think those thoughts. No, exactly. That's good. Or a preacher. Yeah, true. But then again, I know that obviously you are someone who is also a theologian, a pastor, but you're also interested in Peterson's work. And then you've also reached quite a nice audience with that. And you're talking to many young people about this. So I was thinking like maybe there could be a potential overlap between your audience and a potential audience for my dad. So that's something that I want to get into today. And for that, we'll probably need to discuss some of my dad's theological views on certain topics. Okay. Well, all these, you know, one of the things that I've learned via YouTube is that I think a lot of scholars and academicians are really frustrated because they have all these ideas and they're just that these ideas have set their world ablaze and nothing's taking. And then Jordan Peterson comes along and whoosh. And it's like, why can't that happen to me? Exactly. Well, I also like we also figured out that probably my I think that Jordan Peterson likes the polemic nature sort of sometimes. Although, like, obviously, it has been pointed out that he is really devastated after those interviews. But at the same time, he he also does let those things get on his nerve quite a bit and then respond to them in quite a strong sense and also a provocative sense. And I don't think I don't know. I think maybe both you and my dad and maybe Job as well are just too Christian for that. They're just like, I don't know. They just want they have a bit of I suppose the temperament doesn't suit that quite as well. Okay. Okay. Well, let's well let's hear about the book then. So it's interesting that your son had these ideas about the book. So let's let's hear about it. What what what caused this book and what's it about? Okay. Let's first say that Aaron is far more interesting to your audience than I am. So let's but I can learn a lot. Well, we'll let the audience decide that. So that's one part of the story. But the other part of the story is I think it's actually quite tough now to to see my kids struggling with something like Christianity as a stigma now. So it almost seems like you have to be ashamed if you say you're from a Christian family. And some of them basically tell me I don't did at one point. I'm an atheist now. Quite proudly. Not anymore. I overheard him say that. It's more like he was in the canoe. We've got a river at the back of the house and he was coming with a friend in the canoe and I was sitting there where the canoes normally land. And he came there and he said and he said to his friend, yeah, I guess I'm an atheist by now. So what's going on? But he's not the only one. So it's pretty that's pretty impressive to see how people so you can study all your life and you can do all this stuff where you think you're trying to be a reasonable good dad. And it's gone. Blown in the wind. So I don't know how you do it with your kids, but I think it's challenging. And then they come home with the best types of girlfriends, boyfriends. And it's absolutely wonderful. And none of them have been raised a Christian. And they all have all these preconceptions about what being Christian is. And nothing resonates with me. Yeah. So I love Jesus because he says, don't judge and they all think that we are judges. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I feel so ashamed of that. So so when we were having our 25th marriage anniversary, we went to Portugal and I've got a knee problem. So I had to stay in the house sometimes when they went off the cliffs and go to the beaches and stuff like that. And I said, I should probably write it down, even if just to exercise for myself, if I can have an honest conversation about the creed, the thing that actually was supposed to make us Christian and what we can say if we really do not assume that the other person is Christian. And can we then still share what we find in it? What really brings anything of that to my life, to what I cherish? So if if if I walk off the cliff and they climb off the cliff, then at least they have something I thought to remember me by. But that's a bit overdramatic. What it ended up being, I read Drewerman, Eugene Drewman, the German psychologist, theologian. And I was I was getting a bit depressive about this is done wrong in the church and this is done wrong in the church. And I think that shouldn't be like that. So I was trying to find a voice that would honor the text that would sort of open up a conversation like difficult words like hell. I mean, you talk to Preston about hell a little bit last time around the news post. And and of course, it's beautiful to talk about what's in there because it illuminates so much if you want to go in there. But can you do it in a way that's respectful to Muslims, to nonbelievers, to Buddhists, what have you? So that is the exercise. And then I gave it to Aaron and he got to a quarter of it. So I decided, well, I'm probably not a good writer. That's first conclusion. And he said, yeah, you have to be on YouTube. You can't do this writing. And I said, I'm not on any social media. What are you trying to do here? And he said, go talk to these guys, watch their YouTube videos and see what you can do. So that's where we come from. Yeah. OK. OK. Why did you start with the Apostles Creed? I didn't. I do a lot of stuff. But the Apostles Creed was something like if you need to explain it to, say, people who really ask you or your kids, why are you Christian? What does that mean? The thing that they will have understood is that that sort of confession makes it a Christian or not. And I think that's problematic, by the way. So it's not that I that I think that's a good thing, but I think that is the case. So unless we are able to really discuss honestly about virgin birth and the return of Jesus and all that stuff in an honest way with people and acknowledging what we know and what we don't know and whether or not it makes any sense to us, that is relevant to our life today, I thought it was the hardest place to do it. So we should. So, so Aaron, tell me this is this is little this is a little sensitive because of course he's your dad and you want to want to respect him and not hurt his feelings. But inheritance inheritance. Job speaks divided by six. But Aaron you you had the you had the you had the you had the intuition that just maybe explaining the correct me if I'm wrong but explaining the Christian faith in that way and and for. Wow, for a long time, this has sort of been the way to explain the Christian faith you write a book, and you approach it from, let's say the Apostles Creed and but but you had, you kind of had an intuition that that might not get a lot of traction. Why not. First of all, I think I should comment on the fact that my dad told me explicitly that it's something to sort of like meditate on so he wanted me to only read four pages at a time. So, mostly like at most four pages a day. So then you do that but four pages not a lot so you don't really get involved in it, you do somewhat but you don't have time to meditate that much every day, especially if you're in college. So I did that and for like a few days and then you skip a day and then you skip two days and then eventually you skip three days and I noticed, like, it probably would have been better for me to just read a start to finish in like, I suppose like two three days. So that's just to let him know that it's no, there's nothing wrong with his writing per se. I suppose there might be something wrong with the concept of meditating on these texts that it isn't clear from the start that you need to meditate on them if you can also, you know, meditate on the mindfulness which is completely like a trend right now obviously, which may be a bit more shallow in comparison to what I'm saying. More shallow in comparison to what my dad is working with, but at the same time, it seems to draw the attention of many young people. So I noticed that then another thing that I noticed when watching stuff from, for example, Peterson, but I'm also watching John Faveke or Jonathan Pajot is that the manner in which they tend to talk about similar subjects, they do so without invoking certain buzzwords that are very necessary for Christians, but at the same time, tend to alienate people that are not entirely sure yet about their Christianity. And those are words like faith and hope and love. And these are words that my dad rightfully uses a lot because they're very important words and I think that you use them a lot as well and I think that they're important. But at the same time, they seem to alienate people because they're like, oh, those are the Christian values that I learned from Nietzsche are I should despise so much. And precisely for that reason, I think that this manner of treating it either from a in symbolic language with hierarchy works for some people, obviously less than what Peterson does is from more of an evolutionary perspective, I suppose, or a psychological perspective or John Faveke with his cognitive scientific perspective. It seems that even though more and more people are drawn into the importance of getting value back from religion, they're still too, I wouldn't say brainwashed, but they think that the scientific framework is too important to just let go of and they want to justify their religious beliefs through that first. And that is something that I couldn't find in my father's work, I suppose. So that's something that we could work on. But at the same time, you tend to, you know, there's a difference in explaining and explaining things away. And that's, I think something that my dad is also very careful with. So it's a dilemma. I think it's a bit of a bootstrapping problem as well. Monday, I was invited by an atheist friend of mine to go see Richard Dawkins lecture. So I went along, of course. And what I noticed there was largely a pretty young audience. And I did some writing about it on the Discord server, but one of the, a couple of things stood out to me. The Dawkins was very dismissive towards the idea of the idea of the Christian faith, at least. Like the Bible, he said, was written by Bronze Age camel herders with the less knowledge than a modern 11 year old. I'm thinking, have you read the Psalms? Have you read Ecclesiastes? Where do you get this from? But in the Q&A, there were questions like, well, what is the How can we make society more secular? How can we make people, for lack of a better word, believe in science more? And there seem to be, you know, Paul, you've called these people slow utopians, I think. Like they're slowly trying to, you know, if we, and I belong to the same camp. I mean, I recognize the irony here. But I think that's the thing. It's, if you're not ready to already look at it from a different viewpoint, that's just really difficult. Like, if I hadn't just bumped my head into Peterson, I wouldn't have looked at Paul's video and I wouldn't have seen the video where he analyzes the Sam Harris and this Peterson debate with, and that's where Weinstein says, well, I understand the God that Peterson is describing. That was such an important point. Because that showed, wait a second. This is about the relationship to reality that people have with whatever they feel constitutes reality. And then you said, Bas, in our conversation, which I'm just still going on my head again, I can't stop thinking about it. Is that you said that the conversation that Moses has in Exodus, where God wants to start all over again, and Moses, no, no, no, no, no. You said that's a Socratic dialogue. And that blew my mind. That makes me see parts of the Old Testament differently. Well, if that's a Socratic dialogue, now I understand better that the Old Testament is about the relation between God and humans and how you should as Peterson would say, contend with reality in, of course, a very different time in a very different world, but well, that makes interpreting the Old Testament as a as a very important collection of different things just way more. What's the right word for this? I would wager that there would be a large part in Dawkins's audience where you could pull the same trait that Peterson said, would use and said, here's the Cain and Abel story. And here's why there's resentment in there. And here's why God doesn't kill Cain, but he marks him instead. He's saying this is the mark of Cain where one human killed the other. Because they couldn't properly place themselves in relation to what life gave them and what being was. Because that, I don't know. I mean, I think there's really something there. And I think, I mean, Bas, you wrote that book, right, about this psychological approach to Jesus? To the historical Jesus. I want to read that. I think that the title sounds fascinating. And when you showed that book, I really thought it was interesting, but I didn't know it was your own book. So it's also really expensive. Don't worry. Don't worry. You end up with too many copies of your own. So that's fine. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah, there's a lot to be gained there. And in effect, we have in the Society of Biblical Literature, we have a group called Psychological Hermeneutics of Biblical Texts and Characters. I would love to have seen Jordan Peterson do his stuff there. Of course, he's now far too big that there will not be a room that can contain that. But that, well, and I must say the scholarly public might need some convincing to give him a fair hearing. But that's actually what we're doing there. Psychological theories, looking at texts and then see what kind of understanding comes into existence once you do that. And it's fascinating and it's opening up all new possibilities. So that's one of the things that I was really happy to look at his videos. I think completely. I think combined with what you've been working on regarding Psalm 42, 43, Panic Attacks, the limbic system, pulling in the Maascho's work, similarly to how Peterson does in Maps of Meaning. Seriously, there's, I think there are loads of people who would be very interested in what you're trying to do. Maybe now we are losing the audience because we are throwing in too many different things. Sorry about that. No, I don't think necessarily. And again, I think that was part of what Peterson demonstrated because, you know, when I found his videos, I found them engaging and hundreds of thousands, even millions of other people did too. And when I found his videos, I found them engaging. And hundreds of thousands, even millions of other people did too. And when I started putting my videos online, which are one or two hours of me rambling in some ways and just dropping in other videos, people find that interesting enough to watch at least a few hundred or a couple thousand of them every now and then. So we shouldn't sell people out. But I think it's helpful. As human beings, we can't help but follow certain, I'm going to pull some James K. Smith here and I'm going to pull some René Girard here. We can't help but imitate certain liturgies. And some of these liturgies are enormously powerful and have been enormously helpful for many, many people throughout the ages. But We can't always just keep going back to that same bag of tricks. And that isn't to say anything about that bag of tricks. But when I was a college student, so you know, I grew up with mom and dad and I was, you know, you know, all of us old guys on this call, we were young ones too. And that wasn't so long ago. It might be, you know, 40, you know, 30 years ago. But I went to, I grew up as a Christian and my father was a pastor and I went to Calvin College. And Calvin College at that point and still does sort of had the position where we're not going to make you go to chapel, we're not going to force you to believe we're not really going to ram this stuff down your throats. So, you know, I'm at college and I decide, you know, do okay. So I was raised a Christian and all that stuff. I'm at a Christian college. That's fine. I don't have any problem with any of this. But do I believe any of this stuff? And so I started in a sense reading the Bible for myself in a way that I never had before. Like I had to read for, say, let's say school assignments or something like that. And I start reading the Bible. And one of the things I noticed right off the bat, I started reading the Bible. is that this, this evangelical way of approaching the Bible and all the language wasn't in the Bible. And neither is the Apostles Creed. And that's interesting. And, and then I read Jesus and I was, you know, as a college student, I was quite frustrated by the kinds of things that Jesus seemed to pay his attention to. You know, healing on Sunday, wrangling over hand washing, you know, miracles. Well, they're kind of cool. But of course, because of our cultural location, we're a little skeptical of them. And so then you go on and you start reading, you know, Paul's letters and things like that. And that only gets worse because then they're talking about all kinds of other things. And so I started reading the Bible. And so then you go on and you start reading, you know, Paul's letters and things like that. And that only gets worse because then they're talking about all kinds of other things. And maybe some little tidbits are recognizable to someone who's broadly evangelical. But so all of this is to say, it does not surprise me at all that in a time of rapid cultural change and dislocation, that the that many of the things that we're talking about are not in the Bible. And so, you know, some of the forms of generational indoctrination, and I'll use that word not in its pejorative sense, are failing us, partly because the church is now facing the church, the church is in competition with a whole lot of other liturgies and enormously powerful tools that those liturgies employ. And so the church didn't have to compete with Apple. And, you know, any of the other, a number of years ago, there was a really interesting piece done by Frontline called the Merchants of Cool, where it effectively demonstrated that the commercial world for the most part tries to capture the imagination of teenagers and they bring that all the way down to little kids and breakfast cereals in order to groom them for a world of cool. And so they're trying to make the world of consumption, which they are taught to believe will somehow satisfy them. Now, as with any idol or false belief, you can only play this game so long, and it runs out of juice. Now, obviously, that argument is being made about Christianity that oh, now we've all grown up and we all have science and we all know better than that. And so the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century. 19th and 19th century, the 19th and 19th century, the 19th and 19th century, the 18th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, the 18th is an old-fashioned 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th characteristics lit a 19th and 19th century, 19th, 19thagi met ky fulfillment 19th and 19th century, 19th century, 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19thощ 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19th century, 19th and 19th century, 19thelectricity probably find a publisher who'd be willing to publish it because I have a YouTube channel. Now what sense does that make? But that's the truth. There's a lot about this world. Right, I know. I know. So the fact that there are, and this is one thing I've been delighted to see with my channel, is that I'm delighted to give just a little bit of exposure that I can to many, many people doing really amazing things that no one will hear about because the public space is drowned out by the major marketing companies. And via social media, that's sort of starting to break up, but there are other dynamics that are at play. So good for you, Aaron, in terms of poking your father and saying, hey, wake up. The world has changed. You just can't write a good book and have people read it, even your own kid. So yes, I told him to record an audiobook version of what he's writing right now. Then maybe people will also pick it up. That's very true. You should definitely do an audiobook. I was one of these guys that reads books by listening to two double speed audiobooks. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's how I get my reading going. Otherwise, I'm just not a very active reader, sadly. But yeah, I do the same thing. And partly because I have to shower, I have to drive, I have to do dishes, I have to do all these kinds of things. And to sit there with a book requires a certain kind of time I don't have a lot of. So yeah, yeah. For example, I am reading one of the books that Peterson has also recommended. It's a book by Eric Neumann, The Origins and History of Consciousness. And that's a book that I really want to take the time for. So I'll be spending a few minutes from my day to actually read that. But then other than that, when I just want to like get a, I don't know, just read a book that is just important for me now, which I don't, I don't know, which I don't necessarily want to take the time to because it's not as comprehensive or nonetheless difficult to understand this book like Neumann's, then I can easily just, you know, listen to it while cycling to class, essentially. I think the question that we have to contend with is how will the Christian life be conceptualized and communicated? And that's, that's part of our struggle now. And I think no one is smart enough to be able to sit down and predict what that will look like as the world turns. But we will probably figure it out together if we talk to each other and continue to write books and actually have people read them and do all the kinds of things that you guys are doing. So, so I want to go back to this little canoe incident and talk about the atheist quote, because again, the people themselves are the source of the information. That's key. That's why on my channel, I like talking to a lot of people because how am I going to learn if I don't hear what people think? So, so what do you want to know? So tell me about it. Okay. That's okay. That's should I? Okay. I was obviously raised religiously. And I was actually, I was expected to go to church until my 18th birthday. But there were times when I mean, I was definitely still a firm believer at the age of 18. But at the same time, when I would go to church, I would just secretly sit in the corner and put earphones in and listen to music when no one was watching. So I was clearly not motivated to go to church anymore, but I was expected to go, I suppose. Then I finally turned 18 and I no longer had to go to church, which was just great at that time. And then slowly but steadily, I sort of got more in touch with more, I suppose, secular worldviews. I did still sort of retain my belief through a real appreciation for music. At first, I was a big Switchwood fan. And in recent years, I'm a big Sufjan Stevens fan, and both of those are very Christian artists. So even if I didn't really feel it myself, I could always feed it when sort of listening to their music or playing their music. So I didn't like quite ever lose it. However, then when I went to university, I think at the age of 19, probably, which was a liberal arts and sciences college, I took my first philosophy class from a professor who is very much opposed to Christianity. I won't mention his name, but he very much made me question what I used to believe before, even though I wasn't entirely sure if I found it convincing all the time. And also, as I pointed out, I wasn't even sure if I was a believer at that time, but the little belief that I had left, he seriously made me question. And then also, I started reading philosophers like Nietzsche, who was probably even more significant in allowing me to really criticize my Christian beliefs. And that's how I sort of gave up on Christianity at the time. And then one final thing is that I'm a huge fan of the show Rick and Morty, which obviously Rick and Morty should be indicative of any beliefs that I have about this world. But one very common thing that is at the forefront of Rick and Morty is that life is meaningless. And therefore, it's sort of like this philosophy that Albert Camus also really much embodies or embodied. And I did find it persuasive. So not necessarily that they said it, but also the fact that more people around me held this view that life was indeed meaningless. But that's actually great because in meaningless life, you can create your own values, which was nice. But at the same time, I don't know, it didn't really fulfill me. So I suppose I was indeed an atheist for some time, but soon after I noticed that it wasn't fulfilling. And then when I took another class, which was specifically about philosophy in relation to the philosophical notions of God, I noticed that my professor had particular kinds of criticisms of the Bible, which I didn't think were very persuasive. So all of a sudden, even though I wasn't a believer, I was also like, yeah, but this is a weird type of criticism against it. So I started defending it again, in a weird sense. Or when I did find something persuasive, I would go back home and ask my dad like, hey, so what do you think of this? Now maybe you'll become an atheist too. And then obviously my dad would be like, no, I'm a theologian. I've studied this. I know an explanation for this. I'm like, oh yeah, that makes sense. Then I would go back to class and I would also have this rebuttal against my professor and we would have many discussions. But yeah, and then whilst doing research for that course, I first stumbled upon Peterson's videos, which I'm very thankful for because that's also how I got to know Peterson mostly as, well, someone who thinks about religion mostly and to do with archetypes and all that, and not so much with politics because if I had sort of encountered the political Peterson first, then chances are that I would have encountered a mischaracterization of him. So I'm very glad that I discovered him through that religious perspective. And then all of a sudden, religion became a whole lot more interesting again. And I wouldn't say that I ever became, since then, I'm still not comfortable calling myself a Christian. I mean, I'm comfortable calling myself a Christian in my acts, as Peterson also points out. But at the same time, when I look at it philosophically, when I try to think about arguments for and against the existence of God, I think of myself more as an agnostic thinker. But in most of my feelings and my values and my act, I remain a Christian. And that's also what I notice when I get into this stuff and look at your channel and look at Bajau's channel or Peterson's channel. So that's where I'm at right now. So I suppose maybe I wasn't atheist, but I was never like a true Nietzschean atheist who was comfortable with the fact that life is meaningless, not for a long time. I have to say, Aaron, I have huge respect for the fact that you will debate your theologian dad. Yeah, no, I also have much a lot of respect for my younger self because my older self is not that stupid. You learned something that the old man isn't quite as dumb as I thought he was. Yeah. Well, let's hear from the old man a little bit. Now, I don't see part of the, well, I guess it's probably different in every family, but often part of the weird thing about being a parent is that your kids, and this is part of the mystery of life, and the mystery of these kinds of things that, I really love the way Vervecky manages some of this stuff and some of the language that he gives, that your kids probably have so much perspectival knowledge of you, and they see you with so much honesty because they've seen you at your best, at your worst, I mean, all of that. But one of the things they didn't see, and one of the things they often didn't know so much is necessarily before they came onto the scene and had eyeballs to watch you from all their different developmental levels. So, Bass, why don't you, even the little way that you told your story here, you didn't at the age of 19 say, I want to be a theologian, and I want to read the Bible. You studied engineering, you went to South Africa. Maybe you've been a, you know, why do you take Christianity seriously? Is it just that your parents were Christians, and the Netherlands used to be sort of really Christian, and you were just indoctrinated into this, and you don't have any idea why you believe this at all yourself, or do you actually have ideas why you think it's true? Yeah, of course, I probably think it's true because I'm raised in a Christian setting. Yeah, that's probably true. But my parents weren't that Christian, so they went to Canada, came back after some years to the Netherlands. My father worked hard. I mean, they're mostly, they were not like university people. So, I didn't get the idea that studying theology would be something, and imagining myself being a minister, I thought that's impossible for me to do, because I think it's a pretty impossible task that you guys have to fulfill. But I may be wrong. So, at least that's what, so I just went, go into business, do your work, work hard, etc., and that sort of was the idea. But at the age of 12, so that's quite early, my sisters got into touch with the navigators, you must be familiar with them, and the boyfriend of my eldest sister said, are you going to go to heaven and stuff like that? And I was like, what are you talking about? And he was telling me the evangelical tale of you have to convert, and then etc. And then I said, okay, I'm happy to say yes to Jesus, but I'm not going to do that. I'm happy to say yes to Jesus if that's what you want, because if that's in the Bible, I'm more than happy to oblige, but I can't see it as a conversion, because when was I not a Christian? I remember at six years old, I used to read in bed, because I would have, well, I think I was a little older then, but still in primary school, and I would read and the lights would be on, my parents, well, the stairs would be creaking when they went up, so I could always switch off the lights, I thought, until my dad was in the garden and he saw me. And I was really afraid, you know, when he come up, and I thought, well, I'm going to get a good old fashioned Dutch beating there. So he came into the room, and you can imagine then, of course, the light comes, because I had switched off the light, so the light comes in, this door opens, and there is this huge figure comes in, and he is sitting next to me on the bed, and he tells me all the stuff that he did as a kid that were wrong. And he kissed me, and he went downstairs again. And I remember being a young kid to go on my knees and thank the Lord that he had given me a dad like that. Of course, if he never gave me a beating, I would not have been this relieved. Okay, but anyway, so I remember this thing, talking to God and stuff, that was not a conversion. That was perhaps a coming of age that happens then. And when I turned 17, I went to university, I wanted to know what's mine and what's not. So I decided not to go to church, not to do anything else, but read the Bible front to come, front to back, all that kind of stuff, and really confront my own doubts. And yeah, I'm a doubter. I'm a serious, septic, doubter, scientific kind of guy. And yet, the other position would not have any less doubt attached to it. So then it all boiled down to the simple thing that I'm touched in my soul as a relational creature by it. So even though I cannot prove left, right, or center, I know that this David is a guy that I know, this Paul is a guy that I love, this Mary, this Jesus, all these figures are figures that populate my mind space. And I'm very, very happy with them. And I can be part of their world and they're part of my world. So yes, that's what I liked about what Jordan Peterson was saying, that every generation has to make a new mix of what you get from the previous generation and the new world that you live in. And you have to do something with that. So that's sort of forged itself when I was 18, 19 years old. So yeah, I didn't have an atheist period, although I'm beset with that. You didn't have Rick and Morty as well. So that's very interesting. Yes. And when I read parts of the books that you recommended, like Zarathustra, then I really felt sorry for the guy. I said, you have been set with doubts as well. You don't feel comfortable at all. And I also read even Yalom's psychological reading of Nietzsche Webt. And he imagines Nietzsche going to Freud. So that's a beautiful fantasy that he's writing about. And that's really the difference between knowing facts and being in the world. And I know that Nietzsche is calling you out to take responsibility for yourself and to throw away all this bourgeois Christianity. And I respect that. But there's so much in there that's not bourgeois. And that is so real on a visceral level of being, level of... There is this psychology guy, Hjalmar Sundein, who wrote in the 60s about the psychology of religion. And he talked about this. He talks about how we communicate with God through the story material that we have accumulated over time. And that's really what's happened with me. So that's my world. And I think when I came across Peterson and I began to realize the effect he was having on people, I wanted to know why. Because as a Christian minister, I'm far less effective than he is. And aren't I supposed to be trained and equipped to do this? And aren't I supposed to bear the truth in a way that he doesn't? And yet he seemed to be a far more effective evangelist than I could have ever hoped to be. So what's he doing? And this especially from a guy who equivocates and shrugs and sputters when people ask him if he believes in God, which seems to be sort of table stakes for Christianity. Unless, of course, you're one of these highfalutin Dutch pastors who can go on the internet and say, he's still a pastor and doesn't believe in God. And that everybody listens to that and clicks on that because of that. How does that work? But it's, you know, Peterson's, you know, one of the things, so I'm continuing to very badly make commentaries about Peterson's biblical series, which I think is important. And I'm still trying to, I still work to figure out, okay, what's really going on with all of this stuff? And one of the things that I've come to is that, in fact, we actually are, we actually are not terribly conscious of who and what we are down below the surface. And that which means that the likes of Freud and Jung and a bunch of these people had a point in that, you know, when I first started reading Jung, it was like, well, why do you pay so much attention to those doggone dreams? Who cares what you're dreaming about at night? I was like, well, yeah, it's a little crazy, but go ahead, Joe. You want to say something? What you said reminded me of, I think what makes Peterson interesting is that, similar to what you're saying about who cares about dreams, is that Peterson watches himself very, very carefully. And he pays attention to that voice in his head, as he's described in Maps of Meaning. I think once you start to scrutinize yourself really closely, you start to notice you run on all sorts of weird assumptions. Like I have this weird, very weird experience now where I have the same atheist friend who took me to Dawkins. I have discussions with him now, where I find myself on the other side of the debate. Now, as I've always told you, Paul, this wasn't supposed to happen. I blame you, partially. But, you know, I keep saying, well, but you keep saying morality is subjective. But then you say that God is immoral. I mean, how are you doing these two things? And I mean, he's a great guy. And we have very friendly discussions. But all I'm trying to do is like pay attention. Because as soon as you start paying attention, you notice you run on all sorts of presumptions. And, well, you have to. I'm not saying that's wrong. But the more attention you pay to it, the more you see, well, I mean, so there's this interesting thing. Sorry for hijacking the conversation. No, go ahead. That Dawkins said, he was talking about a mathematician who was writing these great mathematic papers, beautiful formulas, great work. But in his private life, he believed that the universe was 6000 years old. And Dawkins said, what a waste of a perfectly good brain. And I wanted to yell value smuggling. Because he just showed his metaphysics. And his metaphysics is that truth is sacred. And truth is the life and truth is the way. And like, oh, we're not so different. And but he doesn't look at that. Because he says, well, those 10% of scientists that say they're Christians, that they're probably just spiritual. They're not really Christians. And thinking, well, I know that I know on Twitter, the Dutch guy, I don't know personally, but the Dutch guy was involved with that black hole photo that did the rounds recently. He's a Christian that influences his decisions. But Dawkins would say, no, no, that they're little like it just spiritual. There's no way that he can, he can see that those two things go together. But if you if he'd really paid would pay attention, he'd see he has a metaphysical. He rolled, he rolled his eyes at me at the book signing table and said, I've converted. Poor guy. Not even on your deathbed. Go ahead, Aaron, you wanted to say something? Yeah, because it's both related to your much earlier point about why is Peterson reaching this audience and why I am a pastor was supposed to be much more equipped is not reaching this audience. But then also to your point that he is pointing out that if you start watching yourself, that there's an awful lot you can learn from that. And also that indeed, someone like Dawkins might be value smuggling because he's not watching himself closely enough. And that's what I think Peterson's impact indeed has been is that through I suppose, if you think about Kierkegaard's leap of faith, and this is a leap of faith that we need to take, it's an irrational leap of faith towards belief, because otherwise, you know, you'll just stay in this meaningless dread. And that's, I think how most young people see Christianity, like, it's this, it's this huge leap, and I don't want to take the leap, because I just don't have the faith to get there. And then I think when you really pay close attention to what someone like Peterson is saying, you're noticing that he's taking much less, if any, of a leap in comparison to someone like Dawkins, and also in comparison to most pastors. I'm not trying to obviously do make the assumption that what you're doing is not meaningful, because it very much is the case. But I'm trying to understand why someone like Peterson has two million subscribers and why it's that large of an audience. So, in a way, I think that he has, in a, I still don't really know how, but he has minimized this leap of faith to an extent that, first of all, most Christians, but also most new atheists just aren't able to do, they still take a leap of faith. And that's the leap of faith where he's value smuggling in, like Joe pointed out. So that's something that we could also discuss. Well, I think you're right. I think that's well said in that he minimized the leap of faith, because he's constructing sort of a, and I don't mean again this in a pejorative sense, sort of a tower of Babel. He's trying to build himself up. And okay, he has the idea of God, and he's pretty sure that the idea of God is necessary for our functioning and for the creation of our civilization. But what beyond that? And, but then do you need something beyond that? So there's a guy in the comment section named Carl, who has been on a bunch of the other channels. I should track Carl down and have a conversation with him directly. But he keeps making the point that all this stuff that VanderKlay talks about, he's right in that it's sort of a, Esther keeps reminding, it's not really natural theology. Okay. But it's sort of a natural theology that sort of builds its way up to God. And yet, yet not a big leap of faith required. But, and this is very Petersonian too. Every day that we live, we make decisions. And those decisions are based on things. And as Job quite nicely said, a lot of those things that those decisions are based on, we've paid almost zero attention to. We've simply inherited them. We're simply acting out of them. In fact, most of our actions in that case are anything but rational. If we imagine rationality is this line of intentionality by which we project outcomes from certain causes and guide that process. So we don't live terribly conscious lives. And, you know, I think both of you said quite well to, and CS Lewis basically said this too, CS Lewis basically said, you know, if you want to be an atheist, you'd better be very careful about the books that you read. And I think if you want to be an atheist, you'd be better be very careful about how much you pay attention to and what you pay attention to, because you're very quickly going to, you're very quickly going to figure out that a whole bunch of these nice little easy answers that you seem to have which defeat all of these religious things out there are really no different from the nice little easy answers that a whole bunch of religious people have to dismiss your worldview. And if you actually wade into this stuff and start dealing with it, well, your life is going to get quite a bit more complicated. Yeah. And but in a good way. Exactly. Well, if I may say something to that. Yes. The I really like the idea of this world of things and the world of being. Because I think actually share with all these 80 atheists, the world of things, I love science, I really I don't I don't see any problem in researching anything under the sun. I mean, it's it's beautiful. I love it. And I, I don't I don't have a problem because this is the way that we work, we find out what is what is probable. And I love that. Now in the world of being, of course, a whole different discussion goes on. And I think that then the question becomes, what is the toolkit that you have to make that world of being if Harari is talking about intersubjective realities that we are sharing? What are effective intersubjective realities? Let alone the question of things. I mean, really just about so. So we have this this this this need now as as people on this planet to share stories and visions that that that that connect us. Otherwise, we will not survive with too many of us. So we need to do a lot with more with a lot less resources. And I think we can I mean, I'm working with economists now. And this story is beautiful. And the Christian story, like many other stories, is a very powerful story to to share. And that's all about being now, the only thing that is perhaps the leap of faith that I'm still making is that somehow God is part of my intersubjective reality that I share it also with something like Holy Spirit. But apart from that, I'm talking about one of the best toolkits, one of the best set of stories that helps us to really move to a world that we that we that we know how we can balance loving yourself loving the other and loving the whole whatever God is as as father of everyone. And I think that toolkit is amazing. So I think we should share this, even if we can't claim anymore on so called scientific grounds that it is the absolute truth. I still think it's mightily effective, comforting, helpful. And I'm happy to to learn from every other worldview, but a worldview that says, but there is nothing that helps us in being. That's just a poor worldview, because I already shared a world of things with them. You know what, where I come from. So so I'd like to learn from people how they inspire themselves and others. And if what you call new atheists would do that, I would happily learn from them as well. Yeah. And I came to, you know, when an Aaron, I really appreciate you sharing your story and boss, you're sharing your story too. And of course, I always love it when Job says shares his story. Because, you know, all of us, most of us who, who are, who are able to talk about these things are able to talk about them, because we've dealt with these questions ourselves, maybe not well, maybe not as exhaustively as others, no one, you know, how to make these comparisons, that's really doesn't really matter or work. But I came to a very similar point that I looked at, I looked at the perspective of the new atheists. And I thought, okay, what do I gain by picking this up? What do I gain by trying to stop talking to God? Even if even if that is completely fictitious, it sure works for me. So there's if there is no God, then I'm not offending any God by talking to the one I was raised with. So, you know, tell me, get, you know, what I'm gonna, I'm gonna have higher status in your eyes. It's like, I don't give a rip. And, and so, and, yeah, so people, people have to think these things through. And, you know, boss, you started, certainly, it is the, it is the longing of every parent who has faith that their child will share their faith. And that will be true of, you know, Christianity, of Islam, of many different things. But one of the things that one of the things that I, you know, I also believe and via my, my Dutch Calvinism, is that is as good of a witness as I can be, and I'm often not a great one. Faith is faith is the product of, of the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit is a member of the Trinity. And so the Holy Spirit is no less sovereign or involved in this world than any of the other members of the Trinity. And so finally, with all of these things, I have and know someone to trust the world with. That is such a powerful thing, emotionally, to live within this world. And I look at these atheists, and I think, oh, okay, I just like, like, just like you, boss, I pity them, because I was just reading, today, I was just in audiobook, actually reading Tom, Tom Holland's Dominion. And he, he tells the story of a, of a martyr who is being killed in a, in a, in a particular Roman persecution. And she's a slave, and her, her mistress, who is also a Christian, so they're all poured into the arena, and, you know, for the sport of the public, they are tortured all in these different ways. And this one slave girl whose name is remembered, her mistress, her name isn't remembered, many of the other high status people in town, their name isn't remembered. But the one slave who it didn't matter what her torturers did to her, she would not renounce. And the way people understood that was that she was formed with this thing called faith. And now suddenly, these propositional elements like the Apostles Creed come in. Because when when someone is perhaps, you know, sticking you with a burning coal, or, or beginning to flay your flesh and asking you, what kinds of, what kinds of things do they ask you about? Do they say, did you, did you tweet transphobic things five years ago? No, they want to know, do you believe in God? Do you, you know, do you, do you say that Jesus is God? And so what this little slave girl, or older woman who was a slave, you know, all of her years of slavery likely taught her a certain degree of toughness and mental discipline that her master never possessed. And so by virtue of her being able to maintain a creed, like the Apostles Creed, she did something that a whole Coliseum who came there to enjoy her humiliation, like what we do on these little internet debates, suddenly had a pause to think and reflect and say, here's a slave woman who had very little value in the eyes of this world, but now in the midst of torture, she exhibited something that put all of us to shame. How am I living my life? And of course, that happened thousands of different ways over the Roman Empire, until many, many people in the empire decided to imitate her, even though they weren't necessarily being tortured to death. So, you know, yeah, if you want to remain an atheist, you're really going to have to stick to some pretty narrow places and not see too much of life in some ways. That's a certain kind of atheist. Other atheists... I'd like to be a bit more positive, if I may. Oh, sure, go ahead. I think my Dutch Calvinism left in the end of the 19th century, so there's a pretty dour time it got preserved in immigration. Well, that's actually true what you say there. It is. I mean, in general, the Christian Reformed Church in America are a bit more conservative than the Evangelische in Germany or the Dutch Calvinists in the Netherlands, although we have quite a few old-fashioned ones as well. But no, no, I'd like to be a bit more positive, because what I find when I talk to people who think they are atheists, they are nevertheless... because faith, for me, is not the opposite of science. It's, of course, living in a trusting relationship. That is the biblical word for faith. And a trusting relationship, that's what you need, otherwise you won't survive with social animals. So if you don't have trusting relationships, you're not going to make it out of this world. So, and actually, they live this way because they are humans. So they live a life full of faith, even if they would fear to use that word. And if they stand amazed in nature, or if they stand amazed with their little baby in their arms, or if they stand in awe when a friend forgives them, all that is faith. And I'm not saying that it is any less real than what we have. The only thing I'm saying is we have a huge set of narratives and stories, both in the Bible and the slave girl that you're talking about, spanning centuries, spanning continents. So you're part of a huge story. You're part of such a great number of voices that you can relate to, that you can actually give words to these experiences that we share with all these atheists, Muslims, or what have you. So I'm far more positive about how they deal with their lives. What kind of words do they use? And I love to learn from them. And once we start exchanging on an honest basis, they'll find out that the words that we are using are pretty effective as well. And perhaps give some wisdom of the ages with it, and then make them understand the art that they live in and the institutions that they're part of. I mean, this whole society has not been built on nothing. That's, I think, Tom Holland's point as well. What we live today, the fact that we cherish the weak one, the fact that we think that humans are dignified persons, and even animals deserve a place under the sun. I mean, all of that is beautifully articulated in Genesis, in the letters of Paul, in the way that Jesus goes about. And that has had a huge impact on our culture. So I think you're just more in tune. And I do respect that you have to make that heritage into something new as you go into new generations. And some people will call that atheism, and others will renew the church. That's fine, as long as you don't dismiss it. Because then you're throwing away all the goodies that we have. Am I now preaching? No, that's fine. No, no, I mean, it's very relevant to a discussion I had with my atheist friend nowadays. He really enjoys having these conversations with me, while at the same time being really atheist. So I'm trying to figure out where that's coming from. But he doesn't understand where I'm coming from. He doesn't understand why I believe in God. And I keep telling him, I don't know either. It wasn't supposed to happen. I'm just as confused as you are. But I tried to explain where I come from to him, which is basically the greatest commandment from Matthew, combined with John 12.15. Anyway, love the other as I loved you. Which is basically what I take as the core of what I think I should aim for. And I combine that with the slave morality, which I see as a good thing, and the sacrifice of the other. Why am I a firefighter? All that stuff. And he says, okay, you write that down really great. But you don't need God for that. And I'm thinking, fair enough. But I need to ground it in something. And I've only been able to properly ground this in the absolute, which I call God. And he says, yeah, but you don't need to do that. You can just live like that without God. And so that makes me think, well, what's this problem with God? Is that some sort of judgment thing or hell thing? I mean, he has like a 30 years of evangelical background with bad experiences. So he comes from a different, like we're ships passing in the sea. You're calling it different. I know, I know. And so, you know, I appreciate that he takes me to Dawkins. But I mean, that is interesting, because to be honest, I don't have a good answer. I just find it easy to like, okay, you know, I'm just like, I just woke up and figured, well, it seems I'm not an atheist anymore. Like, that was more a thing I realized than anything else. Like, when I now think of God, I mean, it sounds bizarre, but it seems like, well, there seems to be something there that's real. I don't know what that means, or if I'm making that up, but it's easier than saying, well, I act as if, which is really weird, because act as if was easier first. So, but to be honest, I don't have an answer to the question of, well, you don't need God to live a moral life. I don't think that's wrong, per se. I don't think you need God to live a moral life, but then you need to ask yourself where that morality comes from, and why is it, why it is better than another morality, if those are, per definition, subjective. Now, that's maybe a whole different discussion. And it's a good one. I see, Joe, part of, so I, you know, my father, my father lived a very sacrificial life, in that I watched him spend, you know, people will sometimes, oh, Paul, you're so smart, you've read all that. My father was just as smart as I am, if not more, just as well read as I am, if not more. He spent his whole life working in, working in churches, small churches. He never had a YouTube channel, you know, in the denomination, people knew him and respected him, but his first 36 years he spent in Patterson, New Jersey, moving people's refrigerators and stoves, bringing them food, preaching sermons, doing funerals for people, you know, the funeral director got a body from the city and had to go to Potter's Field, you know, Stan will say a few words, and so call Stan. And so here's a guy who lives his whole life doing this, never making much money, and it's like, why? Why do that? Why sacrifice yourself for people that this world will never know or value? And this is where God comes in, in a big way, because the frame in which we live right now is, the implicit assumption is you have between zero and 80 to live your best life now, and your best life now is seen as, well, have as much enjoyment, have as much gratification, do all of these things and fill that up. Now you might say, well, I'm a firefighter because it's meaningful to me, and you know, long before Jordan Peterson came along, it could be that your service as a firefighter was a gateway drug to all of this, because you've developed in yourself a sense of meaning, but it gets to some point when, how do you sustain sacrifice, even if it's meaningful, in a way that this world says is irresponsible? And I always come to the resurrection and the life of the age to come that says to me, I can pour myself out from my neighbor in this world, and you know, it's very responsible. And why? Well, look at Jesus. The stories of Jesus are crazy if imagined within our present frame, because he lives 33 years, he has three years of public ministry. Well, that seems a waste. And the three years of public ministry tells his disciples, I'm going down to Jerusalem, and I'm going to be betrayed, turn over to Gentiles, and they're going to crucify me. And Peter says, that's crazy talk. And if I'm just working on a passage this week where Jesus says, you know, if you want to save your life, your souqe, your soul, that thing that you think is you, you want to save that thing, you're going to lose it. You need to take up your cross and follow me, and then you'll find it. That's nuts. And he says, anybody who doesn't do this when I come, when the Son of Man comes with his angels, I'll be ashamed of him. It's like, boy, you know, Richard Dawkins is going to read that thing and say, that's nuts. But actually, it's that kind of living that leads people to get a terribly expensive medical degree in North America, and then go and serve Africans for their whole life long. And if that's crazy, that's a beautiful kind of crazy, and I want the whole world to live it. So that's why, you know, I, God and morality are definitely connected. And we can kind of do things in short bursts. But, boy, for me, it's a lot easier if I've got the resurrection and the life of the age to come behind me to give myself to people who probably don't deserve it. Yeah, but also, it's a lot easier to love somebody, let's say, out of the Christian ethic, when you have a full belly and a good night's sleep. Oh, yeah. Fair enough. We can just live like this without God. Really, you're going to do that when, well, let's say your life is suboptimal, and, you know, somebody pisses you off on the road. Really, you're going to forgive them. Without anything outside of you that makes this life greater than just you and your wants and needs. It's not going to hold. It might work for a little bit. I should write a sermon about this. Job is the pastor of the discord. As I've been told. You've got something there. I mean, you call yourself Paul a pastor of a small church, but if you've got 10,000 followers, it's not Joel Osten yet, I mean, it's a big church that you're ministering to. You're known as the pastor of the IDW. Yeah, look at my congregation. I got a dude that says he believes he acts as if God is real. I've got some celebrity atheists, and I've got the only one who goes to any kind of religious organization with any kind of consistency, isn't a Christian, and makes culture war videos on YouTube for a conservative audience. There's my flock. But Paul, let's be honest now. Isn't that not the new type of flock that we're talking about? Are we not supposed to be there? Yes. For everyone? And can we maybe say, well, you're not just a Christian when you go into church, sit in a pew every Sunday, and read the Bible every day, and say your prayers? Basically, we're all concerned about how to be more loving in this world, how, what Fafek is saying, agape as a mode of being, how to practice that in the world. And if you are having difficulty in this day and age to accept certain creedal confessions, or to do certain religious things, but you are all committed to embrace agape as a mode of being, aren't you following Jesus? I mean, that's the next commandment. That question of definition is, I'm working really hard on that. I haven't made a lot of videos, but I think that in many ways is so much of what we're wrestling with now. Which is, you know, so Tom Holland comes along and says, all you people in the West and your values, you know, everybody outside the West looks at that and says, yeah, that's Christian. In the West, I'm not a Christian. You know, how dare you call me a Christian? And Tom Holland has a point. But the, you know, Kanye West also has a point where he says, you know, where he recognizes that in many ways for, I love the Kanye West story, because the American kingdom came for Kanye West. He's got all of this money. He's got all of this fame. He's got a beautiful wife. He's got, you know, he had a period he could have sex with anybody wanted to, was going to marry a porn star. You know, he had the life Donald Trump wanted. And he gets to a point and he says, gosh, what have I, I've gained the whole world, yet I don't have my soul. How can I have my soul? And then I'm convinced a lot of what he's doing is for his daughter, because he's now seeing himself through different eyes now as a father, instead of just a freelancer. And he wants, he wants his daughter to experience some of what he knows. And so he's off on this crazy tear now flying a gospel choir around. But, but this, what Kanye and Jordan have been working through is very much that they are in a sense doing theology with us and for us. And my complaint is the church does have, the church has no idea how to engage in this conversation. And that's, I think God will judge us for that. Yeah. And the problem that Jonathan Bajau also raised is that he does think this is a very beautiful development, but he isn't sure how it all stacks up in the end. So how do those families eventually start living together, even if we're increasing and improving our lives as individuals? That's something for the church also to figure out. Well, that's one thing. I think we talked about that when we met in Utrecht. There are different styles of being in a relationship to something that you can call God. We've talked about the extra-insect style that you see God as something of someone who has the mounds of you, who's a king, or a judge, a more relational type of God, and a more questing type of people who have a more, say, conceptualized God. And somehow we feel that we're jealous of having this relational type of God, which also, by the way, psychology of religion says is the most healthy type, the one that gives you the most support in your life. But somehow, because we're now these questers, because we have all these doubts, it's difficult to embrace that family type of God, which would also make us more family. So I'm a bit worried. I'm very happy that we're moving away from this judgmental type of faith. I think Jesus moved us away from that. I think Paul definitely made a huge switch from one side to the other there. But now many of us are these questers. And we still talk about God as something that we need to prove or not prove, whereas the relationship is what really helps you get old and let go of your life and see how things move on, even if you're no longer in control. This is what I also like in John Pervaike's approach, even though he is not doing it from a Christian perspective, but he is looking into the notion and concept of dialogue and discussion, not as a debate, but like one of two people ought to win, but really as something that in which both parties can gain insight. So even though John is not a Christian, that element just adds up to that broader Christian mission that we're all engaging in right now. That is useful, I think. Well, and John, so John made a video with Jordan Greenhall and Peugeot commented on it. In Toronto in September for a church, Urban Abbey, the three of us are invited for a conference. That'll be fun because, I mean, and I, you know, Peugeot, they're both sort of at the extremes. I mean, Peugeot went all the way down to the most changeless form of Christianity that we have on the planet, which is orthodoxy. I mean, they're still using the liturgy from, what, the fourth or fifth century. So he goes all the way there to find his roots, and Pervaike is trying to, you know, trying to build a religion that isn't religion based on cognitive science and philosophy, and it's like, oh, that's ambitious. As a pastor who deals in religion all the time, just to have people buy a religion that they say they already believe and integrate it into their lives, I find that challenging enough, but to build a whole new one, wow. So, but that's really where we're at in a lot of ways, and I love the way Peugeot frames a lot of these inversions that we've got to a point where Akira the Don made the comment once that, you know, so Madonna takes off her clothes, and how much more naked can Madonna get? And so now suddenly radicalism is Kanye telling his wife, I wish you'd dress a little bit more modestly, and, you know, Kardashian being like, I don't quite know how to respond to that. Didn't you love me because I'm all of that, and now you want to change me, and you're a man, and on and on and on and on. So, no, we're in this space now where, but yeah, I had a conversation yesterday with Warren Mills, whose guy I know from Australia, I'll probably post that tomorrow, where, you know, and Warren was talking about church scandals, and I told him, I think, I think gospel plus people will always gravitate towards church, because we can't do this alone. You know, even Job, your atheist friend, you know, you're going this way, and he brings you to the Dawkin event, that you're both working this stuff out, and if he wants to stay secure in his atheism, he should probably stay away from you. Well, look, two years ago, I was in the same place, so I'm very, very careful to assume I know things. I think, I don't know, I'm just rambling, what Peterson did, which was, what he says is, you're here, you could be there, and you know this, but you're not listening to it, and then you blame your resentment of yourself on other things, because it's some sort of strange defense mechanism. And then he connects it to some old story, at least that's how it worked for me, in a way, that's it, that story, just like how Yuba said, there's Socratic dialogue in Moses and God, and I think that's the debate. The debate is to show that you're already doing religious things, or are aware of these things, and you're sometimes aiming towards, I mean, you know that that feels good, but you're, for lack of a better word, you're too weak to consistently do that. And then Peterson says, but you must, you must carry that cross of the hill to that city on the mountain, Bako, and I think from there, once you start paying attention to yourself, because you start to do that, I have no proof of this, I'm just analyzing myself, then from there, you start to look at, well, what else am I not really paying attention to? And I think that could connect to what you're saying, Bas, in, well, that's kind of the quest God, the quest to get up the hill, but from there, once you start going, you might run into this father figure God who's trying to help you get up the hill. That's it, huh? What you're saying there, it's the difference between a God that is a, in the end, their proposition, or something that strengthens you and the people with you to move towards this whatever vision of a better place you have. Right, I mean, and it's not like the judgmental God might not be there, but it's not judgmental in the sense that, you know, let's say Calvinist, like you worthless sinner, you wretched thing that breathes, it's more like, that is the judgment in the sense that, well, but you're not that which you could be, let's get you there. And that's also the quest, but then they kind of combine them into all the quest is to be what you could be, because, well, shit, losing the big picture. You're getting help to get there because of that relationship with God who use a judgment to tell you where you should, you know, burn off the deadwood. Yeah, absolutely. Truth embedded in love. That's essentially what you're talking about. Right. Where's that from, Aaron? Well, so that's something that we discussed, I think on Saturday that, forgive me for not remembering. That's okay. You had four hours of sleep, so that makes sense. But we discussed how much a force like Peterson is a force towards the responsible side of faith, like get your shit together, and how much he's also pulling in love one another. And we weren't sure if he was as strong on the love side, but then we do know that he does discuss this idea of sort of embedding this truth value in love, but we were unsure if that's something that he had. And that's maybe something for the church to then figure out, which is actually in those communities. Is it coming back to you? Yeah, my pastor's been telling me similar things. Like, Peterson is way down under the weight of being and the responsibility of always making the right choice. I used to have that view because of Peterson and somebody said, oh, you're one of those rough wooden cross type people suffering under the weight of existence. But my pastor says, but that's not the point. The cross becomes light once you're aiming towards God. Because it's not like picking up the cross. My burden is easy and my yoke is light. Yeah, that's exactly. I wanted to point that out, that Christ also says that explicitly. Like, I will share it. And that also brings back that notion that he has done the work for us. And that's also why, to relate back to Kanye West, as soon as he becomes a father, he's like, I have to take care of this child. How do I do that? Oh, I realize someone has been taking care of me. So actually, that gives me the motivation to also take care of her and take care of all these people in my crowd. I like that you say that, Aron, because this is the biggest miracle that I ever experienced was becoming a father. And standing there with that little baby in your arms. I mean, we were in South Africa, in Johannesburg, Joburg. And she was born there after a horrendous long period and in a home delivery, because we Dutch like home delivery. So we thought we could do that in South Africa as well. And I found out there were two midwives for the whole of Johannesburg actually doing that kind of stuff. So that went on and we were completely exhausted. And then I was walking across the hill towards the print shop, where we would get our birth announcements. And I was like really looking at everybody around me, like, hey, you all have father and mother, or you have kids. And I finally said, well, if this love exists, I didn't know it existed. I mean, that you can love unconditionally without yet getting anything back. It's difficult for you to imagine Aron, but once I loved you in that way. All these atheist questions at you. Yeah, no, I get it. No, but I really felt that understanding God or the concept of God as a father really changed once that happened. I mean, it's unfair to say to people because not everybody becomes a dad or a mom. So it's unfair to say that's a requirement. But for me, it changed my whole perspective on addressing God as a father and what it means. Yes. And this is something that I think Perspectival knowing. And that perspectival knowing, if you turn that around into the Apostles Creed, now suddenly that word father in the Apostles Creed, you've now in a sense seen it from on top. And having seen it from on top, you know it from the bottom. And it's amazing. And one of my talks with Nathan Jacobs, talking about the Trinity, you know, father, son, Jesus, you know, when Jesus, you know, it's implicit and maybe Hosea, you know, you know, Ephraim, Ephraim, but Jesus brings it full into life. What a daring move. Because, you know, that's just so audacious, you know, Islam won't say that, that God is our father. And all that then gets built into that with each of us for good and for bad. But right there, right there, experientially, now suddenly because that you're embedded in that story, like you said so well, this becomes alive. Yeah. Yeah. I was also, that's something that I think that for Vakey might also be missing right now, even though I am really interested in how he's gonna end the series of his. But at the same time, there is this, I don't know, he's missing the notion of being a child to a father and therefore taking care of other people. I was at, someone once gave a lecture on sort of comparing Nietzsche to a French brother at Tese, we have this community there. And he said that they were both very interested in this sort of becoming of the child. So Nietzsche has an entire metamorphosis of becoming the camel, then becoming the lion, and then becoming the child to then be born again. But he pointed out that the difference is that Nietzsche never knew whose child he was then gonna be. So he is implying this relational aspect by saying, I want to be a child. And by saying, I want to become a child at the end of the metamorphosis. But there is no relation there because there is no father. And this is also what Peterson has been pointing out is like, there's no way to embed these values in such a way because you can't relate it to anything else. And this is something that I'll be interested to see how Vakey is gonna sort of integrate this into his series, but we'll see. It's interesting that you call Vakey here, that you talk about Vakey here, because I watched his video with Jordan Hall, is it Jordan Hall? And they were talking about their project. And I thought this is not that much different from what Paul was doing except for this father thing. Because Paul was really making a new family for meaning for people who were neither Jew, nor Greek, nor Roman, nor whatever. And it was at a time that Christianity didn't exist as a name. So he was really arguing why people who were coming from different backgrounds with different identities could nevertheless form a family in which took care of each other and which found meaning somewhere, of course, in the perspective of Jesus. So we now say that's Christian because if you follow Jesus, then you're a Christian. But at that time, that word had no currency, not at all. And the fun thing is, what was defined as a religion was what was called the worship of the gods according to certain laws. And Paul makes that explode because he says, I'm no longer interested in religion as a set of laws. He says that those were given by angels. I'm talking about the real stuff here, guys. So what is forever and what is really important? And then he talks about that we cry out to be adopted as children of the father. So adoption is the real thing. It's wonderful. Hey, guys, we've got a new one. I'll see you in about 20 minutes. He's like, what? It's the same link for the room and I'm doing a previous conversation. You might not be able to hear us. Nice to meet you. Thank you. We'll leave it there until he figures out. Yeah. One big happy family. I have a new system for my links. He'll come back, don't worry. There we go. There he is. A little bit of administrative power. Design intervention. And Vervecki's project is so interesting to me because, you know, comparing him and Peterson has been fascinating in a lot of different levels because in many ways, Peterson has been so stoic and Vervecki. James K. Smith, who's a philosopher at Calvin College, just recently did a video with Rebel Wisdom and did a little bit of critique. I don't think Smith is following much of this at all. He's got his own stuff that he's running. But one of the points that he made, which I think was a very good point, was that in our frame, and this is very true of Vervecki and Jordan Hall, all of this are things we need to do. We need to engage in these practices. We need to build these communities. This is all a product of our intentionality and our agency independent upon our actions in a certain vein. And that is very telling. The Peter Boghossian, I have to get back to Peter Boghossian, the publisher sent me a copy of his book that he just released and I should do a conversation, How to Have Impossible Conversations, because of course Peter Boghossian got himself into a whole bunch of hot water over some things. But again, all of that is so driven by intentionality that this is something he needs to do. What Paul has to leverage is Judaism, which at that point in the Roman Empire, people were getting very interested in Judaism. There were all these God-fearers that Paul bumps into in the Book of Acts. And of course, these are the women, they can just join the synagogue, no problem. But the men, there's blood in the game there, boys. And so they're uncircumcised and Paul comes along, but he's able to leverage this entire context, this entire perspectival knowing. And the difficulty that I think, and John will probably watch this video, so the difficulty that John faces is, whereas every would-be developer of a religion must engage the assumed perspectival landscape in which they engage, Paul already had the Pentateuch and the Hebrew Scriptures and this entire world. And one of the things that I learned doing meetups here is that the group that we started doing meetups here became a core. And once you have a culture, that culture can grow. And so Paul could leverage all of that stuff in the Roman Empire and it was a huge advantage in terms of creating a world. Yeah, there was existing capital. That's right, that's right, that's right. Instead of having to make it all up yourself. And you know, Mormons did that too. Islam did that. It's very difficult to start from scratch. But you can argue that Mormons and Islam both worked on the framework of Christianity or in the case of Islam for Christianity and Judaism. And quite effectively so. I mean, they preserved some of their capital. If you were good in Christianity or Judaism, you had a real good head start in Islam or in Mormonism. Rodney Stark, of course, writes a lot about this stuff, writing Christianity or think about all the ways that you can apply the economics to do these growth of new religions. And I think it would do well for Vaveke if he wants to do this project to actually read up on that stuff. Because it shows some of the dynamics of what's going on and it's always an exponential growth that looks small at the start. But if it's a steady percentage increase, of course, it's never steady, but for modeling purposes, then it seems to take off at some point in time. But this is also where you get back to God, because evangelicals, my God number one and God number two, evangelicals, God number one kind of shrank and so God number two expanded. But, you know, sort of Jordan Peterson's Darwinian perspective, the best story wins, the truest story wins, and, you know, winners and losers. Over time, to actually start a religion, it's going to live far beyond you. It's nothing that any one individual can control. And in fact, in our perspective, any marketer who is trying to promote something like this already has a liability. We can ask science, we can talk about Scientology. So I've got about another five minutes and I should probably, then I'm going to take a little break and then I'll talk to that poor guy who came into our room. That's going to be an interesting conversation too. He's from Yale and he's got a bunch of things about Connecticut history that he wants to talk about with respect to the meeting crisis. So kind of anxious to say about that. It should be fun. Nice. And that's where this channel for me has just been just tremendous amount of fun. All interesting people like you guys now find me and we can have these talks. So this is great. Yeah, thank you very much for offering the platform. This is amazing, I think. Well, any summaries y'all want to do? Any takeaways from this conversation? Just what have we talked about and what do you take away from it? Dad, you go first. I need to think about this for a sec. Well, I'm still in flow, so I'm still learning and it's sufficiently known area to learn, but it's sufficiently unknown to really make it exciting and be part of it. So I thank you for that. I'm behind you guys. So I'm now halfway for Vickie's series. I've done the Peterson lectures. So that's pretty good. So maps of meaning, psychology course, and the biblical interpretation. But I think it's really exciting that people are now working together. And I think John for Vickie actually credited you, Paul, also with the book, and I think that's a great way to do it. Yeah, well, if we can be in conversation like this is happening, I mean, that's a real blessing and a real sense of the word. So yeah, thank you for that. So if you start a YouTube channel, is it going to be in Dutch or English? Well, that's a good question. Should be. No, but the fun thing is, of course, the language of your heart is important if you really want to touch people. But young people now, especially at the universities, do speak a lot of English. So I guess some of the concepts that we're discussing now, Aaron, is more comfortable discussing in English than he is in Dutch. Is that true, Aaron? Sadly so, yes, but it is true. Yeah. So what's the future of the Dutch language? If we do something, we have to do it. No, the Dutch language will survive. It's pretty big. But we just have to, well, no, it will survive. Don't worry about that. But the for time, I mean, the Brexit opens up new possibilities, you know. Oh, the Dutch always ready for a new possibility. There's opportunity here. We can do business. Well, huge. I mean, it's rotten because they are one of our biggest trading partners. But apart from that, yeah, there are huge opportunities. No, but it will be fun. And I think if we do something, I need to be coached by Aaron because I can't do this. And I'm amazed that you managed, Paul. I stumbled in. It was a complete accident. It's like Job's conversion. I didn't intend to be here. I'm probably the only one who was supposed to be here. I wasn't even supposed to be in this call. I mean, yeah, I couldn't stay away. No. I was I'm really interested to in the progress of how your book will will form. I think that's going to be very interesting. And I would love if we could reach I just spent some time on a subreddit that is about anti natalism, some sort of sort of morbid curiosity. And it can be it's mostly just cynicism and despair. And those are things that are new. That's not new in society that what that goes all the way back to the Roman times. I mean, if you look at Diogenes, the Greek, he was pretty cynical and about despair and couldn't find an honest man. And hopefully we can reach them with with the right axiom poking, which hopefully your book will be able to do. Thank you. All right, Aaron, you got the last word. Well, I've noticed that even though philosophically, I'd like to describe myself as an agnostic, I just simply can't exclude God from my worldview anymore. Thanks to you guys. And yeah, effectively, I suppose we have to do like what Douglas Murray referred to as Jesus smuggling, in a sense, and doing it in a way that we would also appreciate it if what I think like, like, like my father has pointed out, we just appreciate in general the conversations and that this may be part of a newer Christian mission when, you know, we don't need to have it all tied as closely to identity. And that's not a discussion that we can have as the point of the genre is, but that's something for future discussions, I suppose. But thank you very much for this. I really enjoyed it. Oh, well, thank you guys for for coming on. And, and yeah, well, we'll, we'll, we'll see what kind of discussion this generates, and then we'll take it from there. Good. Thank you very much. All right. It's it's evening for you guys. Yeah, one am now. One am. Well, you you go to bed and have a good sleep. Yeah, thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you all. Bye bye.