https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pwPCczyIjd8

 This is the Reggie and Paul show because fantasy football season is coming And so what we have here are the co-owners of the Watts Raiders and we're anticipating a new fantasy football year So what's coming up who's going to be hot this year in fantasy football? Who should your number one draft be? number one draft No real consensus on the number one draft, but we're starting looking at the running back position. We have Ezekiel Elliott running back for the Dallas Cowboys Leave you on Bell These are not state secrets everyone who plays fantasy football is gonna draft LeBion Bell Um Ezekiel Elliott So who are your sleepers Nancy? Who are the sleepers? I have no idea because I don't want to say Are the keepers right this is the well sometimes No, no, he's just giving general advice Oh Then we might maybe we need to have a paid channel where Reggie gives the super deep sleeper picks Subscribers the freemium deal First episode very prompt to What it is is you have nine players, right? Nine you do You're gonna have nine players and those Nine players make points by the statistics that they do in other words every move they make is Put down Where there's a foot so you're explaining fantasy football. Yep. Where's the foot? It's in the paper. It's on the website It's on ESPN everybody I Mean every move they make Every move you made Was calculated We're gonna turn we're gonna turn your life Nancy into a into a fantasy sport We're gonna have we're gonna have every move you make we're gonna have it calculated and and Reggie and I are gonna take bets Well, I don't know that we have a lot of picks for you today so any any closing fantasy thought any closing fantasy thoughts It's just it's a wonderful thing to do in the winter when there's nothing else It's not really in the winter It ends in January All right, so there's there's our first fantasy football show I don't know what we'll name it, but we're hoping Reggie will do a little bit more research have those deep picks and That Nancy will complain because he gives them to the world Anything else to say? No, God bless y'all. God bless y'all and good luck to your fantasy football team