https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XK1Y3IBKAtE

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a special guest today. Some of you will recognize her, Poe the Person. And thank you so much for reaching out and really looking forward to this conversation. I've watched a bunch of your videos and I thought maybe I'd just start by, I think you and I sort of started in the same way, sort of in the updraft of Jordan Peterson. That was, so how, well let's start with you. Okay. Tell me a little bit about growing up. Was it a religious household? What did your parents do? And then how you got on YouTube? You got the pressure on me now. Well, my parents are both quite religious, Christian. They actually went to different churches by the time I was sort of of the age of really paying attention. And without going into the details, I ended up being most in touch with Christianity in my mother's Church of England church. You know, proper big, not a cathedral, but somewhere close to a cathedral type of building. And I sang in the church choir and I had a lot of friends there and I really liked singing a lot. And I ended up being confirmed, which is kind of like adult baptism. Yeah. I went into that church and then it's like fairly soon after being confirmed. I started to sort of fall out of faith, which is quite bad about it because the confirmation ceremony is basically you affirming that this is you as an adult saying I'm committed to this the rest of my life. And I guess at the time it felt like that was just the right thing to do. And my friends were doing it. But maybe it was I was too young for that because I ended up sort of doubting things after that. How old were you at confirmation? I think I was confirmed at 13. Okay, so it's pretty young. So, you know, after that I, you know, it just, I still liked the all the music that we were singing and I guess the, you know, that kind of, there's a reason that you sing in church right it gives you that kind of very religious sort of feeling it feels quite spiritual to be singing, especially with other people. And maybe I was sort of misinterpreting that as, you know, as a more profound experience than it was. And, you know, intellectually, I just couldn't engage with Christianity after that, and I. Yeah, I just kind of fell out of that and stopped going to church. Was it a class that you took or a friend you know what what made the big change in your life. I couldn't say anything like, you know, reading, reading a book or a friend or anything like that it was just, I guess, the. I just started asking questions. And then I couldn't find the answers that I found intellectually satisfying. So the questions that I would ask would be kind of thinking about religious sort of scientifically going. And the first question I asked was, if, if God has a plan. Then why do we pray for things. It's pretty simple right I'm not, I'm not saying I was like some amazing philosopher at that question. No, no, like Sam Harris. I was just thinking like, okay, so God has a plan and it's the best plan for me and for everyone. And everything you know he's, he's so powerful and he knows everything. And so what is the point in me telling God what I want and ask me for things. And, you know, the people in my life they were you know, youth leaders and my parents they were, they were very interested in talking to me about theology but I didn't understand their answers. You know they, they didn't they just didn't satisfy me. And I think I sort of started to think well you know this, this idea of God just doesn't match with my scientific understanding of the universe. And I started to get very into mathematics and you probably know people who watching this don't know me what we know that I'm an engineer. So I ended up, yeah, I got really into mathematics when I was about 14. Yeah, just when, as soon as math stopped being about like numbers I started to be more about geometry and sort of abstract concepts I got really into maths and science, and that ended up being my career, and sort of, I guess you'd say surrounding myself with people who like that sort of thing as well. But getting back on to Jordan Peterson and YouTube. I mean you're absolutely right the, I started to re engage with Christianity when john Peterson was doing his biblical series and looking at the Bible stories and I could, I could suddenly engage with the Bible in a way that I've never thought to before in a sort of in an intellectual way like instead of having to turn off that part of my brain to engage with Christianity now I was like, yeah, that was the word yet really, really working hard like it was, it was a lot to think about that, and he, john Peterson. He started talking, just in like offhand talking about YouTube and saying how YouTube was the Gutenberg press of of intellectual discussion or of entertainment. And I started thinking well yeah that sounds sensible right maybe YouTube in the future is going to be like the BBC, it's going to be the main in the UK it's like the, that is the gold standard of information and entertainment. And I thought, you know, in 10 years or 20 years. If everybody's watching YouTube is their main, or you know something like YouTube as their main source of watching stuff. Then, it would be good to get it on the ground floor, you know, and I always. I thought I could, that I had something that might be worth watching whether it was, you know, artistic or, you know, myself, or just my personality and then this politics stuff. I thought, you know, this is a. You may or may not know my first big video was about James DeMore the, the engineer who got fired from Google. I was a student in engineering so I had a kind of not a unique perspective but I had a perspective on that. And people like that video. And that was a really good start for my channel. And, yeah, you know the rest. I'm still here three years later. Yeah. I think, you know, just my interest in john Peterson, and many other people yourself especially has been bringing me back to to thinking about Christianity and religion, and we're making videos on my channel about that, because I think it's really I'm not going to be talking about my channel, but my people who subscribe to me they they like the female engineer politics stuff. And now they're like, I want to be with you but I'm not that into it. You, you've got a great community, and you got. You make great videos and just like what I was saying about john Peterson and his biblical series. Yeah, you've been you sort of picked up that mantle and you've been taking in really interesting directions and making me engage with my brain, thinking about religion again. And that's, that's been really great. So I, yeah, I'm excited to talk to you as well. I've got loads of questions, just random stuff I haven't. I think it's like one huge thing. I'll ask one more question and then I'll let you have at it. Because I know I your baby shown up in some of the videos and I, I have, I have five children so my wife and I had five babies and I love babies, I mean if that I that's one thing it's a pastor if you're a pastor you don't love babies, you shouldn't be a pastor, because babies are hard I get that you know I've, you know, I've had my own, but there's just something about. There's just something about an infant and a toddler, which is, is just magical. Anyway, what my, the question I wanted to ask you is. Now, you know, I think I get that you know it's very interesting because you and I sort of do the same thing with YouTube, in that we kind of went out loud, and we found an audience to speak with this way. What about. How could Peterson. How was Peterson able to talk to you in a way that your parents and the clergy, and obviously you're in a different stage in your life too. But but what was he able to do that the church wasn't able to do for you. Separating. I think he calls it like a prescriptive and and the descriptive view of religion. And so, looking at what is this, what does it say in the Bible and what and, you know, rather than thinking of the, these words as a scientific description of the universe, thinking of it just as, as a story as a, and say just a story would be to minimize what stories are because the just hearing Jordan Peterson talk about psychology and narrative and what you call. The archetypes, you know, the, all of those human characteristics that are, you mean, everybody knows how powerful a story can be and how emotionally moving a story can be a movie or a book. And everybody's had that experience of falling in love and, you know, being really emotionally invested in a story. And yet, the people don't think of that as anything sort of magical or, you know, otherworldly, it's just, you know, that's, that's human psychology, but there's, there's so much more to it than that, I think. When I started to think about human psychology as this really interesting complex deep series of questions that don't really have a solid answer, you know, and, or am I getting with this, the question is about what was Jordan Peterson saying to me about religion. And I think he didn't start with, there is a God, his son was Jesus and he didn't start with a series of things that you had to believe in, sort of facts that you had to believe in and therefore, you know, these are the ways you should act because of these facts you sort of I think he did it upside down and said, you know, what, okay, so what if, what if you were the best person that you could possibly be? What if you committed your life to trying to be better all the time? And, and what, what could you, what could you do? Like, could you even imagine how much better you could be if you just got a bit better all the time? And that doesn't sound like a religious question and yet he made that into a really exciting conversation that I could engage with without having to think about the sort of more magical elements of, of a religion. Does that make sense? It makes, it makes perfect sense. It makes perfect sense. Well, and you're, I mean, obviously, on my channel, I've spoken with a lot of men. And if you look at my Google Analytics my channel is like 90% men. Yes, and, and Peterson. But, but Peterson, you know, when I would go to Peterson events, it'd probably be 6040. And so it's really, and there are. It's always been interesting to me, the, the women who have engaged with his work productively, you know, there are, you know, if they have Kathy Newman and the GQ interview and some of those that kind of were sent up there to knock him down or knock him around or something, but many of the women who have engaged with his work productively I found. I know why a lot of the guys got interested in him. But for me, and no one's quite said it the way you have. So that that really interests me too. Well, that, what I've everything I just explained came after me. Enjoying Jordan Peterson, you know, more broadly. And, and then I started watching his biblical lectures, I started off on his psychology lectures because it's quite strange he's he's actually himself that women are actually much more interested in psychology than men or whether they study it much more than men. Right, in general. And so, most of the people in his classes. Before he went on YouTube, the people he was talking to were young women and so it's quite strange that now it's, you know, his audiences. He's sort of described as being very masculine male, when he's talking about psychology really, but he's, he's speaking to a crisis at the moment that is being experienced perhaps more by men than by women but I know what I'm saying was, what got me interested in Jordan Peterson wasn't the, it's like, you came for the culture or you stay for the religion. I guess what I Oh, that's perfect. Very good. And I, nobody's, you know, this is this is the problem with having a community that so, so many men in it because the point you just made nobody I've never heard anybody make before that. Yeah, I mean most of that most of the people he taught most of the people he worked with in psychology have been women. And people, people like to portray him as some misogynist. And, you know, I saw many people trying to portray him as a misogynist and a racist and it was like, I've listened to the guy, a lot. I've heard that stuff out of him. He has, he has ideas about his ideas about a lot of things but he's not attacking women he's not against women it's the police politicization of all of this stuff so I love that came for the culture war stayed for the religion. I was thinking about that babies and toddlers as well I didn't want to bring, because it kind of does touch on my sort of the main after all the Jordan Peterson thing. I saw this video after I had my, my baby, my daughter was born almost a year ago, but more than a year ago now, and then I made a video. A few weeks off she was born talking about the actual birth, and I won't go over that again you can watch the video if you're interested about why that was a kind of religious experience for me. After that I was, I was kind of astonished by the, just the experience of having a child for the first time. And it was, I don't know how to say it except that it was. I have a lot of religious sort of feelings. You know, like, everyone, if you've been in love and I hope you have everyone watching this I'm sure you have Paul. That's a, that's a wonderful feeling. But loving a child is something else entirely and it felt so profound and the, the world just seems so beautiful. And without really knowing what it means and without making a scientific description of anything religious, I felt very strongly that the world was good. And that life was good, and it kind of. I wanted to say like, you know, praise the Lord like God is good yeah I wanted to say, you know, I felt so, so overjoyed and, but it wasn't just like a, an emotional happiness feeling it was like an experience of life. Wow, wow. Now I remember that video. That was, again, I'm just always interested in children and, and, and I haven't I haven't watched all your videos but I do remember that video and it was a it was a it was a, it was a moving and meaningful video. And now and I know there's a reason there's a reason you're doing. There's a reason you're doing well on YouTube. All right, so I've I've pestered you. Your turn you can pester me. Okay, well, I went. I, I talk about my mom a lot on YouTube and I think people wonder why because she's babysitting my child, I'm going, I've gone back to work now. And so I talked to my mom a lot more than I used to because she's taking care of my child now. She's my nanny, which is great. It's great to have your mother is your nanny. Yeah, well, if, if you like your mother, and if you like the job that your mother did. Well, I hope she watches me. She did a great job with us. Yeah, I mean you can't deny that. How many siblings do you have. I've got two older brothers. Okay. And they're both great people. And, you know, all my favorite people were raised by my mother so I'm my favorite people. That's good. She's taking care of your baby then. She's a she's a Christian like I said, and she sang with me in the in the church while it was very much a big part of how did I'm going to buy it in again because that's what I do. How did it go when you left the faith with her. Yeah, they're very understanding people and that's good I want to come back to my question building up to a question but okay. Sorry. I, I am there is an interesting point that because my about parenting your religion, I don't know how you is your five children but my parents were very. What's the word they they wanted us to be whatever kind of people that we would be, they would just they've just let us be ourselves basically so they never tried to teach us authoritatively about religion they let us explore religion in our own ways and they brought us to church and that was kind of something we had to do but we never had to say we believe a certain thing or, you know, they never made us be Christian they just. So it was, you know, they, they weren't very strict is what I'm saying. You know I was I was growing up enough for that time that they couldn't try to force me to do anything and they they're not the kinds of people who would do that. Okay, and yeah, it's been it's been great. You know, being so close to my parents for my whole life because they're great people. And I was excited to talk to you because I knew that my parents would like this conversation. My talking to you, they, they're gonna love watching this, I think, I hope they do. And so my mom asked, like, who is this guy I said he's called Paul Vanderplein she says oh it sounds like, you know, Dutch name. And I said, oh yeah he makes his videos on YouTube and he's a pastor but he talks a lot about Lord of the Rings. And I said, I was like, he, you're gonna hear this guy because he, he talks about Tolkien's books as if the, they're like a sequel to the Bible like there's, there's like two Holy Scriptures and like one is the Bible and like one is Lord of the Rings. Yeah. You got to throw CS Lewis in there. Yeah, Lewis and Tolkien. And, and when I started making these videos on YouTube this is building up to a question I promise. I started making these religious videos about how religion doesn't have to be descriptive it doesn't have to be like a scientific description of the universe, you don't have to believe in like the guy on the throne with a beard. You don't have to believe, you know, you don't have to believe anything supernatural. That was my argument anyway I'm not I know not all Christians think that. And they got a few comments from people saying, like, okay, but if you want to have a manual you know a guidebook for life. Why then, if you don't believe in Jesus and the Christian God, why then would you choose the Bible, why not, you know, one of the classics and classic philosophers, why not, Shakespeare, why not Lord of the Rings. Right. And so, my question to you is, if, if you talking about religion and God keep having to bring up talking and Frodo and the ring as examples of, you know, to make your point. There's something very interesting going on there, something very religious in those, in those stories. What makes the Bible better or more useful, or, you know, or more applicable, why is that a religious text, but isn't. Yeah, that's a great question. In the church we often talk about the Bible as Canon. What do we mean by that. Well, it's a rule, what do we mean by that. Tolkien is Tolkien and Lewis are powerful. Because they know the Bible well, but the Bible isn't the only thing they know. Part of part of part of where we are with respect to these books is because of the Protestant Reformation. And before the Reformation, the Bible worked with church in a different way. The Reformation was an attempt to address some things that people thought had gotten out of whack. Now the Reformation is about 500 years old. And in some ways, what Lewis and Tolkien were doing, both of them again, World War One vets, both, you know, well, actually, I don't know where Tolkien was from in terms of the UK. Lewis was from North Ireland, so he's, there's a whole nother kettle of fish. But the people throughout the centuries have had to, in some ways, put the Bible into their own words to be able to put the Bible into their own lives. And I think that's what Tolkien was trying to do. He was trying to do it for his children, of course he, I mean the Hobbit started out as children's stories. And if you read The Hobbit, it's a very different book than Lord of the Rings. Lord of the Rings is an adult book. The Hobbit is sort of a children's book, but they sort of fed one into another and of course Tolkien was trying to provide a mythology, a contemporary mythology for the West. And one of the most interesting aspects and in fact modern aspects of the Lord of the Rings was that it was, it would have appeared, if it had been an ancient book, it would have appeared secular. You don't find Aragorn going to the altar, going to the temple. There's no cultic behavior in Lord of the Rings. Now, contemporary people, secular people, often don't recognize that because they're used to that. And so what Tolkien sort of does is, is create a secular mythology. Now, how does that relate to the Bible? There's a, I'm going to get in trouble for this, and I know exactly who I'm going to get in trouble for. The Christian Trinity is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. It's not Father, Son, and Holy Scripture. And I often, people don't like it when I say things like the Bible isn't divine. What do I mean by that? The Bible isn't God. The Bible is part of God's creation. So part of the reason that the church continues to stick so closely to the Bible is because the Bible sort of, it's a rule. Now, over on my desk, I'm not going to go get it. I have a little ruler. It's about 12 inches. It's only about 12 inches. Even if I had a yardstick, that would be three feet. In order to navigate life, I need distances that are far greater. And so what we tend to do is extrapolate from that little ruler into the rest of life. And in order to do that, we need other texts. And so Christians should read Shakespeare. They should read Tolkien. If they have the interest, they should be all over the map. But there is something about the Bible that works sort of as a compass, sort of as an orientation that helps us navigate through the far greater distances than a ruler could afford. Am I making sense? Yeah. Yeah. And I, to come back to a question earlier, I just wanted to let you know that the, I remember a similar kind of question coming up when I was really young and I first heard the idea of the Holy Spirit sort of embodying the people who wrote the Bible. And that is what made the Bible special. And that's exactly the kind of answer that I found unsatisfying. Whereas I find your answer more satisfying, I guess. And if that helps you understand the kinds of things that I was hearing that I didn't engage with at that age. So, part of, I'm convinced part of the problem we're having now is, you know, you've heard me talk about God number one and God number two. And God number two is sort of the personal transcendent personality that gets represented as an old man floating in the clouds. And the second is, is the God that says, the God of whom it says the whole earth is full of his glory. And when I listened to Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris have their first conversation in Vancouver. And, you know, they have this big long talk, and then they're getting to the end and all these people paid money. And Sam Harris hasn't had a chance to, you know, get down to brass tacks with Jordan Peterson, why he's affording aid and comfort to two theists. And, you know, okay, Jordan, what, what do you mean by God, and Jordan Peterson opens up his, his surface book and starts reading all of these things. And I thought as I was listening to this. And I realized that the Christians out there won't recognize what Jordan Peterson is talking about. But if you know enough historical theology, you'll know that Jordan Peterson is talking about God. And then Sam Harris interrupts him says, Wait a minute. No, no, no, no, no, I'm talking about God and then Sam Harris begins to describe another thing. And then after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while, after a while the rain feels bad from Christians. And that's a problem. And Even for me who had been a Christian pastor who had been to Divinity School. I was sort of working on some of this stuff and I had found I had always found Tolkien deeply satisfying. I had found Lewis very helpful because, of course, Tolkien literature and just wrote this stuff that, you know, there was, there was at one point a competition, you know, the most important book of the 20th century, and someone decided to put a survey out there, and the Lord of the Rings won. And a whole bunch of literary critics were furious because this is lowbrow, you know, the Lord of the Rings shouldn't be it. But why is, why, why is Tolkien's work so persuasive? And in many ways, criticals of Narny were sort of popular, but never to the degree of Tolkien, and Tolkien didn't like them. So, so, so what are these two doing? And how does that connect with Harris and Peterson? I started listening to Peterson and I immediately thought of C.S. Lewis. And oh, I can't, I think of his name. Alastair Roberts, a preacher from the UK, wrote a blog post about Peterson and Lewis. And when I read that blog post, it was like a light went on. It's like, oh, of course, Roberts was able to sort of put it down and put it on paper. And, and so that's, so my biting question with Peterson was, why is this guy who is doing what he's doing, communicating with people, some of whom have been to church, many of whom have left it in such a compelling way, and the church can't? And so that's, that's really what drove me, part of what drove me into Peterson, because what is he doing? I want to know, I want to figure it out. And it was right there in that, at the end of Vancouver 1, where the light went on. And it's because Jordan Peterson has found God through his creation. And Sam Harris couldn't be bothered to look, because he was listening to Christians who weren't bothering to look either. Again, I don't know if that makes any sense to you, or if that's clear at all. That's, yeah, I think I get it. That seems, that seems pretty harsh on Christians, isn't it? I mean, might not be hard on Christians. I think, I think God is going to be a lot harder on Christians than I ever am. I mean, a lot harder on me too. What you said about God 1 and God 2, I want to know if you've heard the album that Kanye West released in 2019. I can't remember the name of it. It's his religious album. It's just songs about God. And I've been thinking about doing a video for a while about Kanye West and PewDiePie, the YouTuber. I don't think you've ever talked about him. But these people who are absolutely at the top of the achievement hierarchy, that they've achieved so much, they've got so much money, they could do anything. And they're looking inwards. And I know a lot of people don't think of religion as looking inwards. But I mean, Kanye West may be crazy, but he's definitely a genius, even if he's crazy. He's a musical genius, at the least. But anyway, there's a song on that album called God Is that is, I mean, maybe it's just a very well written song. That's what's crazy about music is that you don't know if you're just listening to a really good song, or if the lyrics are actually speaking to you. I mean, it's the lyrics and the music. But it's so it's the lyrics are very poetic. I don't know what to say. They're just good. I'm not a musical critic. So I don't know how the vocabulary to describe it. But he's describing God without any of this God too. I think it was God too, the guy in the clouds with the beard. I mean, the song was called God Is and he's describing the glory of his creation. He's the strength in this race that I run. Christ is the fountain that fills my cup. This is religious sounding, but it's not a description of the kindly father or the guy who's listening when you're praying. And I find that really, really inspiring, really powerful. And the and the one I think of my favorite hymns as well, something like, it's really cliche, but something like Amazing Grace. You know, that's you're thinking about salvation, the the wretched sinner and the the what do you call it the conversion hymns, thinking about the the power of religion to to help people become better. And nobody's written songs like that about Lord of the Rings is what I'm saying. I mean, Lord of the Rings is kind of like a song. It is the the art like the fan fiction of the Bible. And you could say, that's really good, too. I like that, too. I'm going to steal that, too. That's really good. But you do hear this, you could you could imagine Amazing Grace being written about Jordan Peterson, the way you hear young men talking about the change that is having their lives and the wretched sinner they used to be. Right. The salvation of Jordan Peterson. And I don't want to turn him into a religious Christ like figure. He's just a man. And he's just he's just saying things that people like. And yet it is it's powerful. And I don't know if I was leading to a question, but I I wonder if there is something in the future and a secular religion, if such a thing could exist. You keep talking about the meaning crisis. And I think that's a wonderful phrase for what is going on. People have more money than ever. And it doesn't make them happy because their lives are empty. And when you people aren't having children anymore, and when you don't fill your lives with something to keep you busy, you kind of, you know, end up getting bored of everything there is to watch on Netflix. There's you have to wonder, you start to look inwards, or maybe you you just stop stop moving forward, you know, and you you just settle for the person that you are. And this is what Jordan Peterson says, there's so much rhetoric at the moment. So much of our political discussion is you'll find the way you are. And you should you nobody should be able to bully you for that. And yeah, bullying is mean, but there is there is so much more that we could be. And this this sort of Sam Harris generation of people like me who dropped out of religion, when they started getting their brain in gear, because it didn't it didn't work with that, that part of the brain. And now you've got this Jordan Peterson thing going, where people are engaging again. And it just makes me wonder, like, what is next? Like, if you could, if you could try to channel that, where is it going? Like, if you went down that route of the non magical, God one, it's, it's always it's the most magical and the least magical at the same time. I don't know how to describe it. But this artistic way of thinking for science minded individuals. Is that a is that a good slogan for your movement? I don't know. That wasn't really a question. There's a couple there's a couple things involved here. One is the imminent and the transcendent, which is heaven and earth. And so one of the one of the one of the things that the God number one God number two thing was pointing to was the imminent and the transcendent that so so the transcendent is holy, holy, holy. The imminent is the whole earth is full of his glory in a in a way Jordan Peterson turned the light on to the imminent. And so when you when you talk about, you know, that Kanye West song, that's, you know, he's pointing to the imminent. Now, another another person that I brought into the conversation, Stephen Smith has been who is a law professor in San Diego has been looking at the question of what do we mean by secular? And and part of his answer was the pagan world tend to tended to put this locate the sacred at the level of the imminent. And the the Christian revolution tended to point to the the sacred as the transcendent. So you've got that you've got that process going back and forth. There have been for the last couple of hundred years, many attempts. So, again, go back in history. Christianity in Western Europe, so dominated, so completely controlled, became tyrannical that tyranny was partially broken by the Protestant Reformation. Very quickly after the Reformation, deism came and and the heart of deism was an attempt to understand and predict the mechanisms of the patterns of God. And the idea was God is so faithful and so reliable that we can in many ways predict the unfolding of God in our world. And so you had God then as watchmaker and God made the world into this machine. And eventually sort of what happens is is via Darwin. OK, now we no longer need the watchmaker. We can assume the world sort of sort of emerged from all the complexity. And and that then became this mechanistic modernism. Now, now we have up until this point understood that as the secular story. And I think what we're beginning to see with Jordan Peterson and a number of other thinkers out there is that's probably not right. So then we have the question, well, what is going on? What is the secular story? And I think part of the reason that has been coming unglued is because we as human beings assumed personhood, assumed personhood as exceptionalism, assumed agency that we had and lived in the rest of the world as a dead space. The rest of the world was disenchanted, demythologized, and we believed and we believed that with enough with enough knowledge, we could get all the way to the bottom of the world and find all of the mechanisms. And we ourselves could control it. Two things happened. Number one, we realized the deeper we got into the world, the stranger the world became. And so our enthusiasm about basically reducing the world into processes that we could understand, we became skeptical of that project. The other thing that happened was we began to look at ourselves and recognize, oh, my goodness, there are cogs and gears and processes and cause and effect in us too. We before had this exceptionalism, which sort of mirrored the deism, but then we got rid of God. And the meaning crisis really hits when we begin to look at ourselves and say, what if I am just a machine and I don't mean my body, I mean my beliefs, my thoughts, what if I am simply the product of this mechanistic determined universe too? And so, but it's really important that both these things happened at the same time. Number one, we realized we're not about to exhaust and explain away what we labeled as the physical universe. It's way too complex to do that. And so we began to look at ourselves and recognize that it's way too complex and it's way too strange. And we have a personhood as we experience it, consciousness, agency, choice as we experience it also has a degree of mechanism within it. And so now suddenly we have a crisis because these two foundations of our world, human exceptionalism and the ambition to exhaust the universe have both been shattered. And so what we have now is an increasing awareness of mystery in the universe and an increasing anxiety about the lack of mystery in ourselves. And this is why I think Sam Harris wants to play with psychedelics and meditation because he's not satisfied with the answers he has for humanity. And so I think for that reason, like the inventor of the word sociology, Auguste Camp, who very much tried to explain Auguste Camp, who very much tried the best he could to start a secular church. I mean, he take the classics of modern literature, just wholesale buy, you know, secular humanism and, you know, have cathedrals, bring in statuary, you know, the bells and smells. I mean, do the whole thing. And it was a complete failure and it keeps getting tried again and again and again and again and again. And it's complete failure because I think, again, it fundamentally lacks that mystery that increasingly we are seeing in science. And it simply has to assume the aching thing that we are not the persons we thought we were. And as Jordan Peterson says, you know, we are mysteries to ourselves. And so we can't exhaust the universe and we can't hack ourselves. And so suddenly, and if you go back to a conversation I had with John Vervecki, one of the things I came to understand was it is deeply human for us to talk to our car when it won't start. It is deeply human to project all kinds of things on my dog and sometimes even my children. Because that is actually the human, respectful, and in fact, successful way to deal with complexity that is beyond us. That's where you get into this Pascal and his spirit of engineering. That's how I approach. My wife looks at a computer and it's a mystery. And she says, why do computers obey you? I say because they know I will take it apart and I will rebuild it and I won't care. So I approach computers with the spirit of geometry. My wife approaches computers with the spirit of finesse. She names it, names the cars. Now, she's no less rational than I am. But that is the mode people use to approach what it cannot exhaust. And so, I don't know. Again, I'm rambling. I don't know if any of that is helpful or it makes sense. Your camera went slightly out of focus. I know you're a YouTuber, so that might bother you. That's better. I love that trick. You're kind of breaking my heart. I really want to believe I actually didn't know about that secular religion thing or secular church. That sounds really cool. They're out there. Visit them. Well, yeah. After we look one up, maybe there's one in London. I'd love to see it with the statues of Plato. I don't know what they sing when they go there. But they sing the Beatles. Music will divide their church too. I mean, everything we're talking about is, it sounds like what Jordan Peterson was arguing with Sam Harris about. I saw him in London and I think what they were saying, well, they said a lot of things. It was a really interesting night, as you know, if you've seen the recordings. And the fundamental disagreements seem to be about, I guess, although you said that I know that Sam Harris is interested in, he's always talking about how mysterious consciousness is. And it is funny how it's sort of like he's coming so close to admitting that it's unknowable and ineffable. But he just like skirts off the last second. But I think it comes down to the question of if you want to have a good marriage or, you know, everyone has difficult relationships in their lives and they have to understand other people in order to get along with them. And if you want to have a good marriage or to be a good person, to interact with other people well, is it best to study neurology or to read the Bible? And the Bible isn't the only thing that can do that. But when you talk about how mysterious people are, I love that description you had, the sort of the symbology of getting deeper and deeper, it just gets murkier, it just gets more complicated. It doesn't get any simpler. It doesn't help you, you know, argue with your wife about who's going to make dinner. There are psychological phenomena that do help with that sort of thing. And yet they kind of just come to the same conclusions that you could come to from reading stories, which is why Jordan Peterson just talks about Pinocchio all the time in his psychology lectures. And that was the first sort of serious series I watched from him was his psychology series. And you just think this guy's crazy. He's got a room full of 21 year old students, you know, 18 year olds, whatever they are. He's teaching psychology and he's just talked about Pinocchio for two hours. You think this guy's insane? And yet you are, you know, in hour six, you start to see where he's coming from. And there's so much complexity that can come out of that. You can skip over the complexity and just get to the lessons in that way. And that is that story, isn't it? That's narrative. And yet the what I was coming back to is the Sam Harris talking to Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris accepts all of that, but he doesn't accept what he calls divine revelation. What you're saying is missing, which is the, you know, who's the guy in the car that you're talking to? Who's the car that you're talking to? You know, like the, or, you know, to come back to my own video, who was I praying to when I wanted my baby to live? You know, who's the, what was that? Did I, you know, do I believe in God or not? I, it's a big question for you, but what I want to ask you in this conversation, my biggest question is, do you think I believe in God? And I know that you should say, oh, that's a question of you or like, you know, depends what you mean by God, but I want, I want to sincerely ask you, do you think I believe in God? And can I be a Christian? Or is this, am I doomed to being secular? I think you probably believe in God. I do. And so, okay, so let's, let's, let's take this, let's take this down a couple steps. So Peterson and Lafayette, you know, was asked about religion and Peterson made the point. I think it was exactly right. If you ask somebody about their religion, can they tell you? And Peterson's like, probably not. Why? Well, because we don't really know ourselves. Okay. That's a deeply scary thing, but I've, I'm older than you are. I'm probably, my children are now all in their twenties. And so, you know, I'm probably about the generation of your parents. The longer I've lived, the more I've recognized how much I don't know about myself. And how, so my wife and I have been married, my wife and I have been married 32 years. And it's, you know, my, my, my marriage with my wife has been rocky at points. If you had asked me 12 years ago, if I think I'd still be married at this point, I'd probably would say, I doubt it. I don't think it'll, we could make it, but we have. And so, I think it's, it's a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very and, you know, that's probably the, the, the toughest thing I've ever done in my life, but also in some ways, the most rewarding and productive thing, which was to, in a sense, try to stop fighting in our marriage and try to start fighting for our marriage. We have five kids together. I mean, it would have been, it would have been a real problem if we had, if we, I'm a pastor, I mean, all kinds of issues. But one of the things that my wife and I regularly bump into is that we've been married for 32 years. We knew each other two years before we got married. We regularly have the experience of looking back at each other and saying, who are you? And you'd think after 32 years of a really intensive relationship, we would have come to the bottom of each other and we're not. And, and I, so my father passed away in 2013 and always, I, I, like you was blessed with terrific parents. They're non, non-tyrannical completely. I continue to learn more about my father seven years after his death. And you think, how does that work? Well, I learned more about my father now being a father of 20 something of not, I don't have 20 children, children in their 20s. I have 20 children. I know people who have 20 children. So, all with different women. So anyway, but this is how we are. And so in many ways, why would Kanye, I think he's a, I think you should dive into him because he's a great example of so many things. And when Kanye made some of these albums, I started, I'm a digger. So I tend to dive into, you know, his story and learn about his story and all of this. I mean, basically Kanye got to the point of recognizing that he needed now, whether, let's see, let's, let's set aside ontology for a moment. And I think again, this is one of the powerful things that Peterson did. Let's set aside ontology. Okay. And say, okay, well, let's, let's just assume that as a, and imagine as an imaginative ideal, it is possible that human beings and human society, because it's not just humans as individuals, but in fact, humans as collectives and communities, it is possible that God as an imaginative ideal is essential for human individuals, but especially human cultures and societies and human beings as groups to flourish. And I, in, I'm about to have, you know, after I talk to you, I'm going to talk to Ryan Bennett again today. And, you know, he, I talked with Hay and Andrea a couple of weeks ago and Ryan still considers himself an atheist, but what Jordan Peterson has done to a whole bunch of people is help them to see how incredibly useful and productive even God as a mere concept is, not only for human communities, but also for human individuals. And I think, well, why on earth did Kanye at this point in his life just decide to go whole hog religious, because in, in to a certain degree, there was a college humor video a number of years ago that made the point. Star Wars nerds and Tolkien nerds are just like Bible nerds. They, they LARP, they live action role play all over the place. Well, why do they do so? Because it's meaningful and because it's productive and because believing in God somehow makes lots of people better people. Now, here's the contemporary dilemma is that you might look at this as, wow, looking at it very rational, I can see that embracing the idea of God and LARPing my way into religion helps me be a better spouse, be a better parent, be a better citizen. It just helps me live better with other human beings. But what do I do with the nagging voice in the back of my head says, it's only make believe. Jedi is, Jedi's aren't real. You know, Tolkien made it up for his children. Exactly. Yeah. And, and I talked to a lot of people now who are just at that moment. And the only advice I can give them is LARPing. And I think that's a great way to do it. LARP away, act as if, because why not? That's the, that's, that's in a sense where, where I keep getting to, because I've had, we live, I live immersed in a, in a secular society. I have seen human, I have come face to face with the problem of evil many times in my life. And I think the most powerful argument against God is, couldn't God have, you know, engineered the 20th century without so much bloodshed? And, and that's not even a powerful one. It's much more powerful when you're as, you know, even as a pastor, when you're face to face with some seemingly senseless suffering and evil. And you say, well, maybe imagining that there's no plan to the universe and there's no father in heaven looking over us. And Providence is just a cruel joke. Those ideas live inside me too. But then when I, I fully face them, I have to say, well, why should I give into that vision of the world? Because if all there is, is chaos and accident, and there is no plan and there is no purpose and there is no intentionality, why don't I live into purely imaginatively a world in which a world in which there is purpose? Because it's a whole lot easier to accept that seemingly senseless death. If I can somehow imaginatively believe maybe somehow, somewhere, there's a God who can redeem this ugliness. That just feels better. And when someone is being cruel, and vindictive towards me, and wasting years of my life, I have a choice of being vindictive back. I recognize dealing with human beings, I don't have a level of agency or excellence that I can actually change other people. Other people remain black boxes, at least to me. What kind of neighbor do I want? I want a neighbor who is sacrificial and generous and forgiving and kind and loving. Why don't I be that neighbor? Well, I won't be that neighbor because that's costly. And I think this is why when you have a child suddenly, and call it evolution, call it hundreds of thousands or millions of years of mechanisms built into you as a mother where you have that child and you look at that little child that is so utterly needy and helpless and it's like that baby will wake you up in the middle of the night and you can go in there and reason with that baby all you want, but yet you love that child and there are few things in the world you wouldn't do for that child and you love that child to enough of a degree that, and now as your daughter grows, you're going to say no to that child and that child is going to try to manipulate you in their two-year-old way and, mommy, you don't love me and if you really love me, yada, yada, yada, and you are going to look that child square in the eye and you're going to say no and that child is going to say you're mean and you're going to say yep and I'm drawing a line and I ain't giving it away and you're going to do that and to me, the best way to make sense of this is to believe and to live as if there is a father in heaven that can do that to me. I don't have a better reason, but I also don't have a reason to give it away. But it's not true, I mean, that's the part of the, I mean, you exactly described it perfectly, that there's a certain little leap that you have to make and it feels like a little leap and yet it's the difference between committing yourself to what is true and what is convenient or, yeah, and having a religion isn't always convenient, sometimes it's really inconvenient. I'm not trying to pretend that it's the opiate of the masses or, you know, just like you described, it's not just the, you know, people on their deathbed who convert suddenly at the end of life, it's also people like Kanye West who have every reason to worship themselves, but I I think me and so many others, we committed to believing what is true and saying what is true and we're not comfortable with saying praise the Lord when we don't believe in the Lord part, but we get that we're on board with the message, but the actual words of it feel like a lie and so we say awesome instead or, you know, isn't that cool, you know, you just you fill it with words that are almost there, almost as good, but at least you can justify every part of it and there's so much of what you just said that I wanted to talk about and now I've just forgotten. Well, let me ask you this question. Okay. Does your daughter love you? No. Tell me more about that. Well, I was thinking about making a video about it because I the word love is, you know, it's sometimes used as a verb, sometimes used as a feeling, right, and what my daughter feels for me is a feeling of love or she needs me, it's more of a more accurate way of saying it. She needs me specifically, yeah, and you know, there are a few other people who she needs as well, yeah, and if I died she wouldn't die, but she the feeling that she feels towards me is need and it's and that sounds selfish and mean of her to feel that way, but she can't love me the way I love her because she's not going to get up in the middle of the night to feed me and she frequently fights me if I try to help her and yeah, that's everyone is a parent understands that and it's extremely frustrating, but the way that she loves me is almost the complete opposite of the way I love her, I think, and yet they're both considered love, but the I don't know if I could say that she, I stubbed my toe the other day and I cried out, it was very painful, you know how it is, it was a little one right on the edge of the wall and I bent down and you know, just sort of having a moment trying to recover. My husband came over and you know, he gave a pat on the back and then my daughter ran over and she started hugging my legs and it really looks like she was trying to comfort me, you know, like she had empathy, like she saw me hurt myself and like so many times when I've helped her, when she's hurt herself and comforted her, it looked like she was trying to comfort me and yet I don't really believe she was, I think she wanted a hug, she'll come and hug me when she wants a hug, she would never imagine hugging me for my benefit because she doesn't, I don't think she has empathy and I don't think she could feel love. So it's a good question although I don't know if it's relevant, so tell me why you asked me that. With your definition of truth, you might want to look into, there's a professor of philosophy, I haven't done a lot of videos on him, there's a professor of philosophy at University of Texas, Daniel Bonavac who I believe was a student, I should get him on the channel, I bet you he'd come, I believe was a student of Wilfred Sellers. Wilfred Sellers was an American philosopher that said there, we look at the world basically through two eyes, one is the scientific image and one is the manifest image and basically Daniel Bonavac says don't bother trying to read Wilfred Sellers and another guy I've had on the channel who's a MD up in Idaho agreed because he tried to and he said you can't, he's inscrutable but this is a college professor so he's got all his, he's a philosophy professor, he's got his videos online and he basically says that these are the two eyes through which we see the world but these two worlds, the scientific view of the world and the manifest image view of the world are very very different views and the difference in them is normativity, that science simply tells you what is and the manifest image talks about what should be. Now when it comes to a question like love, all of the doubt that you have about your daughter's capacity to love you, you should probably have with the question do you love your daughter but you see you from the inside and that's a really weird thing and we don't quite know how to think about that because I mean you might, someone might make an argument that well you've you know you've got these you know when you you know when you gave birth these hormones flooded through your body, you were biologically engineered and determined to have these feelings because the feelings are you know with the scientific image all feelings are are chemically induced responses to physical stimuli. Now I could also say well you love your daughter because you have put your own life at risk and continue to care for her at the cost of your life. Now you haven't died taking care of her but every day you spend time with her, you could be spending time on purely selfish pursuits and every good mother raises their child at the cost of their life and what actually you are doing is what actually you are doing is John um John Vervecky has this one episode I forget exactly which video it's in see the 13 or 16 or 15 at the end of it he talks about agape and he talked about he's he's a non-theist but he talked about agape in such powerful terms in that video and you're living it you are if you if you compare your child's life to the lives of those Romanian orphans you know at the end of Ceauescu and if you ever looked into that so Ceauescu was the Romanian dictator and very rationally wanted to you know have his country thrive and so basically he figured out a way to pump up the reproduction numbers in the country so people were having babies like crazy and then with the fall of the communist system they discovered just warehouses of babies in cribs and these these infants weren't touched they were fed but they weren't touched they weren't mothered they weren't cared for and if you google that you will find now this is now 20 years behind us more than that now you will find the long-term effects of these people's lives for what that happened and we can see that very easy during the scientific in the scientific view that well here are all the ramifications of their not being a mother but there's this manifest image view that you see your daughter through and I would say you would very quickly say you love that girl and that is obvious by the way you act but no matter how much I would tell you that's simply a product of the hormones running through your body I think you would probably say yeah there's that too but I am also operating on another level and I think actually number one that's the story verse is in the manifest image and number two another reason I'm not an atheist is I have seen and heard sufficient things in this world that makes me at times skeptical about whether it's all just playing out on the chemical level that we know so but but again I don't see and this is where I'm I don't think I can talk you into belief because I don't think belief is formed that way you know and I don't think it's different from let's imagine that you know at the age of 18 or 21 or what how old were you when you married 23 okay at the age of 23 someone said okay poe it's time for you to marry here I've I've I've gone through everyone in London and I have found the perfect person based on you did extensive surveys yada yada yada yada there's there's reality tv shows about this where we're going to put these people together you went out and fell in love and probably if you've fallen in love or had crushes or infatuations like most of us many times in your life probably chosen poorly a few times sounds like you know me well that's people but here we are and so I I can't talk you into believing there is a god but I think it's telling that we can't help ourselves relating as if there is one and the question of truth this is why on one hand we're looking at ourselves and recognizing gosh these hormones and things and the psychology that's really very real but on the other side we're also looking and saying even when we're looking at particles we keep digging and realizing there's more going on there than we know and even Jordan Peterson Sam Harris can agree we don't know what consciousness is so I don't know and so I can't make you believe and so I don't actually bother trying I can only talk about why I do that would be asking too much I think yeah because I can't I can't make I can't make all kinds of people do things things I far more want them to do than the stuff I want for you maybe that's a good segue into another question that I wanted to ask you which is just about you and your job really I'm just curious to know what it's like to be kind of responsible for so many people or you know who who you pastor that's a that's a verb right as well as a noun and uh and and how much responsibility do you take for the spiritual lives of your uh what do you call it a community a flock a flock yeah I mean a shepherd is responsible for uh you know literally the keeping sheep alive right yeah they'd be roaming around on a mountain and yeah the uh well maybe they'd just run away and they'd be fine and maybe the shepherd in some cases just sort of keeps them in a pen and then takes them to be slaughtered so uh but I'll do it it's a it's a difficult metaphor the thing of the the shepherd or maybe that's a good way to start I mean how do you see your role in your church with with if somebody uh if two people in your church get divorced or you find out that one of them cheated another or otherwise have sinned in a serious way is that something you take responsibility for as you know as failing them or is that just too much to ask yeah that's most often too much to ask I I see pastors I'm very low in neuroticism and so and I also after a lot of years in working with people recognize this whole thing about just in time learning it's really true people can sit in years of listening to sermons and bible studies and bible reading and not learn a darn thing and that's part of the reason so many Christians out there are unimpressive and part of the reason churches are such um are are such poor at what they do now part of this also has to do with my theological tradition which is which is cal which is Dutch Calvinism which is a little bit English than different than English Calvinism but I I have seen that for many people change only comes when big important things happen in their lives you know it's it's sort of it's it's sort of like a gym church is sort of like a gymnasium in some ways that if you if you keep it's sort of like AA in that I know a lot of people who have tried AA and it hasn't worked for them I know other people that are strong believers in AA because because well what's the difference usually but not always it's because they hit a point that they were really desperate to get sober and here what's that rock bottom is what they call it right yep hit rock bottom and then they really started to work it but for a lot of people in church lights only come on when something happens in their lives when and and actually when I don't necessarily I certainly don't take responsibility for it necessarily but I don't necessarily see it as a bad thing when some Christian in church fails in a catastrophic way because it's often at that point that they will hit bottom spiritually and say okay I've got to change because usually what happens is church doesn't necessarily deeply impact a lot of people and most of sort of the common stuff in the culture I'm a good person I'm you know I'm moral I'm I'm better than average and then they will do something you know when Jordan Peterson noted that it's not the it's not the chaotic trauma done to us that really causes for a lot of people deep traumatic post-traumatic stress it's when we do something suddenly I realize that I'm far more selfish than I like to believe about myself and I'm far more capable of you know it can happen in marriages people people's marriages devolve and then they they beat up their spouse and they say I you know I hit this person that I promised to love or they beat up their kid they hit their kid in a way that they know you know it's one thing well however you go with spanking they hit their kid in a way that they never should have now suddenly they're looking at themselves and saying what am I at that point there is an opening and a potential for real spiritual growth because and again I think this is a something deeply right about Jordan Peterson is he understood our capacity for malevolence and understood that we can we can be and Nietzsche Nietzsche had some made some strong points we can be really moral people when there's enough food and people are behaving right but go ahead and let you know when the shit hits the fan see how people really behave so as a pastor a lot of pastoring is sort of putting stuff out there kind of normal feeding of the sheep but waiting around until something happens in someone's life and then you got to be there and then you and then try not to make things worse which you can do too yeah yeah of course and at that time do you wait for them to approach you or do you obviously jump on jump on that situation usually if someone goes into crisis you jump on it but in jumping in it's always sort of a feeling out so you approach them and say would you like me to come over yeah and then you see and then you kind of get a sense of it because every everyone is different people respond to the the chaos and the trauma in their lives in very different ways people are people are remarkable people and churches are full of some of the worst scoundrels you could imagine and some of the more most glorious saints you can imagine churches have both okay i mean go questions just gone straight out my brain I have so my father was a pastor and I grew up not wanting to be a pastor and I was a foreign missionary for a while and I found that difficult but incredibly important for me because I I was much more of a biblical rationalist when I was a foreign missionary because I thought I was going to go overseas and I had all this I this newly minted seminary degree and I was going to teach them about the bible and cool stuff was going to happen and I got there as a guy in his 20s I realized I didn't know squat and these illiterate pastors I was working with yeah they had their issues but I had I learned way more from them than they learned from me and I was supposed to be teaching them and then I wound up coming back to the states and wound up pastoring a local church not unlike the church I grew up in and found I really enjoy it I enjoy the diversity of the job the people um working with people's incredibly hard especially in something like a church because they all have expectations on you as a pastor they all think they know what you're going to do even though they've never done the job but well it's every job like every job exactly well we would say uh as a mechanical engineer the um I mostly work with uh electronic engineers uh just because it's the company I work at and they um my boss my old boss used to say that uh every electrical engineer engineering degree comes with a free mechanical engineering degree because that's how that's how the electronic engineers treat us they were just the uh we just the ones who do the drawings and they're the ones who know how it's going to look anyway that's that's what that's completely believe it uh I'm interested in your missionary work because you said something about um South America is that what you did that um it was lat it was uh the Caribbean it was in the Dominican Republic near the Haitian border yeah and I worked mostly with Haitian missionaries yeah and I worked mostly with Haitian pastors who were some degree of legality or illegality in the Dominican Republic and um you know I thought I thought you know money and ideas would help these people and they were just you know they were illegals living in a country in a murky political situation and um I learned you know when these people and they were full of all the same old tricks that every human being is but um I don't know how you would live I don't know how you would survive that without a belief in God which seems deeply ironic because if anyone these people should these people should um look around the world and say no good God or engineer this thing yeah well that's uh that's the book of mormon I don't know if you've seen the musical no I haven't oh I don't like to swear but the uh one of the um songs you know huge set piece is um the uh the Ugandan uh Ugandan people that they are these um uh uh Landa saints what are they called the mormons that's it the mormon missionaries are there to teach the Ugandans to to be mormons and the Ugandans are saying look uh you know 50 percent of us have aids and you know we we hate God basically the whole song is like fuck you God like that's what we say that's what helps us get through our hard times and uh it's exactly what you're describing but I don't know I don't think the people who wrote that music I mean it strikes home the musical is it's amazing not just being funny but it's also um yeah it's insightful in a kind of satirical way um but the a book that I read that was really influential for me a few years ago was called tribe by uh Sebastian Junger have you read it I haven't read it it's the second time it's come up in conversation sure it's more like a long essay um so you should read it but uh the his his sort of main hypothesis in that book is talking about how desperate situations like war and poverty uh they they they give people it brings life into focus and gives people meaning yes and the I think part of the meaning crisis uh that you're always talking about is a product of affluence and having like like I was saying before you you have too many hours in the day to you know and Netflix gets boring real quick and you it seems to be a product you know people they they get all this money and they use it to put themselves in a box that isolates them from other people and you're at home you don't have people don't have a community around them the way that we the way that we used to when you know before we had TVs and also before we had like houses and we know them now and uh you know the way that uh well I just wonder how did you find I don't know what kind of people you were working with like was it poverty or uh richer than I'm imagining I mean is is that representative of what you found like do these people have a a different experience of life than people who you know have you know a life that I would consider perhaps too comfortable oh yeah brings it into crisis yeah the Haitians they living I think there when I was there their their average income was something like 50 cents a day if they were working um and I they could live cheaper in the country than I could obviously but um it wasn't necessarily a terribly cheap country to live in no there's there's absolutely no question that part of secularity is related to prosperity um the more people suffer the more desperate people are the more religious they will become but they might not become religious in the ways we esteem um so there's a um I haven't read it but I know there's so there's a there's a book Shantung Compound uh the story of men and women under pressure by Langdon Gilkey and so he was in China uh you know lead at the lead up to World War II and all the expats were rounded up and put into an internment camp and and and you know a bunch of them were business people and missionaries and his observation was that for the most part the missionaries weren't any better than the business people and but then there was one missionary the guy that um the movie Charits of Fire was made out of after he was in that camp and according to Gilkey he kind of shone like the sun you know not literally but the his quality was just remarkably different from the other missionaries well what's going on there and and so working with poor Haitians not a lot of secular ones there um by virtue probably both of the culture and of the situation and and many people could be religious in the most transactional simplistic greedy way possible I mean it's not that religion will necessarily make people more moral in the way that we have been deeply formed by the morality of Christianity but uh it is it is to me and but you know one of the really interesting experiments going on now is that even as people deconstruct from from dominant well-formed religions like Christianity they just kind of eat supernatural junk food after that you know it's you know it's astrology and it's aliens and it's ghosts and I'm not yeah crystals and I've got a lot I know lots of people and again it's just the fact that this is this is how we're wired and a little portion of that then then you'll say look at the bell curve of human beings you know probably certain portion of us just don't tend to enjoy that so much and another portion really does and so then then suddenly you're on a psychological distribution but that won't tell you anything about truth either because you know the way I see it I mean I find the um the simulation arguments quite interesting you know how do we know we're not in a simulation that's a really interesting question I think simulation is the wrong word but I when I look at you know as as I watch my kids play increasingly lifelike computer games you get to the point of realizing boy how much longer until we can sort of strap a human being into some kind of simulation atmosphere and really fool them because we get fooled right now regularly about all kinds of far low tech things so I don't know yeah I uh I was thinking about that recently as well as you know it's one of those conversations that I I really used to enjoy when I was you know 16 or so it was like I studied philosophy a little bit um at school for for an a level that's kind of you know 16 years old and uh I kind of fell out of that thinking about that for a while it's one of those you know sort of having a sleepover and you know looking up and that you don't want to go to sleep and you're talking to your friends about that sort of thing it's good fun but I kind of for a while I started to think like okay well what's the point it's one of those you know if it's a simulation or it's not I mean what's the yeah what's the upside of it but I started to think about it again recently uh you know it came up again you know Elon Musk what was it or uh Jerry Rogan all those sorts of people uh fun conversations and I realized that maybe I'm low in uh what was it uh uh new neurosis that's it neuroticism maybe I'm low in neuroticism as well because I was thinking I think my life is if you're playing a video game where you could live as anyone I think people would want to live as me maybe they are sticking too much in my life but I really have a um not just like now but my whole life leading up to this point has been like just the right mix of like quite interesting but not too dangerous or scary and like nothing really difficult has happened like you don't have to work in a mine or uh you know get uh get really badly bullied but like it's not it's not that easy either it's like I've had a great life is what I'm saying and uh I think people would like to play a video game with my life if they could and uh I don't know if you've um yeah Total Recall was kind of the original but then um since then there was a little uh other places about it but probably the most culturally significant recently was uh the show Rick and Morty where there's a video game called Roy where you put on the headset and you are suddenly this I think you start off as like a teenage or you start off as like a teenage kid called Roy and you live his entire life to the point you've you've completely forgotten what you're who you were before you put on the headset and then when you die you get a score depending on how well you did in this guy Roy's life and uh yeah that's exactly what I think uh I can imagine my life is that and um you know in 60 years I hope I live that long I take off a headset and I go back to being the futuristic yeah person living in the year 4000 who wanted to see what 2020 2020 looked like yeah a white female engineer lived like in England or maybe there never wasn't maybe there never really was in England and this was just part of the population as well well and you should if you've never have you read any of the Narnia books Chronicles of Narnia yeah I uh without doxing myself too much I my name is actually my name is a Po sorry yeah my real name is uh is based on it's a name of a character in Narnia books so they're quite influential in my family oh okay okay yeah well I I always think of the last battle and um and this this scene where they're they're going further up and further in and they look they look out yonder and they see they see the um they see where they used to live and they said well that that building was destroyed and and Lewis is playing all these all these questions about playing on all these questions about reality and and what is what is where I I find it telling that when especially boys and young men play simulations they play war and it's like well that's interesting um you know what's what's it's just tremendously telling about us um we don't play going to work watching tv we don't play all of the things that you know we think we would want have you read uh notes notes from the underground um it's a it's a it's one of it's one of uh Peterson's you know one of books he mentions a lot it's it's it just starts dramatically but you just it's almost in novel form going into this person that you you descend into him and very quickly like I don't want to be this person this is exactly the kind of person I don't want to be it's it's very interesting but but I think I think in a lot of way that's exactly what literature has done for humanity is it it gives us simulations yeah we always do the same thing it's wonderful to get to read a book that really puts you in a character even if it's not a character you want to be but yeah the latest experience I had with that was reading um Ernest Hemingway uh Robert Jordan in For Whom the Bell Tolls that's just a very well written book I don't really have a larger point about it but even if and it's a very some very interesting things happen to this guy but it's not like a it's not a fantasy that you have like I really would like to be a soldier fighting in the Spanish Civil War like it's I don't want I don't want to have that life but it's fascinating to read about it because the character is described it well you can see through his eyes and again we've just gone off point but I uh yeah I never thought about Narnia that way that's such a good point about the simulation and they you know oh and I recognize this lamppost and they go in the yeah amazing I I've got a question for you about uh about the Narnia series yes this is completely off topic but since you're a you know a lot about the books and I've never actually heard this addressed but when I read The Horse and His Boy uh when I was how old was I 14 maybe and I really liked the book but even at 14 and that was more than 10 years ago before all of this SJW culture war I read about these uh the um you know the men with the uh sort of hooked noses and curved swords and I thought this sounds kind of racist is it what do you think I had the same I had the same experience I grew up so my so my father pastored a church which was this racial reconciliation church and most of the church was black and I remember reading reading Narnia in a number of places and just feeling like this feels some of this feels slightly racist and and I think Lewis I think Lewis was a product of his time you know he think about growing up at the end of the 19th century in Northern Ireland and then living his life in Oxford people are racist we're all more when people call me racist I don't have a problem with it because I'm a Calvinist I'm not just a racist I'm all these other bad things too they're all in me okay I think uh no I think that's that's not a that's not a bad answer I'm not trying to use it to discredit uh CS Lewis I just wondered if there if anybody could come up with a justification for it or uh um you know a different way of seeing it then um perhaps I thought it would be you uh I just wanted without having to go through all the work of actually reading it again to check that I remembered it right I uh I thought I'd just check check in with you because uh I I I think if I remember reading so Abraham Kuyper was a Dutch polymath who was an important figure in in my religious tradition and I remember reading his stone lectures which I think were from the 1920s and it's like well there's just so there's just some eugenics that it smells of and and often if you read books from you know basically from the from the 1870s to the 1930s you know there's eugenics there's social darwinism all that stuff is in the literature and someday people are going to read our stuff and smell stuff that they are sensitive to because of I mean eugenics and social darwinism was not stamped out by some social movement that said no it was it all got a bad reputation because of the Nazis and we looked at the Nazis and said oh I don't want to go there that's but it's going to come back okay uh and so I guess the the question not that I planned this question but the if if CS Lewis who wrote this wonderful series of books with so much that we can learn from them and uh in not a religious text as we discussed but something like a religious text that is still useful uh morally and symbolically if that can have something that is kind of racist in it then I mean that is how people often see the bible as well and saying okay well we we know you know that bit about mixing the textiles that was kind of weird and that bit about the um eating shellfish and you know you know all of these all of these really strict rules that we don't really adhere to because we go okay well the bible really wasn't serious about that bit that was just about hygiene and now we understand hygiene and we don't need the bible anymore but you know for that bit we'll just ignore that bit and I'm not saying that's you know hypocritical or anything but is does that kind of undermine the bible or is it all right what do you think about that I'm actually I was actually working this morning on I'm doing an intro to the bible series on my church channel now I posted one video of it on my channel the the bible my understanding of biblical inspiration is organic inspiration and what that means is that um the bible you you cannot express anything intelligible to a human being unless it is clothed in a culture now I don't think that the the mosaic ordinances with respect to shellfish and clothing have anything to do with any kind of conceptualization that we have with respect to hygiene I think that is us reading back onto the text I think um I think that text was I think what was happening in in the desert with those laws was something that was intelligible to the broader cultures around Israel but also deeply formative in order to trying to create a program by which everything in their lives would be reinforcing the kind of program to in a sense God had taken Israel out of Egypt now it's time to get Egypt out of Israel and so um that's a and that's an extremely I mean if you go back and you look at the debates about what's going on in the mosaic law it's really fierce stuff and I think truth is it's extremely hard for us to conceptualize the question of you know you're not going to find anything like what we consider racism to be in the Bible simply because those categories just came far later than that now I think racism maybe you missed the question more about just things that were of their time that don't make sense now the Bible the Bible is completely of its time but everything always is the question is you know John Walton has this great line the Bible was written for us but not to us well what does that mean um when Paul sat down to write letter to the Corinthians he was writing a letter to the Corinthians now he probably knew in the back of his mind it would be passed around because that was probably what was starting but like when you make a response video on YouTube exactly exactly and so what video am I making that isn't of the time now 100 or 200 years from now if anybody would ever watch any video that I would make now through their filters they would find certain aspects of what I do wanting that's simply a function of the time getting into the question of how the Bible should shape and mold us for today and how we could imagine God speaking through the Bible I think and I think Jordan Peterson is actually quite helpful with this I don't think it's that hard for us to understand how that might be now does that mean that we won't look at the the test of an unfaithful wife where you sweep up I mean here's the thing the more you know the Bible the more of these things you're going to bump into okay and so you how do you know if your wife was unfaithful you take the sweepings of the temple and you give it to her to drink and basically if she gets sick she was a cheater you know I think probably faced with the sweepings of the temple if you know what happened around the temple to look at the right now confess before you drink it but there's there are tons of things like that in the Bible and I don't think to me in terms of how I understand inspiration it doesn't challenge my idea of canon now if someone would come to me and say pastor I'm a little worried about my wife let's get out the broom and sweep the floor of the church I'd say I don't think that's the way we should interpret that text okay and I think actually part of what we tripped up so much on in the modern period that triggered a whole bunch of these things was not just how cultures have changed since the Bible but some of the ways we began to understand truth and that gets back to the question of can you use truth with respect to something like love can you measure love we can see how many times you get up in the night and you know to help your crying child that would be you know it's a fair mention of love but what exactly is it that we're measuring so it gets it gets it gets complex fast but I don't think it's at all unworkable for people and that's the job of a pastor to try and say okay well let's try and understand it in this way and maybe that will be helpful because you know I and and I don't think the world is such that at the end of your life you know God pulls you out of you know your however movie way you want to imagine you know the Poe that's in you goes up and stands before God and God says all right we're gonna do a multiple choice test on you know the way you check things off actually the New Testament and this is something that a lot of Christians don't recognize every every determination in every judgment they seen in the New Testament evaluates people based on what they do they also evaluate them based on how they relate so those are kind of the two matrices and it's only after the Protestant Reformation that we tend to check off a lot of propositional things but that gets back to the question of you know do I think you believe in God probably because we're not in touch with ourselves in that way and so then you have the question well what should if in fact as Christianity asserts we do we do not end with the physical sensation of our bodies what happens then yeah those are good questions and science isn't going to help you because science can't really delve too deeply into that although they're trying and that's when and it's usually at that point that people begin to ask bigger questions and it doesn't seem inconceivable that if we're in something that might be analogous to a simulation and in fact if our coding is you know if for the coder something of our essence remains after we've left the program then okay well what did the coder care about so so maybe this comes back to the question about um I've been watching your video earlier today where you were mentioning that it seems like quite a lot of your attention has been dedicated this question of gay marriage is that right it's something that's been on your mind yeah well it's about my denomination is about to go to war over it so yeah well you made it sound like it was important to you and it is important to me too I'm uh I guess I'm just curious about what you think your role is in that it comes back to my question about what it means to be a a shepherd or a pastor where if I if I believe or don't believe in gay marriage and I make a YouTube video about it I feel like I'm just one I feel like I'm on a pedestal in one side of a debate where people are watching both sides but you're you're you're a youtuber but you're also a pastor so for the people in your church you're a bit more than just a guy on one side of the debate you're you're more of a authoritative figure where they will look to you for you know for guidance on this how they should feel about this and you they're not just assessing your arguments they're also you know putting their trust in you a bit and so I wanted to just how do you how do you deal with that and do you tell them what to believe or do you give them a reason to agree with you I I want what I want from this conversation is for us to have a better conversation about it and what I mean by that is for the most part there's arguments on both sides that are pretty stagnant and stale and I don't think I don't think people are actually talking productively about it so no there are there are a lot of stakes in that for me but and this gets this does get back to the earlier question because I can't make someone gay or not gay and truth be told how I feel about it if someone is same-sex attractive won't necessarily determine what they do with their attraction especially in any given moment I've known people who at one point in their life they said I'm you know I I'm same-sex attractive but I want to I want to be side b which is sort of you know I don't believe this is God's plan for for my life sexually so I'm either going to stay celibate or I'm going to marry someone of the opposite sex and then they do that for a while then they switch and and and actually both ways I've known lots of people all over this conversation and I know well enough that I'm probably not going to talk them in or out of anything so what I want people to do is have better conversations about it and understand the issues in a broader way and the best way I know how to do that is for me to try to figure out better conversations about it and to understand it in a broader way so just like with the rest of my videos I'm talking out loud and I don't think for me where I come down on the issue well there's also that's that's also such a false way of looking at it because if I am sitting in a church meeting and have to vote on a particular thing I'm voting on that particular thing I'm not same-sex attractive I've been married for 32 years I'm not going to marry a man it ain't going to happen so what do I care in some ways but people there's a this is getting at a whole universe of other things that are not well related to it and nobody's talking about it and everybody's talking about it in a moralistic sense and in a political sense and I think that's one of the dumbest ways to approach it and so I want to talk about it and I frustrate both sides because people want me to be on their side and to argue their case and I find that boring that's been done all over the place yeah I think uh yeah I think I get some of that as well but um I don't have your jobs and I'm glad I don't have your job but I I guess it comes questions like this you know the gay marriage thing I think was a huge I mean it's I'm surprised that you're bringing it up now because it seems like something you know like we were done talking about it five years ago maybe it's different in the US compared to the UK but the I think maybe that was one of the big drivers of the uh sort of the atheist movement is people were sick of the moralizing but that is one of the key characteristics that people associate or especially atheists associate with Christianity especially now although it's by no means the most moralistic of the religions but yeah we'll leave that there but um that people expect a pastor although probably I think you'd say that a pastor's job is a bit different from the you know Catholic priests of you know a few hundred years ago where you know before the Reformation I please correct me if I'm wrong on any of this but the the job of the priest was to say this pleases God or this does not please God and it doesn't there's no argument about it there's no well I think maybe this and you know what if this and we're having a debate and it's more of that in the Bible it says this and I'm the priest so it's evil yeah that that seems to the I can't think about this question gay marriage is one thing but then just also homosexuality your approach to it seems very much to be the the sort of the modern way of doing things but in the end it does seem like it's the the job of the religious leaders to say it's it's evil or the the the the secular way of saying evil is to say degenerate a lot of the sort of right right right put it in a medical term that's exactly right you put it in a medical term again and this gets back into the frame so well I know I didn't ask a question but I think you get it I think I do get it I do get it and so let's say I stand up and say one way or the other well now suddenly I'm just one lot one name in a list of pastors names of you know for against does that help do they believe God thinks one way or another to it to want to whatever degree of influence I have in this frame depends on to whatever degree people find a whole bunch of other things I'm saying believable or compelling pastorally someone comes into my office and says I'm same-sex attractive I'm trying to figure out what to do with my life and usually it'll be far more contextual you know I'm attacked I'm attracted to this and this person over here I want to know if I should pursue it okay well what does God say okay well who do you think God is because even though that's germane to the conversation because right now there's a whole diversity of people out there with a whole diversity of ideas and so people often misunderstand the nuance with which I bring to these things as if well Paul is Paul is either trying to be cute or clever he hasn't made up his mind blah blah blah blah blah no I'm trying to engage real people in conversation that will be productive for them for helping them come to a conclusion because if if someone comes in my office says I'm same-sex attractive I'm attracted to this person over here what should I do pastor it's like right away I think whatever I tell you right now if you're really listening to me in that way you're probably abdicating some responsibility in your own life because even if I tell you what to do and you do it and then something bad happens you'll just come back and blame me and no you're you're you don't enter a relationship like that you're not a child so let's have a conversation about this and I'll tell you what I think about what certain Bible passages mean and and but right now someone comes into my office they have pastors and churches with rainbow flags and have pastors of churches that are deeply against it and probably they're going to pick so what do I want to help them do I want them to have a fuller view of the situation so that they can exercise their agency and and this is where you know generally speaking I want to John Verbeke has this great talk about addiction as reciprocal narrowing and I think actually good mirror good ministry is reciprocal broadening after this conversation I got to wrap it up because I got another one coming up but and you said two hours you never go that long but I knew it'd go fast but um what I want for people after listening to my videos after having a conversation with me is I want them to feel more empowered more agentic in terms of they have more agency I want them to have a better clear view of the world and for me obviously as a minister God is all over this world just like Tolkien is all over middle earth and so my my goal is to open their eyes more and probably help them see a bigger picture and because conversations are so small and we're only able to touch on one thing at a time so way consciousness works you have to do that sort of tenderly and cautiously always getting signals back and forth and that's that's what a conversation is so that's what I try to do oh I think you do it very well I uh I guess is a good way of wrapping it up and um I think I think you're right I think you're doing a great job and uh if you I hope you're as good to your um your flock as you are to your uh your YouTube community that's your um yeah I think you're doing a great job and uh I had a really good conversation with you today so thank you very much good time all right I'll post this out oh we didn't I will send this to you too so you can post it if you want to yeah no I I don't really mind I like I said I don't think a lot of my audience would be that interested in this conversation so I think it's more for your audience and I've been really happy to see some of your audience I'll post a clip though I'll take a clip from you and then okay well it was great talking to you both and uh we'll have to talk again and absolutely congratulations on being a mom and and your daughter and I again I I was looking over your videos oh she's got her baby on some of the videos oh I'm so excited there's a little girl looking up there like ah it's so wonderful so yeah she's the most amazing person ever and uh I know not everyone agrees with me but I I don't mind that's exactly how you should feel all right have a good day have a good day it's uh it's close to bedtime for me so I'll have a half a good sleep tonight I think all right take care of great talking to you bye bye you