https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jnfMg0Xv__k

 Okay, so I'm recording. So, yeah, go ahead. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Wonderful. So, I'm a pretty technical and analytical person, so I have a little Word document that I prepared in terms of just some things to go over with you. But I remember one of the first things that is so cool about this whole YouTube and space is that, I don't know if I learned this correctly, but in ancient Greece or wherever maybe like a town square, you used to be able to just go and look and listen to people and pick your teacher and kind of be a disciple, obviously, as well with Jesus. And YouTube has more or less allowed that to happen. And I just think it is just such a wonderful way to just be able to pick out different people and, like I said, whether it's Jordan Peterson or yourself and whatever else, it's like living in those times where you could just listen to somebody preaching or teaching. And that just reminded me a lot of that. So, do you feel the same way? Oh, absolutely. It's a wonderful technology and I've certainly been blessed by it and enjoy using it. And just doing what we're doing now for me is one of the, I mean, this is just a really cool thing. So, where are you at? You're obviously in a different time zone if you're getting home from work. Yeah, well, I'm not getting home. I came home on my lunch and so I'm in Florida, just north of Orlando. Oh, you're just on the East Coast. That's not so far. Exactly. And so it's a good time. Am I your first call of the day or I don't know how many? On Wednesdays, I start my calls at 10. I've got a balanced church and everything, so I've got limited time for these kind of calls. So that's why I have the setup that I do. Absolutely. And I'm a commercial banker and big into finance and everything. And knowing you're in Sacramento and the cost of living there, I just, it's gotta be very, very difficult with, as much as people love the idea of California, just the prices of a home and everything and having a family and running a small church and stuff. I have nothing but admiration for what you do and the way that you approach it and handle it. Well, thank you. So Sacramento isn't quite as bad as the Bay Area. The people move to Sacramento from the Bay Area just for a little bit more affordability, but compared to a lot of other places in the country. Right. So right before I go into telling you a little bit about myself, I want to mean this with the utmost sincerity and that what you remind me of is that scene in Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade where it's like you have chosen wisely. I just think that if Jesus came down and saw what you're doing at Living Stones and your ministry and what you've said about the Dominican Republic and everything else, that he would just be delighted. And we'll get a little bit more into my background as a Roman Catholic and the gold and the Vatican and everything else and stuff, but I just, my heart is like, I just love watching your videos and you're able to show Christianity maybe in a different light than me in terms of just being able to laugh and be happy and still be able to incorporate the teachings and stuff. So I just feel like there's all these different people out there that would pick the different, Sam Harris or whoever else. That's the shiny one with all the jewels and everything else, but Paul VanderKlaas is the one, the real deal that's there. And you've been such a blessing. When I first came across Jordan Peterson, I was hoping in some ways that he was any particular nomination that he would say he was a Christian to help with narrowing that gap for me. But his work wasn't enough and you filled that gap for me and I've learned through your videos that there's always going to be a leap of a certain sense, but I needed all the things that he was incorporating, but through a Christian lens and a Christian perspective. And so that's, I always have that visual is that you have chosen wisely when I watch your videos. Thank you. That's very, very gracious. I appreciate it. So I don't know if you know much about, we've exchanged tweets and I've sent you an email at times and stuff, maybe my name does or doesn't ring a bell, but I'm hoping that I can. Yeah, exactly. And I remember you mentioning the way you're so fond of CS Lewis. Was it Lewis that was Nicknamed Jack or was it somebody else that was? Yeah. Exactly. And I was watching, I made it through most of your talk with Ron Dart and I'm pretty caught up to a lot of the videos that you posted and I just I really, really enjoy the, you know, Job and some of the other Dutch friends that you have and their perspective and stuff. I can really appreciate them as someone. I kind of look at it, you know, the way that I am is if you go to a conference or after school or the way I was in college, I'm the person that's staying after asking questions and really wanting to learn. And 29 out of 30 people are want to be out of there as soon as possible. Can't wait to get out of there, you know, and I'm the one that just really, really wants to learn. And I feel like you'd be at my meetup late and I'd have to start kicking you out at 11 o'clock if you wanted that crew. Exactly. So, you know, I'm that one out of 30 that really really cares and really wants to figure things out and have always wrestled with these type of questions and I have the late one o'clock, two o'clock discussions with my father and stuff and it doesn't change anything and doesn't change the world per se, but I'm just drawn to it and I just, like I said, I think we share so much in common. I consider myself a fiscal liberal, but a social conservative, I guess is the best way to put it, and you know, more like a, I guess they call them the Reagan Democrats, but even like Reagan, a lot different than the current conservative Republican party. And when you shared that in a recent video about a pro-life Democrat and stuff like that, I could really, really relate. So a little bit about myself. I don't know if it's going to be more about myself or some of the questions I have, but either way, I just wanted to share. So when somebody says, you know, describe yourself, I was thinking about, you know, the first thing you say should probably be one of the most important. So I'm 38 years old, I'm happily married, and I recently became a proud father for the first time. My son's eight months old. And it's been a dream of mine ever since I was a little kid. And I wasn't about the career or the money or the success, it was all about being a father and having, my dream was always to wake up on Christmas morning and give my wife a kiss as the kids ran in and just say that, you know, life is good and stuff. So I had that from a very, very young age. And some people roll out a lot of bed and say, what happened? I'm married and kids, I don't know when this happened. Or it's just something that so many people achieve that goal, but for me it was always going to be one of the most important ones. I spent my career thus far as primarily as a commercial credit analyst and portfolio manager. So I'm an underwriter at commercial banks. And it's been difficult in terms of my ethics and my morals and beliefs, especially with the financial crisis and all the pain that the banks have caused, mostly Wall Street banks. And so I made a choice to become a regulator with the state of Florida and help ensure the safety and soundness of the financial and sort of working with community banks. And I've since left and worked for a community bank now and actually helped make loans to people that really need it, not the people that are so wealthy that they don't really need it. But I still feel some, the words I wrote down here are my soul is, like I said, it's not balanced or balanced or at rest or good with the profession that I'm in and stuff. So I'm very analytical and we can get into a little bit more of that as we go on. I said I don't consider myself a typical Peterson viewer, but I know that a lot of times people have a conversation with you and you're like, your story is not that unusual. You think it's really unique or that. I was a perfectionist. I don't consider myself particularly smart, but I try to, I overcome that by working really hard or more than somebody else. So my SAT wasn't as good as maybe it should be, but I was a 4.0 student and that kind of stuff. And then it would stay up late. So I was a perfectionist. I had a clean room. I didn't play video games all day and everything else. So I'm kind of coming up at Peterson from maybe a different perspective, but more from people that are like the Eric Weinsteins and people that are just intellectually curious and wanting to get at the big questions of life. And that's what the, my understanding is what the Greeks did. They talked about these things and what's the purpose of life, where do we come from. And now it's more or less about the career and drop training and they're not even doing a particularly good job in college of doing that per se. I don't know if you caught the Joe Rogan experience with Mr. Yang, Andrew Yang, or if you've heard much about his candidacy. No, no. I saw that he did it, but I haven't listened to it yet. Yeah, I've been following him for a little while and he's pretty left on the spectrum, but he's really in favor of a universal basic income. And I'm somebody who, you know, I'm not particularly knowledgeable in terms of religion or biology or anything else, but I know finance and economics and banking very, very well. And he makes a lot of really good points and I think you'll really, really enjoy his talk a lot. And I know that you watch Joe Rogan from time to time. Yeah, I'll check it out then. I know it's another video that you have to try to squeeze in amongst your day, but I think you'll enjoy it. But I was going to say, one of the big things in terms of my faith is that both my parents were born in Poland. So I'm 100% Polish and they came over in the 60s. And so as you, I'm sure you probably know, Polish is, I think there was a, last year they took a survey and 93% of Polish people associate themselves as being Catholic. And I think there's about 2% that are other faiths, and then about 5% that don't affiliate. And I hear stories about, I've never been there and it's a dream of mine to go there, but of punk rockers with tattoos and mohawks that when they are on a public bus and they pass a church, they make the sign of the cross. That's how ingrained it is in their culture, you know, in terms of your faith. And so I can really respect in one of your talks you talked about, Paul, why aren't you, it wasn't why aren't you Catholic, but it was like, well why are you CRC? And you were like, well my father was and I've come from a long line of that and you know, I still, well I'm open to all, I have a very high in openness and love learning about all the different faiths, but I mean for me it would be so, so hard to leave the Roman Catholic faith given how ingrained it was in just the actions of my father and I have just the utmost, when you said you described your father as giving the shirt off your back and I go to visit with him and he wants me to sleep in his bed and he's, you know, he was just unbelievably selfless and just, you know, a lot of people think that way of their father when they have a good father in their life and I just could really relate the relationship that you had, it sounds like you have with your dad, and then the relationship that I have with my dad, so that's a little bit, like I said, being of Polish descent and is a large, and you know, the Roman Catholic, not necessarily American Catholicism, but more of the Polish Catholicism and all of the suffering that the Polish people have gone through, I don't know how much you know, but when you have Germany invading from the West and Russia from the East and how the US, you know, like I said, what happened after the war, you know, becoming part of the Soviet Union and obviously the Pope John Paul and that whole ending of the Soviet Union and how the first Polish Pope in history and speaking 12 languages and all that he did for the church is obviously somebody that is really respected in our family. I read Timothy Snyder's Bloodlands, which is about the history of the space, so Poland, Belarus, Ukraine, from the 20s to the 50s and Shast, I mean, being wiped off the map for over 100 years and you know, the people that still kept, it reminded me a lot of one of your recent, it might have been one of your Sunday school or preparation for your sermon, but you were talking about people that are able to contain their faith even when they don't have a place, whether it was like the people from Israel and the Jewish people as they were roaming and stuff, but how you can still consider yourself Polish despite the fact that you don't live in any place on a map that represents Polish and keeping that spirit, especially when you had the Nazi regime and then you had communism, which had basically abandoned all faith and belief in God and that is really interesting reading some of those, like Siefski and Tolstoy and in regards to them finding faith despite everything around them kind of going in the opposite direction. I'm not by any stretch of the imagination believe that communism would work, but I think that Peterson approaches it a lot more from an economic standpoint than he does from a faith standpoint and I think when you lose your belief in a higher power in God and you're willing to do anything to make ends meet and the nihilism that approaches it, I think that has another dimension to it and I don't know that it could ever work or should be tried in a society as large as the United States, but I also look to like the Indians, the American Indians, I just have a lot of respect for their cultures, the fact that they respected their elders and they were in touch with the earth and when they killed an animal they had respect for it and stuff and I don't know a lot about the East, but Peterson makes such a beautiful order in chaos analogy that you do and then he's very, it seems right on a lot of issues or a lot of really political and I just think that and he talks about keeping your pretend when you listen to somebody that they have something that you might learn from or something from his 12 rules and I just think he isn't as open minded as maybe I would hope him to be in some of these aspects. I always respected a professor who could argue both sides of a point equally well and you never knew where they stood and they let you make up your mind for yourself and there's times where he'll just say I don't know that or that's not in my expertise and he's so smart in so many different fields that when you have people that are just paying to see you and you're traveling all around the world and you have a Q&A that you can ask any question, I have a lot of respect that he doesn't have just canned questions and that he's willing to take those on, but at the same time I think sometimes it was just like maybe that's not my area of expertise or I could learn more from because I still think that respecting your elders and culture, the individual might be more important but it doesn't have to be an either or type thing. There's a lot about society and community that is lost when you go to a strictly individual approach. It would be interesting if other people flesh out more of his ideas on that. Like I said, in terms of my background, I was going to talk about more or less the tale of two jacks so to speak. My worldview was very much that if I put my mind I could accomplish anything as I was growing up and I was blessed in a wonderful household with two loving parents and middle class, upper middle class and I really didn't have very many struggles looking back on it that would prepare me for life and I just have some notes in terms of the old jack it's still a part of me obviously but it's also I've grown from there. I was more or less, if you remember the show Family Ties, I was like Alex P. Keaton. Yeah, you know that type of where he was rebelling against his liberal parents by being conservative when most people have conservative parents and rebelled by being a little bit liberal so I think that kind of paints a nice picture. I always wanted to be at the adult table. I'm Jack Jr. and I was nicknamed JJ and I said my name is Jack not Jack Jr. One of these guys, I was an old soul, I was more or less introverted, I was raised with old fashioned values, I was analytical, I was introspective, always in my old head, serious. I was always serious first and you know, oh you're joking or you're laughing, I didn't understand how guys could give each other kind of a hard time when they cared for each other, I was just like why are you making fun of me or giving me a hard time, I've been nothing but nice to you so that was just my dad was raised and my dad treated my wife with very old fashioned values in Poland and so when we'd get together for Christmas or Easter or whatever else, the guys would get together at the table and tell stories and all the women would talk in the kitchen and the women would come out with the food and you'd have your wife around you and then the conversations, but that was normal to me, right? You go to college, you learn that there's no such thing as normal, it's what's normal to you but everybody's got their own sense of normal, right? So when you try to take something, I was born in America, I went to American schools and stuff you'll realize is that kind of jumping ahead but I went through a really really painful divorce and the woman I married was of American descent or American and born and raised and so coming together and she was also somebody that really didn't have faith and born with faith and some other details that we'll get into and so you just realize that for her that wasn't normal, like why aren't you helping me out in the kitchen or whatever else and it was just normal to me and it wasn't anything disrespectful, it was just the way that things kind of worked and I don't know if it's similar with the Dutch or having your own customs and that. Oh yeah, the immigrants do. It's just something about it, I've learned more about it recently, whether it's, you might not follow or probably know, but there's a guy named Bas Rutten, he's an MMA guy, he's a famous Dutch, he was a pro fighter but he recently came out and did talks about refining his Catholicism and he was basically on a movie with Kevin James and Kevin James is a pretty prominent Catholic and during breaks in the shooting he would bring in very prominent priests or theologians or whatever else and he invited Bas to come by and had somebody explain it to a certain way that it never explained before but he has this joy and this happiness in life and this twinkle in his eye and I see it in Job and some of the other people that you interview, I just love the Dutch spirit and I don't know a lot about it, being from I was born and raised in Michigan and so obviously Grand Rapids and well I was born in Detroit but I grew up in Troy, Michigan which is Troy, Birmingham, Royal Oak, it's one of the suburbs and I have in-laws there, a small private Christian, yeah do you? Okay, so that was where I was born and raised and Polish people came to Detroit looking for a job with the big three, automotive and willing to work hard, my grandfather walked with a Polish to English dictionary to get a job and he basically moved trucks off the line for Dodge truck from that's all he did is walk across the street and came back and was never late and there's even a story about my other grandfather during the Detroit riots where he said I gotta go to work and so he put a shotgun on the top of his dash hoping not to have to use it but I'm going to work, that's what I do, I have a family and stuff so. Yeah, there's a lot of, there's actually a lot of in Grand Rapids there's a significant Polish community too and so there really? Oh yeah, so and so Grand Rapids was heavily Dutch Western Michigan was heavily Dutch that's where a lot of the Dutch immigrants settled but a lot of Polish immigrants in that side of the state too and very similar work ethic as the Dutch and immigrant values as the Dutch but it was reformed and Catholic which for the Dutch was felt very at home because the Netherlands is very Catholic and reformed so it, there's a lot of commonality plus the Dutch also were surrounded by bigger more powerful neighbors and they were always under somebody else's boot except for short times where they have their own thing going so there's a fair amount of similarities between the Dutch and the Polish And I completely relate I think one of the people said that they could only find mostly Catholic churches around them I don't know if it was Jober or the other ones and they didn't really feel at home there and then they went to the kind of the smaller church and they felt more at home there and I could completely relate to so many of these people people even though that I was so blessed to be born into the faith and you know confirmation and first communion and all of those things and but I still am approaching it from a little bit of a different perspective some of that some of them it seems like that the Christianity bug virus gets inside of their head and they just can't shake it and they want to shake it more than anything and for me it was kind of the opposite when you started reading some things when I started you know having doubts or questioning my faith that you know this other bug of doubt kind of got into me and I was kind of trying to shake it and I really would looking forward to talking to you and helping me maybe steer me in the right direction when I tell you about the specific things that I am struggling with in that so I think I am doing okay in terms of time I would be respectful for your time and everything I got someone after you at 11 so 11 my time another 25 minutes so I really tried to be a perfect person as a child the way that I would describe that it was is that you know I really like I had all these filters in my head and I really tried to say the right thing and do the you know be like the best person that I could be and not offend anybody with all my words and everything and then as I've you know so I think I've given you a little bit between a lot about the jack number one if we want or got one got two or jack one in my world view but basically I really didn't have a lot of hardships that I had to face and things were you know it's like I broke my arm or something else like big deal in the big scheme of things so I was like there wasn't anything that I could put my mind to and then when I got divorced I was with the person I was with I met her in college we were together for six and a half years we were married for a year and a half and you know that Polish instinct in me is it's not about how you know you're vulnerable you are or whatever else you made a commitment in front of God and you're going to stick to it and I've realized that you know you can't make somebody love you and you you know there was nothing I could do I could arrange for counseling or whatever that somebody that wants to stay with you and so this was something that I couldn't you know I couldn't fix I couldn't work hard enough just you know I just used to look at people that went through a divorce with very naive goggles that they're just not willing to work hard enough to make it work and I think there's some of that in our culture but the while I wasn't you know dogmatic and again a very typical in terms of a lot maybe some Catholics maybe you know not attending mass as much as I should or knowing as much of the biblical stories or reading the Bible and that kind of stuff but we really really lived our faith and held ourselves accountable and that kind of thing as a family and so potentially losing by Catholicism if I didn't get an annulment or wasn't able to get an annulment was like a really really tough thing that I you know kind of struggled with so I will say that when I went to college I went to Alma College in Michigan founded Presbyterian and it's got a lot of Scottish kind of they do the Highland games there it's just north of Lansing and so college would play them. Yeah exactly right and so kind of going in to college I was accepted into the University of Michigan and some other really prestigious schools but I had an influential teacher in my high school that said I'm on the board there you know I'll waive your application fee it was some of the best years of my life just give it a try and they're going and just being a number at some of these other schools and I wanted to be a 4.0 student and not getting a scholarship I went to Alma and they said Alma College welcomes Jack Hayes right here on the little board and that was enough for me and I wanted to I said I want to be a big fish in a small pond and I don't want to be one of 200 students I would want to be able to talk to my professors and that and the rest is kind of history but during that time there's a lot of Protestants that went to that and what a wonderful time college is for having late night debates and getting questioned and your beliefs and everything and I had a couple friends that would just take me to task with chapter and verse on the Pope and fallibility and all of the things that you hear about Catholicism that shook things a little bit and realized why do I believe some of these things and that I've come to believe and the board is saved and the more different faith and the more you go from the works verses to faith alone and the stuff that you know obviously you know so much about and stuff but it was you know and so I had a father arrange for a dinner with a priest and I got a lot of those questions more or less answered and so that was kind of my first kind of inkling into kind of a shaken faith so to speak and then after my divorce I went to Charleston, South Carolina is kind of a strange story but for me it was so analytical and trying to make the right decision all the time and not make a mistake and I didn't make decisions for myself I didn't make decisions to make my dad proud that was the primarily thing that I wanted to do maybe to a fault so I didn't really learn how to make decisions I just wanted to make my family proud you know most kids hate when they're worried when their parents go to parent teacher conferences I was couldn't wait for my dad to tell me that you know that he was proud of me and that wasn't from a lack of from a lack of love or anything like that my dad told me he said you know Jackson he called me Jackson and that's what we named my son he was my nickname was Jackson so I wanted him to be his own man one day but also to keep the line the family name and so he said Jackson as long as you try your best that's all I can ever expect from you you know and for me that was like the ticket for my perfectionism which was like you know if I got a 98% but I missed one that was I shouldn't have missed I was hard on myself I knocked the mirror off my car I'm a stake when I was pulling it to the driveway or backing out and I punished myself I went into my room and my dad's like I did the same thing it's okay you know he was loving he was understanding but I wanted you know I just wanted to you know make my father so proud and so I didn't really make decisions you know for myself and I wanted to be this kind of like you know stereotypical you know trying to be the perfect person that I could be but not be myself and I don't know how that I'm still working through that in some ways and understanding that but after I went through my divorce and Jack that you're talking to now is open and very compassionate and empathetic and I had a lot of those traits before but nothing like going through trauma and suffering and pain to really bring out some of those attributes and I got this feedback from my friends and Jack we liked you before you know you were a very guy but we really didn't know you we didn't know really what to make of you you were really quiet and reserved and you know in your head and now when I was in so much pain I had to open up to other people including my friends and stuff they got to know me and got to know the real me and flaws and all and they really appreciated they really appreciated me being able to open up and it really changed the way I am so when I still think of myself as this you know young adult and teen and even college of reserved and you know and then people are like you I can't picture you like that at all you're so open you're going to talk about anything and that just like I just can't you know can't believe that and so you know it's you know going through divorces and anything that I would wish on my worst enemy and but at the same time it was the way that you know I was able to you know gain some very important qualities and traits that have really kind of served me well I guess so but kind of circling back around so being such an analytical person my mom died tragically and so you know the divorce and my mom dying tragically and a failed business that my dad spent a lot of his my dad spent a lot of money on my mom his retirement their retirement money when she wasn't able to go back to work when she was sick because she was a dental hygienist and they one of the things was that she had when they were doing all these tests on her they found that she had aneurysms in her in her brain and several of them and they were large and what they were concerned about was that as a dental hygienist even though she was cleared to go back to work she loved her patients her patients would follow her wherever she went and she would buy them presents and that was like really a big part of her life was her patients and when she couldn't go back to work because they're afraid that one could pop at any time and be a liability she wasn't able so she went through the Cobra health insurance and then after that the health insurance was my dad's retirement account and you know when you look at any medical bill that top line that a lot of people never pay well that's what people without insurance pay and there wasn't anything that we could do about it so my dad lost a lot of money doing that and then when my brother was struggling he took hundreds of thousands of dollars which was a large significant share of his savings to help open up a business to give my brother a future and you know we were doing well and we were doing a great business and then the financial crisis hit and you know people didn't have disposable income and stuff the business was a video game lounge and entertainment suites business and what it was designed to do was I was an athlete my brother was a little bit more into video games and that kind of stuff but you know for young adults who had those arcades back in the 80s and they got a place and a community and you know a place to go and this was to try to help kids get out of their basement or at their house or get parents a place where they could have their kids and when the financial crisis hit it just decimated the business and you know we were only able to sell it for pennies on a dollar to somebody that was trying to keep it going so I mean it was just like one after another after another and I really still didn't necessarily question my faith at that time but when I would go back to church I'm sure you can appreciate this whenever I went back to church and when some of these stories that you tell like you know they just you know happened the coincidence of the guy that was walking on the trail and I'm so sorry I'm bad with names he was going on the trail and then one person told them about coming to church with them and he's just like you know I don't want to do that or Darren yeah exactly so you know or the you know where they have this fortuitous event and stuff for me every time I would go back to church it was like we have three collections today and it's going to be for our third social hall you know or I'd have a priest who was in his homily talking about financial issues and you know there's a time in the catholic liturgy for when matters I know that it's tough and I'm a finance person and I watch every penny that you know you got to pay the light bill and you got to you got to you got to make ends meet and for contribution but it's like at the third social hall or or or something you know and I'm just trying to get back and I'm trying to get away it's my time to get away from banking and finance and in my career as a credit analyst I'm trying to identify risks and mitigate them and I'm always looking at the negative side of how something can go wrong and our family has a really strong strong on my mother's side suicide and depression genetic that runs that runs through that family so I'm predisposed to that and like I said so it's very difficult when you know when you have that and it's very similar to the way that Peterson describes it in some of his older videos where he's like I you know I've done an antidepressant right now and I'm never ever going to go off it it's changed my life he would sleep all the time he had you know he was a lethargic and all these and all these other types of types of things so I have the utmost sympathy for people that suffer from depression from you know the passing or or difficult time or for some but with those people you know it's like I can you know at least you can go back and say you know I have something and I'm supposed to be grieving right now and this is supposed to be happening I can lay it to and with people where it's more genetic it's like you could be having a great day and this cloud comes over you and the voices you know start coming and there's no real trigger and it's just the strangest you know it's the strangest thing and thank God that they're doing so many things but I just know that there's a lot of people that have depression and it's just you know it's just so misunderstood and such a bad word to talk about you know not having the right word in your language for a condition you know whether it's you know translating the Bible or anything else and you know that's the depression and it is there's so many different things there's you know traumatic events and then there's you know the kind of more genetic and they're doing a lot of different work on it but so that was just really the something that was difficult to go through all of these all these times and when I really felt like you know that you know I was being called or you know I was upset at God but you know how can you be upset at God at something someone or something that doesn't you know exist and I wanted to go back and you know you know really get helped like I said I would have one of those unfortunate events with the you know going to church and it being a funny or whatever else and I said like that's not why I'm here and that's why you know you talk about you know a small little church and this and that and I mean that's just in the Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade analogy just that really speaks to me that's the way that I you know that I'm being drawn to but I'm really you know with the way that you are with Catholicism is very important and I remember reading a Robin Williams quote which is from one of his stand up specials which is I think he said I am Episcopal not Catholic it's the same as Catholicism it's the same beliefs it's just half the guilt I don't know if you've ever heard that have you heard that and I didn't know enough about it but I'm like man I gotta try a Episcopal church because you know I'm a serious person and I'm really really hard on myself and there's all these Christians that are laughing and enjoying their lives and not being hard on themselves you know I'm you know looking at man like I did a really good job today and I still sit in this this this this and this like you know I'm a horrible person and I'm beaten down some people need that you know to kind of get down their ego and I'm the opposite I need to be kind of build up because maybe it's a low self-esteem issue or something as I was growing up or being you know more of a gentleman and quiet at reserve that wasn't particularly good with you know dating and my dad taught me all these old fashioned values that you know in America it's a little bit different and it's more kind of the outgoing and type guy and that gets maybe a little bit more attention and when I met my my current wife and she's from England born and raised in England and she was over here temporarily and it seems like our values are very mesh maybe some parts of Europe yes and no every country is different have a lot of the you know there was a lot of overlap to some of those some of those values and stuff but I will say now moving on and we just have a couple about ten more minutes or less so I won't probably get as much of my questions but I went to Charleston South Carolina because my mom her favorite movie was The Notebook and it became one of my favorite movies it was a complete opposite end of the spectrum of being an anti-political person and watching documentaries as a love story and you remember I don't know if you've ever seen it I've never seen it no it's a fantastic movie and it opens up the book and the movie it's with Rachel McAdams and trying to think of who plays the lead role of Noah but he says I'm just a simple man there will be no books written about me but you know I've loved someone with all my heart and that's always been enough or something right and that just spoke to me bam and so I went with my dad in memory of my mom and I went around Charleston South Carolina where it was filmed and went to all the filming locations and everything else had a great road trip with my dad in memory of my mom and ended up spending some time in Charleston South Carolina just kind of following my heart trying to figure things out after my divorce and I ended up going to Charleston Southern University to take some MBA classes and Charleston Southern is Baptist and so I had my experience with college with some Protestants but then with going to an MBA program at Baptist College even though it was an MBA program and business minded and stuff like that it was really eye opening and that and what I got introduced to the Veritas forum where there's really really good information but I also was watching all of these debates and Christopher Hitchens for the first time got was a virus that kind of infected my brain and you know created a sick and commanded to be well and you know why didn't Jesus talk about slavery and you know it's a Celestial North Korea you know if you're commanded and at least the Old Testament when you died you know there was no more suffering and then in the New Testament your suffering is going to go after you die we're going to punish you after you're dead and I don't know if you follow or have seen much of Hitchens or his with Alastair McGrath and some of his points that he makes but he's just very very persuasive and he's very it's just very difficult for somebody that is very logical and you know a lot of the Jordan people that are attracted and a lot of the people that are the atheist and agnostic viewers that are kind of finding Peterson and I wouldn't say experimenting but starting to read more about Christianity so mine's kind of like a reverse of all of that you know so in terms of just some questions that I kind of wrote down for myself is in terms of the kind of the spiritual you get this question so much but there's a book that was written recently it was about it's called like Bad Jesus and it was like the ethical teachings of Jesus as some religious scholar that wrote it and Alastair you know I'm so I wanted to become a little bit more practical and so you know will I know whether or not the resurrection ever happened no will I ever know a lot of these things I'll never know but what I can do is read the Gospels and read the New Testament and look at Jesus as an ethical figure and look the way that he navigated through life and the parables and everything else and use that so that's something that I wanted to do and I came across this book and some other criticisms of just you know it's just a fundamental belief of the Christians that Jesus was the essential character that you model yourself after and you know he is like you know the perfect person he never sinned he didn't make any you know any mistakes or anything else and then you read some of these criticisms or if you type in criticisms of Jesus ethical ethics you know on the internet and the people are just talking about just all of these all of these different things and I just need more information I need more help I can read the Bible but I need it in the proper context I need to have somewhat of a commentary or something to help me understand because I know that there's good answers to some of these questions at Hitchens and this other biblical scholar I think Justin would have a wonderful debate with this book about bad Jesus and misguided teachings of versus somebody that would really talk about Jesus ethics as being moral and I think that's a great point that we've got so any help? I've never heard of the book before so I'm just looking at it now on Amazon looks like a very interesting book and I think you're right that'd be a perfect thing for Justin Briarley to take on make it a perfect setup for unbelievable right and then in terms of and I'm just going to rapid fire a couple of these and that was something that was kind of interesting to me and so you know taking on a burden carrying across after the way that Jordan Petersfield and how important it is to meeting it has a whole other meaning to me but when you look at life do you think or look at life as a test of some ways does God test the people that he loves the most does any of that ring true or is it completely against it I'm just curious of how you know you view especially when you lose the ability for me to try to be the perfect person you still want to act well but you're acting more like yourself which is going to when I act more like myself I'm going to send a little bit more and be more the person that kind of comes out naturally but you know if I believe and I'm doing my best to act out my faith in the best way and what is the purpose of us being here and is it a test is it to help prepare us I just was wondering how you view that I well one of the interesting things of course the book of James famously begins in verse two consider it pure joy my brothers and sisters whenever you face many trials of many kinds because you know that the testing of your faith produces perseverance and perseverance finishes work so that it may be so that you may become mature and complete not lacking in anything because I'm a Christian I think that this life for us is the front porch to whatever it is God is doing further up and further in so you know the New Testament is quite clear that God does test us but he tests us not to exclude us but tests us to perfect us and test it's interesting in the New Testament test and trial they all come from the same Greek words so but yet at the same time Jesus in the Lord's prayer invites us to pray and keep us from the time of testing so while we will certainly be tested and I think you testified to that in your in the story about your divorce it also sounds from your story like he used that painful process to refine you and in fact to make you to perfect you and I think that's what God does through trials and testing often but I want to be careful with that because some people then make kind of a facile equation well if things are hard then God is doing this and reality is just a little too complicated to make those kinds of connections and simplistically but I think I can very easily say that when we suffer trials and difficulties that these are opportunities for God to perfect us and so then what is this life in terms of where he's taking us we don't we know very very little about the next chapter but then we lean on we lean on the goodness of God and say okay so so I believe that the things that I am learning and growing and developing in this life will be useful for God in whatever situation he brings us into the next so I think that's a very to me that that that gives me a lot of meaning in terms because you know here's the thing you spend all these years decades in fact developing skills and knowledge and then in a materialist perspective it all goes into the grave you know people write books and even the great books that many people write just a tiny fraction will be remembered or exist through time and I mean there's history is just a horrendous waste and I believe that God won't I believe that God will harvest from this world the glory that I get that out of Isaiah 60 so there's my perspective. Yeah thank you for thank you for providing that as well because I'm still struggling with and there's probably it's what I'm struggling with is no different I know it's been handled a million different ways the you know when somebody commits suicide they've been pushed to the past they're best they've been tested but more than they can handle or they they they say you know Jesus decided not to heal some people and other people he didn't cure blindness he just cured blind in one person you know there's you know Hitchens was talking about how you know that we were on as homo sapiens and obviously there's the six thousand years or new earth or not earth but you have a hundred thousand and you know he comes in like 98,000 years into the story you know and and he goes and he kind of lays out the the case and that's where I have like you know if whether it's free will or you know some of the things if somebody does something to another person I you know I can come to grips with with that in terms of you know free will or choice or that but when it comes to like the needless suffering or the endless suffering of some people whether at the end of their life or a baby that is born or you know or genetic abnormalities or that kind of stuff I just have a really you know difficult time with some of that and that and also properly understanding the you know you're nothing you're nothing you mean nothing you can't get through me like you're just so little what you do means absolutely nothing to me but like I have a unhealthy understanding of that whole relationship I have no problem bowing down to my lord and savior and giving him all the respect and doing what he needs but you know what am I supposed to you know how am I supposed to you know live this life or or or kind of act out my day and just kind of you know being kind of beat down whether it's through sin and it's not about like when they say Catholic guilt to me Catholic guilt is just an over excess of I wouldn't say unnecessary but maybe misdirected or kind of guilt and that's when the Robin Williams quote really stuck with me and watching seeing yourself and other Christians that are happy and stuff versus the more kind of like more depressive or kind of you know that maybe accompanies and just seeing maybe there's other face and other books and other things that I can read that gives me a more balanced perspective on on that on some of those issues I don't know that the you know people talk about reformed guilt too growing up Christian reformed and having a doctrine of total depravity but I think that I think that Christianity in any of its in any of its in any of its faithful traditions is is fundamentally an optimistic story and I think that the Bible is the original divine comedy because in Christianity God creates the world not out of strife like in some mythologies not as a sexual byproduct in other mythologies but out of joy and the reason God makes the world is because he is he is so full of joy and you know even even a movie like the color purple has it it's one of my favorite lines where you know or no he's God is trying to share a good thing well what good thing is God trying to share himself which is the best thing right and and so whereas I think traditions like like the Dutch and the Poles that had much suffering in some ways I grew up with what I call Dutch stoicism which was nobody wants to hear you complain and and that's a that's a refrain from my the Friesian side you know my mother's side of the family that those people had hard lives and it is true have a bunch of whiners and complainers when everybody is suffering you get sick of that so you kind of smack them on the head and say yeah it's bad for everyone just shut up because your your your complaining makes it worse and so there was this Dutch stoicism that that was very much in our culture and and and and I understand how these things get into cultures they're adaptive mechanisms to help people survive hard times but but the faith finally in my opinion is the most joyful optimistic in my opinion again the most meaningful worldview that I know if if I knew if I knew a better worldview I'd switch but yep you know that's deep down in my heart that's exactly how I feel if I watch any debate you know when it comes to whether it's new atheists or anything my my my skin would crawl there was a recent one with the one the I think it was an unbelievable one with you know it's the most recent unbelievable was on stage it was kind of live it was John Lennox I believe was on stage versus somebody else but basically I mean I I love Lennox and you see the spirit of Christians and I see your spirit and I see the spirit of Christians I I completely agree with that and that's that is my heart truly but it's the the brain the part of my brain that's getting ahead in in the way and trying to help I want to read the Bible but I want to be able to do it and maybe your your Sunday school videos or a way to read especially the New Testament the gospels in a way that's educated because you know the parables and farming and and some of the things that I have a natural tendency to be just like maybe not understand the the scripture like when the one about the burying the the tokens but versus investing in the bank talents right or or the you know the prodigal son and you know why you know having a misunderstanding of that as someone that's tried really really hard you know and I know other you know to the other extent I have friends real good friends that I care deeply about that are Protestants but they live a kind of like you know I'm saved you know I'm good you know I'm gonna try the best I have and they live they have a lot more joy and happiness in their faith that that that I have maybe to be just kind of self-critical so just a way to read and the Bible and you know Bible study or something else like you know good books or like I don't know if there's a commentary you have shelves full of commentaries but is there any particular that you turn back or you know like you know the good study Bible is helpful a good study Bible is helpful and then usually pick and choose often some of the best commentaries on a particular book of the Bible isn't necessarily a technical commentary Eugene Peterson has written some lovely books he's a he's a Presbyterian author just he passed away recently has written some lovely books on different books of the Bible Reversed Thunder on the book of Revelation Along Obedience in the Same Direction I forget his book on David and Samuel so there are there are some books out there maybe I should do some more of that with my videos I've got a million ideas for videos and never know how to make them but I gotta bring this to a close because I got Josh and I don't want to sacrifice his time too so Absolutely Paul and I completely respect and so thank you again and thank you very much and at least now you can put a face with the name and you know from time to time you know through email or schedule another chat I want to give everybody an opportunity to speak with you like this so it really means the world to me Thank you Paul have a great rest of your day Absolutely yep bye now